Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


MAESTRO: O PEN -E NDED E NVIRONMENT D ESIGN
FOR M ULTI -AGENT R EINFORCEMENT L EARNING

 Mikayel Samvelyan12 Akbir Khan2 Michael Dennis3 Minqi Jiang12 Jack Parker-Holder4
 Jakob Foerster4 Roberta Raileanu1 Tim Rocktäschel2
 1
   Meta AI 2 University College London 3 UC Berkeley 4 University of Oxford
 samvelyan@meta.com

                                              A BSTRACT
            Open-ended learning methods that automatically generate a curriculum of increas-
            ingly challenging tasks serve as a promising avenue toward generally capable
            reinforcement learning agents. Existing methods adapt curricula independently
            over either environment parameters (in single-agent settings) or co-player policies
            (in multi-agent settings). However, the strengths and weaknesses of co-players can
            manifest themselves differently depending on environmental features. It is thus
            crucial to consider the dependency between the environment and co-player when
            shaping a curriculum in multi-agent domains. In this work, we use this insight
            and extend Unsupervised Environment Design (UED) to multi-agent environments.
            We then introduce Multi-Agent Environment Design Strategist for Open-Ended
            Learning (M AESTRO), the first multi-agent UED approach for two-player zero-sum
            settings. M AESTRO efficiently produces adversarial, joint curricula over both envi-
            ronments and co-players and attains minimax-regret guarantees at Nash equilibrium.
            Our experiments show that M AESTRO outperforms a number of strong baselines on
            competitive two-player games, spanning discrete and continuous control settings.1


1       I NTRODUCTION
The past few years have seen a series of remarkable achievements in producing deep reinforcement
learning (RL) agents with expert (Vinyals et al., 2019; Berner et al., 2019; Wurman et al., 2022) and
superhuman (Silver et al., 2016; Schrittwieser et al., 2020) performance in challenging competitive
games. Central to these successes are adversarial training processes that result in curricula creating
new challenges at the frontier of an agent’s capabilities (Leibo et al., 2019; Yang et al., 2021). Such
automatic curricula, or autocurricula, can improve the sample efficiency and generality of trained
policies (Open Ended Learning Team et al., 2021), as well as induce an open-ended learning process
(Balduzzi et al., 2019; Stanley et al., 2017) that continues to endlessly robustify an agent.
Autocurricula have been effective in multi-agent RL for adapting to different co-players in competitive
games (Leibo et al., 2019; Garnelo et al., 2021; Baker et al., 2019; Bansal et al., 2018; Feng et al.,
2021), where it is crucial to play against increasingly stronger opponents (Silver et al., 2018) and
avoid being exploited by other agents (Vinyals et al., 2019). Here, algorithms such as self-play (Silver
et al., 2018; Tesauro, 1995) and fictitious self-play (Brown, 1951; Heinrich et al., 2015) have proven
especially effective. Similarly, in single-agent RL, autocurricula methods based on Unsupervised
Environment Design (UED, Dennis et al., 2020) have proven effective in producing agents robust to a
wide distribution of environments (Wang et al., 2019; 2020; Jiang et al., 2021a; Parker-Holder et al.,
2022). UED seeks to adapt distributions over environments to maximise some metrics of interest.
Minimax-regret UED seeks to maximise the regret of the learning agent, viewing this process as a
game between a teacher that proposes challenging environments and a student that learns to solve
them. At a Nash equilibrium of such games, the student policy provably reaches a minimax-regret
policy over the set of possible environments, thereby providing a strong robustness guarantee.
However, prior works in UED focus on single-agent RL and do not address the dependency between
the environment and the strategies of other agents within it. In multi-agent domains, the behaviour of
other agents plays a critical role in modulating the complexity and diversity of the challenges faced by
a learning agent. For example, an empty environment that has no blocks to hide behind might be most
    1
        Videos of M AESTRO agents are available at maestro.samvelyan.com


                                                     1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                                                        Student Agent
                           Generate new
                           environment                       Evaluate                   Train


                                            Sample           Update            Periodically     Prioritise high
             Environment                   agent for   agent’s buffer          store student    regret agent-
              Generator                   evaluation     using regret          agent’s copies   environment pairs


                Co-Player                                                                  …
                Population


                Environment
                Buffers



Figure 1: A diagram of M AESTRO. M AESTRO maintains a population of co-players, each having
an individual buffer of high-regret environments. When new environments are sampled, the student’s
regret is calculated with respect to the corresponding co-player and added to the co-player’s buffer.
M AESTRO continually provides high-regret environment/co-player pairs for training the student.

challenging when playing against opponent policies that attack head-on, whereas environments that
are full of winding hallways might be difficult when playing against defensive policies. Robust RL
agents should be expected to interact successfully with a wide assortment of other rational agents in
their environment (Yang et al., 2021; Mahajan et al., 2022). Therefore, to become widely applicable,
UED must be extended to include multi-agent dynamics as part of the environment design process.
We formalise this novel problem as an Underspecified Partially-Observable Stochastic Game (UP-
OSG), which generalises UED to multi-agent settings. We then introduce Multi-Agent Environment
Design Strategist for Open-Ended Learning (M AESTRO), the first approach to train generally capable
agents in two-player UPOSGs such that they are robust to changes in the environment and co-player
policies. M AESTRO is a replay-guided approach that explicitly considers the dependence between
agents and environments by jointly sampling over environment/co-player pairs using a regret-based
curriculum and population learning (see Figure 1). In partially observable two-player zero-sum
games, we show that at equilibrium, the M AESTRO student policy reaches a Bayes-Nash Equilibrium
with respect to a regret-maximising distribution over environments. Furthermore, in fully observable
settings, it attains a Nash-Equilibrium policy in every environment against every rational agent.
We assess the curricula induced by M AESTRO and a variety of strong baselines in two competitive
two-player games, namely a sparse-reward grid-based LaserTag environment with discrete actions
(Lanctot et al., 2017) and a dense-reward pixel-based MultiCarRacing environment with continuous
actions (Schwarting et al., 2021). In both cases, M AESTRO produces more robust agents than baseline
autocurriculum methods on out-of-distribution (OOD) human-designed environment instances against
unseen co-players. Furthermore, we show that M AESTRO agents, trained only on randomised
environments and having never seen the target task, can significantly outperform specialist agents
trained directly on the target environment. Moreover, in analysing how the student’s regret varies
across environments and co-players, we find that a joint curriculum, as produced by M AESTRO, is
indeed required for finding the highest regret levels, as necessitated by UED.
In summary, we make the following core contributions: (i) we provide the first formalism for multi-
agent learning in underspecified environments, (ii) we introduce M AESTRO, a novel approach to
jointly learn autocurricula over environment/co-player pairs, implicitly modelling their dependence,
(iii) we prove M AESTRO inherits the theoretical property from the single-agent setting of imple-
menting a minimax-regret policy at equilibrium, which corresponds to a Bayesian Nash or Nash
equilibrium in certain settings, and (iv) by rigorously analysing the curriculum induced by M AESTRO
and evaluating M AESTRO agents against strong baselines, we empirically demonstrate the importance
of the joint curriculum over the environments and co-players.

2   P ROBLEM S TATEMENT AND P RELIMINARIES
In single-agent domains, the problem of Unsupervised Environment Design (UED) is cast in the
framework of an underspecified POMDP (Dennis et al., 2020), which explicitly augments a standard
POMDP with a set of free parameters controlling aspects of the environment subject to the design
process. We extend this formalism to the multi-agent setting using stochastic games (Shapley, 1953).


                                                              2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


      (a) Start of training    (b) Middle of training        (c) End of training       (d) Zero-shot evaluation

Figure 2: Emergent complexity of autocurricula induced by M AESTRO. Examples of partially observable
environments provided to the M AESTRO student agent at the (a) start, (b) middle, and (c) end of training. Levels
become more complex over time. LaserTag levels (top row) increase in wall density and active engagement
between the student and opponent. MultiCarRacing tracks (bottom row) become increasingly more challenging
with many sharp turns. (d) Example held-out human-designed LaserTag levels and Formula 1 benchmark tracks
(Jiang et al., 2021a) used for OOD evaluation. For the full list of evaluation environments see Appendix B.
An Underspecified Partially Observable Stochastic Game (UPOSG) is given by the tuple M =
⟨n, A, O, Θ, S, T , I, R, γ⟩. A, O, and S denote the action, observation, and state spaces, respectively.
Θ is the set of the environment’s free parameters, such as possible positions of walls in a maze or
levels of a game. These parameters can be distinct at every time step and are also incorporated into the
transition function T : S × A × Θ → ∆(S), where A ≡ An is the joint action of all agents. Each
agent draws individual observations according to the observation function I : S×N → O and obtains
reward according to the reward function R : S × A × N → R, where N = {1, . . . , n}. The discount
factor is denoted by γ. Each configuration of the parameter θ ∈ Θ defines a specific instantiation
of the environment Mθ , which is often referred to as a level (Jiang et al., 2021a; Parker-Holder
et al., 2022). In this work, we will simply refer to a specific instance θ as an environment when clear
from the context. We use −i to notate all agents except i: π−i = (π1 , ..., πi−1 , πi+1 , ..., πN ). For
an agent i with a stochastic policy πi : O × A → [0, 1], we define the value in Mθ with co-players
                            PT
π−i as V θ (πi , π−i ) = E[ t=0 γ t rti ] where rti are the rewards achieved by agent i when following
policy πi in Mθ . The goal is to sequentially provide values for Θ and co-players π−i to agent i
during training so that the policy πi is robust to any possible environment and co-player policies,
i.e., πi = arg minπi maxθ,π−i (V θ (π ∗ , π−i ) − V θ (πi , π−i )), where π ∗ is the optimal policy on θ
with co-players π−i . UPOSGs are general by nature and allow for cooperative, competitive, and
mixed scenarios. Furthermore, Θ can represent different game layouts, changes in observations, and
environment dynamics. When n = 1, UPOSGs are identical to UPOMDPs for single-agent tasks. In
the remainder of this work, we concentrate on competitive settings with n = 2 agents.

2.1     UED A PPROACHES IN S INGLE -AGENT RL
A curriculum over the environment parameters θ can arise from a teacher maximising a utility function
Ut (π, θ) based on the student’s policy π. The most naive form of UED is domain randomisation (DR,
Jakobi, 1997; Sadeghi & Levine, 2017), whereby environments are sampled uniformly at random,
corresponding to a constant utility UtU (π, θ) = C. Recent UED approaches use regret as the objective
for maximisation (Dennis et al., 2020; Gur et al., 2021): UtR (π, θ) = maxπ∗ ∈Π {R EGRETθ (π, π ∗ )} =
maxπ∗ ∈Π {Vθ (π ∗ ) − Vθ (π)}, where π ∗ is the optimal policy on θ.
Empirically, regret-based objectives produce curricula of increasing complexity that re-
sult in more robust policies. Moreover, if the learning process reaches a Nash equilib-
rium, the student provably follows a minimax-regret policy (Dennis et al., 2020): π ∈
arg minπA ∈Π {maxθ,πB ∈Θ,Π {R EGRETθ (πA , πB )}}, where Π and Θ are the strategy sets of the
student and the teacher, respectively. While this is an appealing property, the optimal policy π ∗ is
unknown in practice and must be approximated instead.
Prioritized Level Replay (PLR, Jiang et al., 2021a;b) continually curates an environment buffer con-
taining the environments generated under domain randomisation with the highest learning potential,
e.g., as measured by estimated regret. PLR alternates between evaluating new environments for learn-
ing potential and performing prioritised training of the agent on the environments with the highest
learning potential so far found. By training the student only on curated high-regret environments,
PLR provably results in a minimax-regret student policy at Nash equilibrium. M AESTRO makes use
of PLR-style curation of environment buffers to discover high-regret environments during training.


                                                        3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


2.2   C O -P LAYER AUTOCURRICULA IN C OMPETITIVE M ULTI -AGENT RL

The choice of co-players plays a crucial role for training agents in multi-agent domains (Leibo et al.,
2019). A simple but effective approach is self-play (SP, Silver et al., 2018), whereby the agent always
plays with copies of itself. In competitive two-player games, SP produces a curriculum in which
opponents match each other in skill level. However, SP may cause cycles in the strategy space when
agents forget how to play against previous versions of their policy (Garnelo et al., 2021).
Fictitious Self-Play (FSP, Heinrich et al., 2015) overcomes the emergence of such cycles by training
an agent against a uniform mixture of all previous policies. However, FSP can result in wasting a
large number of interactions against significantly weaker opponents.
Prioritized Fictitious Self-Play (PFSP, Vinyals et al., 2019) mitigates this potential inefficiency
by matching agent A with a frozen opponent B from the set of candidates C with probability
 P f (P[A beats B])     , where f defines the exact curriculum over opponents. For example, fhard (x) =
   C∈C f (P[A beats C])
(1 − x)p , where p ∈ R+ , forces PFSP to focus on the hardest opponents.

3     M ETHOD
3.1   A N I LLUSTRATIVE E XAMPLE
To highlight the importance of curricula over the joint Table 1: An illustrative two-player
space of environments and co-players, we provide an il- game. Rows correspond to co-player poli-
lustrative example of a simple two-player game in Ta- cies and Π = {πA , πB , πC }. Columns
ble 1. Here, the goal of the regret-maximising teacher indicate different environments and Θ =
is to select an environment/co-player pair for the stu- {θ1 , θ2 , θ3 , θ4 }. The payoff matrix repre-
                                                             sents the regret of the student on pair (θ, π).
dent. Ignoring the co-player and selecting the highest
regret environment leads to choosing θ3 . Similarly, ig-                 θ1     θ2     θ3    θ4    Eθ∼Θ
noring environments and selecting the highest regret co-        πA       0.6 0.1 0.4 0.2 0.325
player leads to πC . This yields a suboptimal pair (θ3 ,        πB       0.1 0.5 0.4 0.3 0.325
πC ) with R EGRET(θ3 , πC ) = 0.4, whereas a teacher            πC       0.2 0.4 0.4 0.4            0.35
over the joint space yields the optimal pair (θ1 , πA ) with   E π∼Π     0.3    0.33   0.4   0.3
R EGRET(θ1 , πA ) = 0.6. Thus, naively treating the environment and co-player as independent can
yield a sub-optimal curriculum. Such overspecialisation toward a subset of environmental challenges
at the expense of overall robustness commonly emerges in multi-agent settings (Garnelo et al., 2021).

3.2   M ULTI -AGENT E NVIRONMENT D ESIGN S TRATEGIST FOR O PEN -E NDED L EARNING

In this section, we describe a new multi- Algorithm 1: M AESTRO
agent UED approach called Multi-Agent
Environment Design Strategist for Open- 1 Input: Environment generator Θ
                                             2 Initialise: Student policy π, co-player population B
Ended Learning (M AESTRO) which in-                                                  ′           ′
duces a regret-based autocurricula jointly 3 Initialise: Environment buffers ∀π ∈ B, Λ(π ) ∅.
                                                                                                     :=
                                             4 for i = {1, 2, . . . } do
over environments and co-players.            5     for many episodes do
M AESTRO is a replay-guided approach         6          π′ ∼ B                  ▷ Sample co-player via Eq 1
(Jiang et al., 2021a) that relies on an en-  7          Sample replay decision           ▷ see Section 3.2.2
                                             8          if replaying then
vironment generator to continuously cre-
                                             9               θ ∼ Λ(π ′ )     ▷ Sample a replay environment
ate new environment instances. Rather
                                            10               Collect trajectory τ of π using (θ, π ′ )
than storing a single environment buffer, 11                 Update π with rewards R(τ )
as done by PLR, M AESTRO maintains a 12                 else
population of policies B with each pol- 13                   θ∼Θ           ▷ Sample a random environment
icy assigned its own environment buffer. 14                  Collect trajectory τ of π using (θ, π ′ )
In each environment θ produced by the
generator, M AESTRO evaluates the stu- 15               Compute regret score S = Regret(θ,
                                                                                       ^         π′ )
                                                                       ′
dent’s performance against a non-uniform 16             Update Λ(π ) with θ using score S
mixture of co-player policies in B. High-   17     B   ←   B ∪ {πi⊥ }, Λ(πi⊥ ) := ∅        ▷ frozen weights
regret environment/co-player pairs are
then stored, along with the student agent’s regret estimate for that pair, in the corresponding co-
player’s environment buffer.


                                                     4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


M AESTRO maintains a dynamic population of co-players of various skill levels throughout training
(Czarnecki et al., 2020). Figure 1 presents the overall training paradigm of M AESTRO and Algorithm 1
provides its pseudocode. We note that when applied to a fixed singleton environment, M AESTRO
becomes a variation of PFSP (Vinyals et al., 2019), where the mixture of policies from the population
is computed based on the agent’s regret estimate, rather than the probability of winning.

3.2.1      M AINTAINING A P OPULATION OF C O -P LAYERS
A key issue of using replay-guided autocurricula for multi-agent settings is nonstationarity. Specif-
ically, using PLR with SP results in inaccurate regret estimates over environment/co-player pairs,
as the co-player policies evolve over training. M AESTRO overcomes this issue by maintaining a
population of past policies (Lanctot et al., 2017). This approach confers several key benefits. First,
re-encountering past agents helps avoid cycles in strategy space (Balduzzi et al., 2019; Garnelo
et al., 2021). Second, M AESTRO maintains accurate regret estimates in the face of nonstationarity
by employing a separate environment buffer for each policy in the population. Third, M AESTRO
always optimises a single policy throughout training, rather than a set of distinct policies which can
be computationally expensive.

3.2.2      C URATING THE E NVIRONMENT /C O - PLAYER PAIRS
To optimise for the global regret over the joint environment/co-player space, a M AESTRO student is
trained to best respond to a non-uniform mixture of policies from a population by prioritising training
against co-players with high-regret environments in their buffers:
                             C O -P LAYER HR ∈ arg max{ max′ Regret(θ,
                                                             ^         π ′ )},                                    (1)
                                                     π ′ ∈B       θ∈Λ(π )
where B is the co-player population, Λ(π ′ ) is the environment buffer of agent π ′ , and Regret^ is
the estimated regret of student for the pair (θ, π ′ ). To ensure that the student learns to best respond
to high-regret co-players as well as to the entire population B, we enforce all members of B to be
                                     λ
assigned a minimum probability N       . For instance, if Equation (1) returns a single highest-regret co-
player, then the resulting prioritised distribution assigns a weight of N −λ(NN
                                                                                 −1)
                                                                                     to the highest-regret
co-player and weight of N to the remaining co-players. For each co-player π ′ ∈ B, M AESTRO
                            λ

maintains a PLR environment buffer Λ(π ′ ) with the top-K high-regret levels. Once the co-player
is sampled, we make a replay decision: with probability p, we use a bandit to sample a training
environment from Λ(π ′ ),2 and with probability 1 − p, we sample a new environment for evaluation
from the environment generator. Similar to Robust PLR (Jiang et al., 2021a), we only update the
student policy on environments sampled from the environment buffer. This provides M AESTRO with
strong robustness guarantees, which we discuss in Section 3.3.

3.3      ROBUSTNESS G UARANTEES OF M AESTRO

We analyse the expected behaviour of M AESTRO if the system reaches equilibrium: does M AESTRO
produce a regret-maximising distribution over environments and co-players and is the policy optimal
with respect to these distributions? We cast this problem in terms of Bayesian Nash equilibrium
(BNE) behaviour in individual environments. BNE is an extension of Nash equilibrium (NE) where
each co-player j has an unknown type parameter θj , which affects the dynamics of the game and
is only known to that player. The distribution over these parameters Θ̃N is assumed to be common
knowledge. Equilibria are then defined as the set of policies, conditioned on their unknown type,
each being a best response to the policies of the other players. That is, for policy πj of any player j,
                                πj ∈ arg max{        E       [U (π̂j (θj ), π−j (θ−j ))]}.                        (2)
                                        π̂j ∈Πj   θ N ∈Θ̃N

In M AESTRO, we can assume each co-player is effectively omniscient, as each is co-evolved for
maximal performance against the student in the environments it is paired with in its high-regret
environment buffer. In contrast, the student has conferred no special advantages and has access to only
the standard observations. We formalise this setting as a −i-knowing game. This game corresponds
to the POSG with the same set of players, action space, rewards, and states as the original UPOSG,
but with θ sampled at the first time step and provided to co-players −i as part of their observation.
   2
       Sampling is based on environment’s regret score, staleness, and other features following (Jiang et al., 2021b).


                                                              5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Definition 1. The -i-knowing-game of an UPOSG M = ⟨n, A, O = ×i∈N Oi , Θ, S, T , I =
×i∈N Ii , R = ×i∈N Ri , γ⟩ with parameter distribution θ̃ is defined to be the POSG K = ⟨n′ =
n, A′ = A, Oi′ = Oi + {Θ if i ∈ −i}, S ′ = S, T ′ = T (θ), Ii′ = Ii + {θ if ∈ −i}, R′i = Ri , γ⟩
where θ is sampled from the distribution θ̃ on the first time step.
We thus arrive at our main theorem, followed by a convenient and natural corollary for fully observable
settings. We include the full proofs in Appendix A.
Theorem 1. In two-player zero-sum settings, the M AESTRO student at equilibrium implements a
Bayesian Nash equilibrium of the −i-knowing game, over a regret-maximising distribution of levels.
Corollary 1. In fully-observable two-player zero-sum settings, the M AESTRO student at equilibrium
implements a Nash equilibrium in each environment in the support of the environment distribution.

Informally, the proof of the Corollary 1 follows from the observation that the −i-knowing game in a
fully observable setting is equivalent to the original distribution of environments, as there is no longer
an information asymmetry between the student and co-players. Moreover, the NE strategy on this
distribution of environment instances would be a NE strategy on each instance individually, given
that they are fully observable. This argument is formalised in Appendix A.

4     E XPERIMENTAL S ETTING
Our experiments aim to understand (1) the interaction between autocurricula over environments and
co-players in multi-agent UED, (2) its impact on zero-shot transfer performance of student policies to
unseen environments and co-players, and (3) the emergent complexity of the environments provided
to the student agent under autocurricula. To this end, we evaluate methods in two distinct domains:
discrete control with sparse rewards, and continuous control with dense rewards. We assess student
robustness in OOD human-designed environments against previously unseen opponents. Given its
strong performance and usage in related works, PPO (Schulman et al., 2017) serves as the base RL
algorithm in our experiments. We provide full environment descriptions in Appendix B and detail
our model architecture and hyperparameter choices in Appendix C.
Baselines and Ablations We compare M AESTRO against two key baselines methods producing
autocurricula over environments: domain randomization (DR; Jakobi, 1997), and (Robust) PLR (Jiang
et al., 2021a), a state-of-the-art UED baseline. For co-player curricula, we consider SP, FSP, and PFSP,
popular methods that underlie breakthroughs such as AlphaGo (Silver et al., 2016) and AlphaStar
(Vinyals et al., 2019). Since these baselines independently produce curricula either over environments
or over co-players, our choice of baselines results in a combination of 6 joint curriculum baselines
over the environment/co-player space. We present further ablations investigating the importance of
M AESTRO’s co-player selection mechanism in Appendix D.

4.1   E NVIRONMENTS
LaserTag is a grid-based, two-player zero-sum game proposed by Lanctot et al. (2017) where agents
aim to tag each other with laser beams. Success in LaserTag requires agents to master sophisticated
behaviours, including chasing opponents, hiding behind walls, keeping clear of long corridors, and
maze-solving. Each agent observes the 5 × 5 grid area in front of it and can turn right or left, move
forward, and shoot. Upon tagging an opponent, the agent and the opponent receive a reward of 1
and −1, respectively, and the episode terminates. LaserTag training environments are generated by
randomly sampling grid size, wall locations, and the initial locations and directions of agents.
MultiCarRacing (MCR, Schwarting et al., 2021) is a high-dimensional, pixel-based continuous
control environment with dense rewards. Two agents compete by driving a full lap around the track.
Each track consists of n tiles. Agents receive a reward of 1000/n or 500/n for reaching a tile first
or second, respectively. Agents receive a top-down, egocentric 96 × 96 × 3 partial observation and
can collide, push, or block each other, allowing for complex emergent behaviour and non-transitive
dynamics. The action space is 3-dimensional, controlling changes in acceleration, braking, and
steering. All training tracks used for training agents are generated by sampling 12 random control
points defining a Bézier curve forming the track.
Figure 2 shows example LaserTag and MCR environments, including human-designed OOD test
environments. MCR test environments are the Formula 1 CarRacing tracks from (Jiang et al., 2021a).


                                                    6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


5     R ESULTS AND D ISCUSSION
5.1    C ROSS -P LAY R ESULTS
To assess the robustness of the approaches, we evaluate all pairs of methods in cross-play on OOD
human-designed environments (13 LaserTag levels and 21 F1 tracks for MCR). For each pair of
methods, we perform cross-play between all pairs of random seeds (10 × 10 for LaserTag and 5 × 5
for MCR) on all environments. Full results are included in Appendix E.2.
Figure 3 shows the cross-play results on LaserTag throughout and at the end of training. To estimate
the robustness of each method on unseen environments, we evaluate round-robin (RR) tournament
results where each baseline is matched against every other baseline. More robust agents should attain
higher RR returns across all other agents. We can see that M AESTRO outperforms all baselines in
round-robin returns. Although SP-based methods achieve an early performance lead due to more
frequent policy updates, M AESTRO quickly outperforms them due to its curriculum that prioritises
challenging environment/opponent pairs.
             LaserTag-Eval [13 Tasks]    LaserTag-Eval [13 Tasks]      LaserTag-Eval [13 Tasks]
                             1.0                                                        0.3
                                                                                                                                                      0.10
      Normalised RR Return


                             0.8                                                        0.2
                                                                                                                                                      0.05
                                                                     RR Return


                             0.6                                                        0.1


                                                                                                                                       RR Return
                             0.4                                                                                                                      0.00
                                                                                        0.0
                             0.2
                                                                                        0.1                                                           0.05
                             0.0
                                   0                           40K                                      0                        40K
                                                                                                                                                      0.10
                                           # Student Updates                                                 # Student Updates


Figure 3: LaserTag Cross-Play Results. (Left) normalised and (Middle) unnormalised RR returns during
training. (Right) RR returns at the end of training (mean and standard error over 10 seeds).

Figure 4 reports the MCR results on the challenging F1 tracks. Here, M AESTRO policies produce the
most robust agents, outperforming all baselines individually across all tracks while also spending less
time on the grass area outside of track boundaries. PLR-based baselines outperform DR, underscoring
the benefits of a curriculum over environments on this task. Nonetheless, M AESTRO’s superior
performance highlights the importance of a joint curriculum over environments and co-players.
                                           Formula 1 [21 Tasks]                                        0.8
                                                                                                             Formula 1 [21 Tasks]                            1000
                                                                                                                                                                    Formula 1 [21 Tasks]
                                   400                                                                                                                        800
                                                                                 Cross-Play Win Rate


                                                                                                       0.6
                                                                                                                                             Time on Grass


                                   300
                    RR Return


                                                                                                                                                              600
                                                                                                       0.4
                                   200                                                                                                                        400
                                   100                                                                 0.2                                                    200

                                       0                                                               0.0                                                      0


Figure 4: MultiCarRacing Cross-Play Results. (Left) RR returns (Middle) Cross-play win rate and (Right)
grass time between M AESTRO and baselines (mean and standard error over 5 seeds).

5.2    I MPORTANCE OF THE CURRICULUM OVER THE ENVIRONMENT / CO - PLAYER SPACE
Figure 5 shows the co-player×environment regret landscape of a M AESTRO student agent on
randomly-sampled environments against each co-player from M AESTRO’s population at the end of
training (as done in the motivating example in Section 3.1). We observe that high regret estimates
depend on both the choice of the environment and the co-player. Most importantly, maximising mean
regrets over environments and co-players independently does not lead to maximum regret over the
joint space, highlighting the importance of the curricula over the joint environment/co-player space.

5.3    E VALUATION AGAINST S PECIALIST AGENTS
While we show that M AESTRO outperforms baselines trained on a large number of environments,
we are also interested in evaluating M AESTRO against specialist agents trained only on single, fixed
environments. Figure 6 shows that, despite having never seen the target environments, the M AESTRO
agent beats specialist agents trained exclusively on them for the same number of updates. This is


                                                                                                                     7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Figure 5: Regret landscapes on LaserTag and MultiCarRacing. Shown are regret estimates of the student
on 16 random environment (columns) against each policy from M AESTRO’s co-player population (rows).
Highlighted in red are the regret estimates of the co-player and environment with the highest mean values when
considered in isolation, whereas in green we highlight the overall highest regret environment/co-player pair.

possible because the M AESTRO agent was trained with an autocurriculum that promotes the robustness
of the trained policy, allowing it to transfer better to unseen opponents on OOD environments. These
results demonstrate the potential of multi-agent UED in addressing key problems in multi-agent RL,
such as exploration (Leonardos et al., 2021) and co-player overfitting (Lanctot et al., 2017).

                                            LaserTag-Eval [4 Tasks]                                           LaserTag-Eval [4 Tasks]                                               Formula 1 [3 Tasks]                                   Formula 1 [3 Tasks]
                                                                                                        0.4                                                                        0.6
                       0.50                                                                                                                                                                                                              400
  Cross-Play Return


                                                                                    Cross-Play Return


                                                                                                                                                             Cross-Play Win Rate
                                                                                                                                                                                   0.5


                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Cross-Play Return
                       0.25                                                                             0.2
                                                                                                                                                                                   0.4                                                   300
                       0.00                                                                             0.0
                                                                                                                                                                                   0.3                                                   200
                       0.25                                                                             0.2
                                                                                                                                                                                   0.2
                       0.50                                                                             0.4                                                                                                                              100
                                                                                                                                                                                   0.1
                                        0                                  40K                            0                                            40K
                                                 # Student Updates                                               # Student Updates                                                 0.0                                                     0

Figure 6: Cross-Play vs Specialists. Cross-play evaluation against specialist agents trained directly on the target
task. We use different specialist agents for each fixed environment. Shown are averaged metrics across 4 target
LaserTag levels and 3 Formula 1 tracks. Full results on individual environments are included in Appendix E.1.

5.4                        E MERGENT C URRICULUM A NALYSIS
We analyse the curriculum over environments induced by M AESTRO and compare it with the curricula
generated by the baselines. Figure 7 demonstrates that, as training progresses, M AESTRO provides
agents with LaserTag environments with an increasing density of walls, which contributes to a
gradual increase in environment complexity. Initially, the size of the grid also increases as the teacher
challenges the student to navigate the mazes. However, after more adept opponent agents enter the
population, larger mazes yield lower regret. Instead, M AESTRO starts prioritising smaller grid sizes
compared to other baselines. Smaller environments with high wall density challenge the student
to navigate maze structures while succeeding in more frequent multi-agent interactions against
increasingly more capable opponents throughout an episode. Figure 2c illustrates such challenging
environments, which, due to the smaller grid, require the student to engage with the opponent earlier
in the episode. PLR-based methods also prioritise high wall density but do not shrink the grid size to
prioritise competitive interactions to the same extent as M AESTRO.
                                                 LaserTag Train                                         LaserTag Train                                    MCR Train                                                        MCR Train                                             MCR Train
                                        34                                         12                                                                                                                                                                                 0.18
                                                                                                                                               0.505                                                     49000
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Track Amplitude
                      Wall Percentage


                                        32                                                                                                                                                                                                                            0.16
                                                                                                                               Track Notches


                                                                                   11                                                          0.500                                                     48000
                                                                                                                                                                                            Track Area
                                                                       Grid Size


                                        30
                                                                                   10                                                          0.495                                                     47000                                                        0.14
                                        28
                                                                                                                                               0.490                                                     46000                                                        0.12
                                        26                                          9
                                                                                                                                               0.485
                                        24                                                                                                                                                               45000                                                        0.10
                                             0                       40K                 0                               40K                       1.5K                                  4.5K                 1.5K                               4.5K                     1.5K               4.5K
                                                 # Student Updates                                  # Student Updates                                  # Student Updates                                         # Student Updates                                           # Student Updates



         Figure 7: Characteristics of emergent autocurricula in LaserTag and MultiCarRacing.
We observe similar emergent complexity in the MCR domain. Here the PLR-based baselines and
M AESTRO all prioritise tracks that have a high number of notches (i.e. the non-convex parts of the
track) and enclosed areas. Here, as in the LaserTag domain, M AESTRO gradually shrinks the track
amplitude, which corresponds to a lower intensity of the winding portions of the track. Such tracks
may contain more segments where competitive interactions can play out without sacrificing overall
episodic return, thus inducing policies more adept at the competitive aspects of this domain. Figure 2
illustrates randomly sampled environments curated by M AESTRO at different stages of training.

                                                                                                                                                             8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


6    R ELATED W ORK
Unsupervised Environment Design (UED, Dennis et al., 2020) is a family of methods that provide
an agent with a sequence of environments for training robust policies. The simplest UED approach
is Domain Randomisation (DR, Jakobi, 1997; Sadeghi & Levine, 2017) which has demonstrated
strong empirical performances in domains such as robotics (Tobin et al., 2017; James et al., 2017)
and magnetic control of tokamak plasmas (Degrave et al., 2022). PAIRED (Dennis et al., 2020; Gur
et al., 2021) trains an environment generator that maximises the student’s regret, approximated as
the difference in return between the student and an antagonist agent. Prioritized Level Replay (PLR,
Jiang et al., 2021a;b) curates environment instances (i.e., levels) for training, by performing a random
search of domain randomised levels for those with high learning potential, e.g., as measured by
estimated regret. ACCEL (Parker-Holder et al., 2022) is a replay-guided UED approach that extends
PLR by making edits to high-regret environments. Several methods generate curricula by adapting
the environment parameters in response to the agent’s performance (Portelas et al., 2019; Matiisen
et al., 2020; Klink et al., 2019; Eimer et al., 2021). This adaptation is largely heuristic-driven, without
the robustness guarantees shared by minimax-regret UED methods. Notably, all these methods focus
on single-agent RL, while M AESTRO is designed for the two-player multi-agent setting.
Many prior works study curricula over opponents in two-player zero-sum settings. The most naive
approach, self-play (SP), consists of pitting the agent against a copy of itself. Combined with search,
SP has led to superhuman performances in board games such as Backgammon (Tesauro, 1995),
Chess and Go (Silver et al., 2016). Zinkevich et al. (2007) use self-play with regret minimisation
for achieving Nash equilibrium, an approach that led to superhuman performance in Poker (Brown
& Sandholm, 2018; 2019). Fictitious self-play (FSP) learns a best-response to the uniform mixture
of all previous versions of the agent (Brown, 1951; Leslie & Collins, 2006; Heinrich et al., 2015).
Prioritised fictitious self-play (PFSP, Vinyals et al., 2019) trains agents against a non-uniform mixture
of policies based on the probability of winning against each policy. PFSP is a practical variant
of Policy-Space Response Oracles (PSRO, Lanctot et al., 2017), a general population learning
framework, whereby new policies are trained as best responses to a mixture of previous policies.
M AESTRO is related to PSRO but adapted for UPOSGs. In M AESTRO, the population meta-strategy is
based on the student’s regret when playing against policies on environments observed during training.
Unlike our work, these prior autocurricula methods for competitive multi-agent environments do not
directly consider variations of the environment itself.
Several prior works have applied DR in multi-agent domains. Randomly modifying the environment
has proven critical for the emergence of complex behaviours in Hide-and-Seek (Baker et al., 2019),
Capture the Flag (Jaderberg et al., 2019), and StarCraft II Unit Micromanagement (Ellis et al.,
2022). In XLand (Open Ended Learning Team et al., 2021), a curriculum is provided over both
environments and tasks to create general learners. This work differs from ours in multiple aspects.
Open Ended Learning Team et al. (2021) uses handcrafted heuristics and rejection sampling for
selecting environments for training and evaluating agents, while M AESTRO automatically selects
environments based on regret rather than hand-coded heuristics. Furthermore, unlike the autocurricula
used in XLand, M AESTRO does not rely on population-based training, a computationally expensive
algorithm for tuning the autocurriculum hyperparameters.

7    C ONCLUSION AND F UTURE W ORK
In this paper, we provided the first formalism for multi-agent learning in underspecified environments.
We introduced M AESTRO, an approach for producing an autocurriculum over the joint space of
environments and co-players. Moreover, we proved that M AESTRO attains minimax-regret robustness
guarantees at Nash equilibrium. Empirically M AESTRO produces agents that are more robust to the
environment and co-player variations than a number of strong baselines in two challenging domains.
M AESTRO agents even outperform specialist agents in these domains. Our work opens up many
interesting directions for future work. M AESTRO could be extended to n-player games, as well as co-
operative and mixed settings. Furthermore, M AESTRO could be combined with search-based methods
in order to further improve sample efficiency and generalisation. Another interesting open question
is identifying conditions whereby such an algorithm can provably converge to Nash equilibrium in
two-player zero-sum settings. Finally, this work is limited to training only a single policy for each of
the multi-agent UED approaches. Concurrent and continued training of several unique policies in
underspecified multi-agent problems could be a generally fruitful research direction.


                                                    9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

We extend our gratitude to Christopher Bamford for his assistance with the Griddly sandbox frame-
work (Bamford et al., 2020; 2022) used for our LaserTag experiments. We thank Max Jaderberg,
Marta Garnelo, Edward Grefenstette, Yingchen Xu, and Robert Kirk for insightful discussions and
valuable feedback on this work. We also thank the anonymous reviewers for their recommendations
on improving the paper. This work was funded by Meta AI.

R EFERENCES
Bowen Baker, Ingmar Kanitscheider, Todor Markov, Yi Wu, Glenn Powell, Bob McGrew, and Igor
  Mordatch. Emergent tool use from multi-agent autocurricula, 2019. URL https://arxiv.
  org/abs/1909.07528.

David Balduzzi, Marta Garnelo, Yoram Bachrach, Wojciech Czarnecki, Julien Perolat, Max Jaderberg,
  and Thore Graepel. Open-ended learning in symmetric zero-sum games. In Kamalika Chaudhuri
  and Ruslan Salakhutdinov (eds.), Proceedings of the 36th International Conference on Machine
  Learning, volume 97 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pp. 434–443. PMLR, 09–15
  Jun 2019. URL https://proceedings.mlr.press/v97/balduzzi19a.html.

Chris Bamford, Shengyi Huang, and Simon Lucas. Griddly: A platform for ai research in games,
  2020. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2011.06363.

Christopher Bamford, Minqi Jiang, Mikayel Samvelyan, and Tim Rocktäschel. GriddlyJS: A web
  IDE for reinforcement learning. In Thirty-sixth Conference on Neural Information Processing
  Systems Datasets and Benchmarks Track, 2022. URL https://openreview.net/forum?
  id=YmacJv0i_UR.

Trapit Bansal, Jakub Pachocki, Szymon Sidor, Ilya Sutskever, and Igor Mordatch. Emergent com-
  plexity via multi-agent competition. In International Conference on Learning Representations,
  2018. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=Sy0GnUxCb.

Christopher Berner, Greg Brockman, Brooke Chan, Vicki Cheung, Przemyslaw Debiak, Christy
  Dennison, David Farhi, Quirin Fischer, Shariq Hashme, Chris Hesse, Rafal Józefowicz, Scott Gray,
  Catherine Olsson, Jakub Pachocki, Michael Petrov, Henrique Pondé de Oliveira Pinto, Jonathan
  Raiman, Tim Salimans, Jeremy Schlatter, Jonas Schneider, Szymon Sidor, Ilya Sutskever, Jie Tang,
  Filip Wolski, and Susan Zhang. Dota 2 with large scale deep reinforcement learning. CoRR,
  abs/1912.06680, 2019.

George W Brown. Iterative solution of games by fictitious play. Activity analysis of production and
  allocation, 13(1):374–376, 1951.

Noam Brown and Tuomas Sandholm. Superhuman ai for heads-up no-limit poker: Libratus beats top
  professionals. Science, 359(6374):418–424, 2018.

Noam Brown and Tuomas Sandholm. Superhuman ai for multiplayer poker. Science, 365(6456):
  885–890, 2019. doi: 10.1126/science.aay2400. URL https://www.science.org/doi/
  abs/10.1126/science.aay2400.

Wojciech M Czarnecki, Gauthier Gidel, Brendan Tracey, Karl Tuyls, Shayegan Omidshafiei, David
 Balduzzi, and Max Jaderberg. Real world games look like spinning tops. Advances in Neural
 Information Processing Systems, 33:17443–17454, 2020.

Jonas Degrave, Federico Felici, Jonas Buchli, Michael Neunert, Brendan D. Tracey, Francesco
  Carpanese, Timo Ewalds, Roland Hafner, Abbas Abdolmaleki, Diego de Las Casas, Craig Donner,
  Leslie Fritz, Cristian Galperti, Andrea Huber, James Keeling, Maria Tsimpoukelli, Jackie Kay,
  Antoine Merle, J-M. Moret, Seb Noury, Federico Pesamosca, David G. Pfau, Olivier Sauter, Cris-
  tian Sommariva, Stefano Coda, B. Duval, Ambrogio Fasoli, Pushmeet Kohli, Koray Kavukcuoglu,
  Demis Hassabis, and Martin A. Riedmiller. Magnetic control of tokamak plasmas through deep
  reinforcement learning. Nature, 602:414 – 419, 2022.


                                                10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Michael Dennis, Natasha Jaques, Eugene Vinitsky, Alexandre Bayen, Stuart Russell, Andrew Critch,
 and Sergey Levine. Emergent complexity and zero-shot transfer via unsupervised environment
 design. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 33, 2020.
Theresa Eimer, André Biedenkapp, Frank Hutter, and Marius Lindauer. Self-paced context evaluation
  for contextual reinforcement learning. In The International Conference on Machine Learning.
  2021.
Benjamin Ellis, Skander Moalla, Mikayel Samvelyan, Mingfei Sun, Anuj Mahajan, Jakob N. Fo-
  erster, and Shimon Whiteson. SMACv2: An improved benchmark for cooperative multi-agent
  reinforcement learning, 2022. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2212.07489.
Xidong Feng, Oliver Slumbers, Ziyu Wan, Bo Liu, Stephen McAleer, Ying Wen, Jun Wang,
  and Yaodong Yang. Neural Auto-Curricula in Two-Player Zero-Sum Games. In Ad-
  vances in Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 34, pp. 3504–3517. Curran Asso-
  ciates, Inc., 2021. URL https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper/2021/hash/
  1cd73be1e256a7405516501e94e892ac-Abstract.html.
Marta Garnelo, Wojciech Marian Czarnecki, Siqi Liu, Dhruva Tirumala, Junhyuk Oh, Gauthier Gidel,
 Hado van Hasselt, and David Balduzzi. Pick your battles: Interaction graphs as population-level
 objectives for strategic diversity, 2021. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2110.04041.
Izzeddin Gur, Natasha Jaques, Yingjie Miao, Jongwook Choi, Manoj Tiwari, Honglak Lee, and
  Aleksandra Faust. Environment generation for zero-shot compositional reinforcement learning. In
  Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2021.
Johannes Heinrich, Marc Lanctot, and David Silver. Fictitious self-play in extensive-form games. In
  International conference on machine learning, pp. 805–813. PMLR, 2015.
Max Jaderberg, Wojciech M. Czarnecki, Iain Dunning, Luke Marris, Guy Lever, Antonio Garcia Cas-
 tañ eda, Charles Beattie, Neil C. Rabinowitz, Ari S. Morcos, Avraham Ruderman, Nicolas Sonnerat,
 Tim Green, Louise Deason, Joel Z. Leibo, David Silver, Demis Hassabis, Koray Kavukcuoglu,
 and Thore Graepel. Human-level performance in 3d multiplayer games with population-based
 reinforcement learning. Science, 364(6443):859–865, may 2019.
Nick Jakobi. Evolutionary robotics and the radical envelope-of-noise hypothesis. Adaptive Behavior,
  6(2):325–368, 1997.
Stephen James, Andrew J. Davison, and Edward Johns. Transferring end-to-end visuomotor control
  from simulation to real world for a multi-stage task. In 1st Conference on Robot Learning, 2017.
Minqi Jiang, Michael Dennis, Jack Parker-Holder, Jakob Foerster, Edward Grefenstette, and Tim
 Rocktäschel. Replay-guided adversarial environment design. In Advances in Neural Information
 Processing Systems. 2021a.
Minqi Jiang, Edward Grefenstette, and Tim Rocktäschel. Prioritized level replay. In The International
 Conference on Machine Learning. 2021b.
Pascal Klink, Hany Abdulsamad, Boris Belousov, and Jan Peters. Self-paced contextual reinforcement
  learning. In Conference on Robot Learning. 10 2019.
Marc Lanctot, Vinicius Zambaldi, Audrunas Gruslys, Angeliki Lazaridou, Karl Tuyls, Julien Perolat,
 David Silver, and Thore Graepel. A unified game-theoretic approach to multiagent reinforcement
 learning, 2017. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/1711.00832.
Joel Z. Leibo, Vinicius Zambaldi, Marc Lanctot, Janusz Marecki, and Thore Graepel. Multi-agent
  reinforcement learning in sequential social dilemmas, 2017. URL https://arxiv.org/
  abs/1702.03037.
Joel Z. Leibo, Edward Hughes, Marc Lanctot, and Thore Graepel. Autocurricula and the emergence
  of innovation from social interaction: A manifesto for multi-agent intelligence research. ArXiv,
  abs/1903.00742, 2019.


                                                 11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Stefanos Leonardos, Georgios Piliouras, and Kelly Spendlove. Exploration-exploitation in multi-
  agent competition: Convergence with bounded rationality. In A. Beygelzimer, Y. Dauphin, P. Liang,
  and J. Wortman Vaughan (eds.), Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2021. URL
  https://openreview.net/forum?id=OSLVL-tIBei.
David S Leslie and Edmund J Collins. Generalised weakened fictitious play. Games and Economic
  Behavior, 56(2):285–298, 2006.
Xiaoteng Ma. Car racing with pytorch. 2019. URL https://github.com/xtma/pytorch_
  car_caring.
Anuj Mahajan, Mikayel Samvelyan, Tarun Gupta, Benjamin Ellis, Mingfei Sun, Tim Rocktäschel,
  and Shimon Whiteson. Generalization in cooperative multi-agent systems. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2202.00104, 2022.
Tambet Matiisen, Avital Oliver, Taco Cohen, and John Schulman. Teacher-student curriculum
  learning. IEEE Trans. Neural Networks Learn. Syst., 31(9):3732–3740, 2020.
Open Ended Learning Team, Adam Stooke, Anuj Mahajan, Catarina Barros, Charlie Deck, Jakob
  Bauer, Jakub Sygnowski, Maja Trebacz, Max Jaderberg, Michaël Mathieu, Nat McAleese, Nathalie
  Bradley-Schmieg, Nathaniel Wong, Nicolas Porcel, Roberta Raileanu, Steph Hughes-Fitt, Valentin
  Dalibard, and Wojciech Marian Czarnecki. Open-ended learning leads to generally capable agents.
 CoRR, abs/2107.12808, 2021.
Jack Parker-Holder, Minqi Jiang, Michael Dennis, Mikayel Samvelyan, Jakob Foerster, Edward
  Grefenstette, and Tim Rocktäschel. Evolving curricula with regret-based environment design,
  2022. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2203.01302.
Rémy Portelas, Cédric Colas, Katja Hofmann, and Pierre-Yves Oudeyer. Teacher algorithms for
  curriculum learning of deep RL in continuously parameterized environments. In Leslie Pack Kael-
  bling, Danica Kragic, and Komei Sugiura (eds.), 3rd Annual Conference on Robot Learning, CoRL
  2019, Osaka, Japan, October 30 - November 1, 2019, Proceedings, volume 100 of Proceedings of
  Machine Learning Research, pp. 835–853. PMLR, 2019.
Fereshteh Sadeghi and Sergey Levine. CAD2RL: real single-image flight without a single real image.
  In Nancy M. Amato, Siddhartha S. Srinivasa, Nora Ayanian, and Scott Kuindersma (eds.), Robotics:
  Science and Systems XIII, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts, USA,
  July 12-16, 2017, 2017.
Julian Schrittwieser, Ioannis Antonoglou, Thomas Hubert, Karen Simonyan, Laurent Sifre, Simon
  Schmitt, Arthur Guez, Edward Lockhart, Demis Hassabis, Thore Graepel, Timothy Lillicrap, and
  David Silver. Mastering atari, go, chess and shogi by planning with a learned model. Nature, 588
  (7839):604–609, dec 2020.
John Schulman, Philipp Moritz, Sergey Levine, Michael Jordan, and Pieter Abbeel. High-dimensional
  continuous control using generalized advantage estimation. In Proceedings of the International
  Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR), 2016.
John Schulman, Filip Wolski, Prafulla Dhariwal, Alec Radford, and Oleg Klimov. Proximal policy
  optimization algorithms. ArXiv, abs/1707.06347, 2017.
Wilko Schwarting, Tim Seyde, Igor Gilitschenski, Lucas Liebenwein, Ryan Sander, Sertac Karaman,
 and Daniela Rus. Deep latent competition: Learning to race using visual control policies in latent
 space, 2021.
L. S. Shapley. Stochastic games. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 39(10):1095–
  1100, 1953. doi: 10.1073/pnas.39.10.1095. URL https://www.pnas.org/doi/abs/10.
  1073/pnas.39.10.1095.
David Silver, Aja Huang, Chris J. Maddison, Arthur Guez, Laurent Sifre, George van den Driess-
  che, Julian Schrittwieser, Ioannis Antonoglou, Vedavyas Panneershelvam, Marc Lanctot, Sander
  Dieleman, Dominik Grewe, John Nham, Nal Kalchbrenner, Ilya Sutskever, Timothy P. Lillicrap,
  Madeleine Leach, Koray Kavukcuoglu, Thore Graepel, and Demis Hassabis. Mastering the game
  of Go with deep neural networks and tree search. Nature, 529:484–489, 2016.


                                                12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


David Silver, Thomas Hubert, Julian Schrittwieser, Ioannis Antonoglou, Matthew Lai, Arthur
  Guez, Marc Lanctot, Laurent Sifre, Dharshan Kumaran, Thore Graepel, Timothy Lillicrap, Karen
  Simonyan, and Demis Hassabis. A general reinforcement learning algorithm that masters chess,
  shogi, and go through self-play. Science, 362(6419):1140–1144, 2018. doi: 10.1126/science.
  aar6404.
Kenneth O Stanley, Joel Lehman, and Lisa Soros. Open-endedness: The last grand challenge you’ve
  never heard of. While open-endedness could be a force for discovering intelligence, it could also
  be a component of AI itself, 2017.
Gerald Tesauro. Temporal difference learning and td-gammon. Commun. ACM, 38(3):58–68, mar
 1995. ISSN 0001-0782.
Josh Tobin, Rachel Fong, Alex Ray, Jonas Schneider, Wojciech Zaremba, and Pieter Abbeel. Domain
  randomization for transferring deep neural networks from simulation to the real world. In 2017
  IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems, IROS 2017, Vancouver, BC,
  Canada, September 24-28, 2017, pp. 23–30. IEEE, 2017.
Oriol Vinyals, Igor Babuschkin, Wojciech M. Czarnecki, Michaël Mathieu, Andrew Dudzik, Junyoung
  Chung, David H. Choi, Richard Powell, Timo Ewalds, Petko Georgiev, Junhyuk Oh, Dan Horgan,
  Manuel Kroiss, Ivo Danihelka, Aja Huang, Laurent Sifre, Trevor Cai, John P. Agapiou, Max
  Jaderberg, Alexander Sasha Vezhnevets, Rémi Leblond, Tobias Pohlen, Valentin Dalibard, David
  Budden, Yury Sulsky, James Molloy, Tom L. Paine, Çaglar Gülçehre, Ziyu Wang, Tobias Pfaff,
  Yuhuai Wu, Roman Ring, Dani Yogatama, Dario Wünsch, Katrina McKinney, Oliver Smith,
  Tom Schaul, Timothy P. Lillicrap, Koray Kavukcuoglu, Demis Hassabis, Chris Apps, and David
  Silver. Grandmaster level in starcraft II using multi-agent reinforcement learning. Nat., 575(7782):
  350–354, 2019. doi: 10.1038/s41586-019-1724-z.
Rui Wang, Joel Lehman, Jeff Clune, and Kenneth O. Stanley. Paired open-ended trailblazer (POET):
  endlessly generating increasingly complex and diverse learning environments and their solutions.
  CoRR, abs/1901.01753, 2019.
Rui Wang, Joel Lehman, Aditya Rawal, Jiale Zhi, Yulun Li, Jeffrey Clune, and Kenneth Stanley.
  Enhanced POET: Open-ended reinforcement learning through unbounded invention of learning
  challenges and their solutions. In Hal Daumé III and Aarti Singh (eds.), Proceedings of the 37th
  International Conference on Machine Learning, volume 119 of Proceedings of Machine Learning
  Research, pp. 9940–9951. PMLR, 13–18 Jul 2020.
Peter R. Wurman, Samuel Barrett, Kenta Kawamoto, James MacGlashan, Kaushik Subramanian,
  Thomas J. Walsh, Roberto Capobianco, Alisa Devlic, Franziska Eckert, Florian Fuchs, Leilani
  Gilpin, Piyush Khandelwal, Varun Kompella, HaoChih Lin, Patrick MacAlpine, Declan Oller,
  Takuma Seno, Craig Sherstan, Michael D. Thomure, Houmehr Aghabozorgi, Leon Barrett, Rory
  Douglas, Dion Whitehead, Peter Dürr, Peter Stone, Michael Spranger, and Hiroaki Kitano. Outrac-
  ing champion Gran Turismo drivers with deep reinforcement learning. Nature, 602(7896):223–228,
  February 2022. ISSN 1476-4687.
Yaodong Yang, Jun Luo, Ying Wen, Oliver Slumbers, Daniel Graves, Haitham Bou-Ammar, Jun
  Wang, and Matthew E. Taylor. Diverse auto-curriculum is critical for successful real-world
  multiagent learning systems. In Frank Dignum, Alessio Lomuscio, Ulle Endriss, and Ann Nowé
  (eds.), AAMAS ’21: 20th International Conference on Autonomous Agents and Multiagent Systems,
  Virtual Event, United Kingdom, May 3-7, 2021, pp. 51–56. ACM, 2021.
Martin Zinkevich, Michael Johanson, Michael Bowling, and Carmelo Piccione. Regret min-
 imization in games with incomplete information. In J. Platt, D. Koller, Y. Singer, and
 S. Roweis (eds.), Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 20. Curran As-
 sociates, Inc., 2007. URL https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper/2007/file/
 08d98638c6fcd194a4b1e6992063e944-Paper.pdf.


                                                 13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


A    T HEORETICAL R ESULTS
It is useful to understand the long-term behaviour of M AESTRO the student and teacher agents
reach optimality. In this section, we will formally characterise this equilibrium behaviour, showing
M AESTRO achieves a Bayesian Nash equilibrium in a modified game, which we call the −i-knowing
game, in which the other player has prior knowledge of the environment and can design their policy
accordingly. We will do this by first defining the −i-knowing game, showing that the policies the
M AESTRO student learns in equilibria represent Bayesian Nash equilibrium strategies in this game,
and then specialising this result to a corollary focused on fully observable games where M AESTRO
finds a Nash equilibrium for all environments in support of the teacher distribution.
We will define the −i-knowing-game, given a UPOSG M, with a parameter distribution θ̃ as
POSG constructed as a modification of the original game where the distribution over parameters is
determined by θ̃, and the agents other than i know the true parameters of the world. This simulates
the setting where the co-player is a specialist for the particular environment, who has played the game
many times. More formally:
Definition 1. The -i-knowing-game of an UPOSG M = ⟨n, A, O = ×i∈N Oi , Θ, S, T , I =
×i∈N Ii , R = ×i∈N Ri , γ⟩ with parameter distribution θ̃ is defined to be the POSG K = ⟨n′ =
n, A′ = A, Oi′ = Oi + {Θ if i ∈ −i}, S ′ = S, T ′ = T (θ), Ii′ = Ii + {θ if ∈ −i}, R′i = Ri , γ⟩
where θ is sampled from the distribution θ̃ on the first time step. That is, a POSG with the same set
of players, action space, rewards, and states as the original UPOSG, but with θ sampled once at
the beginning of time, fixed into the transition function and given to the agents −i as part of their
observation.
We use U K (πi ; π−i
                  K
                      ; θ̃) to refer to the utility function in the −i-knowing game, which can be written
in terms of the utility function of the original UPOSG as
                                  U K (πi ; π−i
                                             K                      K
                                                ; θ̃) = E [U (πi ; π−i (θ), θ)],
                                                        θ∼θ̃
         K
where π−i   (θ) is the policy for players −i in the −i-knowing game conditioned on θ. Given this
definition, we can prove the main theorem, that the equilibrium behaviour of M AESTRO represents a
Bayesian Nash equilibrium of this game.
Theorem 1. In two-player zero-sum settings, the M AESTRO student at equilibrium implements a
Bayesian Nash equilibrium of the −i-knowing game, over a regret-maximising distribution of levels.

Proof. Let πi , θ̃M be a pair which is in equilibrium in the M AESTRO game. That is:
                    πi ∈ arg max{       E    [U (πi ; π−i ; θ)]}                                      (3)
                           πi ∈Πi   θ,π−i ∼θ̃ M

                  θ̃M ∈       arg max    {        E      [U (πi∗ ; π−i ; θ) − U (πi ; π−i ; θ)]}      (4)
                          θ̃ M ∈∆(Θ×Π−i ) θ,π−i ∼θ̃ M

where πi∗ is an optimal policy for player i given π−i and θ, while ∆(S) denotes the set of distributions
over S. Then we can define DRegret to be the marginal distribution over θ from samples θ, π−i ∼ θ̃M .
         K
Define π−i  (θ) as the marginal distribution over π−i sampled from θ̃M conditioned on θ for θ in the
support of θ̃M and π−i a best response to θ and πi otherwise.
                         K
We will show that (πi ; π−i ) is a Bayesian Nash equilibrium on −i-knowing game of M with a
regret-maximizing distribution over parameters DRegret . We can show both of these by unwrapping
and re-wrapping our definitions.
First to show πi ∈ arg max{         E        [U K (πi ; π−i
                                                         K
                                                            ; θ̃)]}:
                     πi ∈Πi    θ̃∼D Regret


                                 πi ∈ arg max{            E         [U K (πi ; π−i
                                                                                K
                                                                                   ; θ̃)]}            (5)
                                        πi ∈Πi        θ̃∼D Regret
                                                                              K
                           ⇐⇒ πi ∈ arg max{               E         [U (πi ; π−i (θ); θ)]}            (6)
                                        πi ∈Πi        θ,π−i ∼θ̃ M

                           ⇐⇒ πi ∈ arg max{               E         [U (πi ; π−i ; θ)]}               (7)
                                        πi ∈Πi        θ,π−i ∼θ̃ M



                                                         14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Which is known by the definition of Nash equilibrium in the M AESTRO game, in Equation 3.
                                 K
Similarly, we show that we have π−i ∈ arg max{              E      [U K (πi ; π−i
                                                                               K
                                                                                  ; θ̃)]} by:
                                           K ∈ΠK
                                          π−i     θ̃∼D Regret
                                               −i



                                  K
                                 π−i ∈ arg max{         E        [U K (πi ; π−i
                                                                             K
                                                                                ; θ̃)]}                (8)
                                         K ∈ΠK
                                        π−i        θ̃∼D Regret
                                             −i

                               K                                           K
                           ⇐⇒ π−i ∈ arg max{            E        [U (πi ; π−i (θ); θ)]}                (9)
                                         K ∈ΠK
                                        π−i     θ,π−i ∼θ̃ M
                                             −i

                            K
                        ⇐⇒ π−i (θ) ∈ arg max{           E        [U (πi ; π−i ; θ)]}.                (10)
                                         K ∈ΠK
                                        π−i     θ,π−i ∼θ̃ M
                                             −i



The final line of which follows from the fact that π−i is a best-response πi for each θ. More
concretely, this can be seen in Equation 4 by noting that θ and π−i conditioned on a specific θ can be
independently optimised and holding θ fixed.


Using this theorem, we can also prove a natural and intuitive corollary for the case where the
environment is fully observable:
Corollary 1. In fully-observable two-player zero-sum settings, the M AESTRO student at equilibrium
implements a Nash equilibrium in each environment in the support of the environment distribution.


Proof. From Theorem 1 we have:

                              πi ∈ arg max{        E        [U K (πi ; π−i
                                                                        K
                                                                           ; θ̃)]}
                                     πi ∈Πi   θ̃∼D Regret


                                                          K
However, since the world is fully observable, the policy π−i can be made independent of the additional
observation θ in the −i-knowing game since that can be inferred from the information already in the
                                  K
agent’s observations. As such, π−i   can be interpreted as a policy in the original game, giving:

                                                                     K
                             πi ∈ arg max{         E        U (πi ; π−i (θ); θ)}
                                     πi ∈Πi   θ∼D Regret


Moreover, since the environment is fully observable, πi can condition on θ, so for it to be optimal for
the distribution, it must be optimal for each level in the support of the distribution. Giving, for each θ
be in the support of θ̃M :
                                                        K
                                  πi ∈ arg max{U (πi ; π−i (θ); θ)},
                                          πi ∈Πi

                                       K
showing that π is a best-response to π−i (θ) on θ. The same arguments can be followed to show that
 K
π−i (θ) is a best response to π on θ. Since each policy is a best response to the other, they are in a
Nash equilibrium as desired.


Thus, if M AESTRO reaches an equilibrium in a fully observable two-player zero-sum setting, it be-
haves as expected by achieving a Nash equilibrium in every environment in support of the curriculum
distribution θ̃M .


B    E NVIRONMENT D ETAILS

This section describes the environment-specific details used in our experiments. For both LaserTag
and MultiCarRacing, we outline the process of environment generation, present held-out evaluation
environments, as well as other relevant information.


                                                   15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


      (a) Cross         (b) FourRooms        (c) SixteenRooms         (d) Ruins             (e) Ruins2


      (f) Star         (g) LargeCorridor        (h) Maze1             (i) Maze2             (j) Arena1


                           (k) Arena2          (l) Corridor1        (m) Corridor2

                           Figure 8: Evaluation environments for LaserTag.


B.1    L ASERTAG

LaserTag is a two-player zero-sum grid-based game, where two agents aim to tag each other with a
light beam under partial observability. It is inspired by prior singleton variation used in (Lanctot et al.,
2017; Leibo et al., 2017) and developed using the Griddly sandbox framework (Bamford et al., 2020;
2022). LaserTag challenges the agent to master various sophisticated behaviour, such as chasing
opponents, hiding behind walls, keeping clear of long corridors, maze solving, etc. Each agent can
only observe a 5 × 5 area of the grid in front of it. The action space includes the following 5 actions:
turn right, turn left, move forward, shoot, and no-op. Upon tagging an opponent, an agent receives a
reward of 1, while the opponent receives a −1 penalty, after which the episode is restarted. If the
episode terminates while the two agents are alive, neither of the agents receives any reward.
All environment variations (or levels) that are used to train agents are procedurally generated by
an environment generator. Firstly, the generator samples the size of the square grid (from 5 × 5 to
15 × 15) and the percentage of the walls in it (from 0% to 50%) uniformly at random. Then the
generator samples random locations for the walls, followed by the locations and directions of the two
agents. Figure 2 illustrates some levels sampled from the level generator. Note that the generator can
generate levels where agents are unreachable.
Upon training the agents on randomly generated levels, we assess their robustness on previously
unseen human-designed levels shown in Figure 8 against previously unseen agents.


B.2    M ULTI C AR R ACING

MultiCarRacing is a continuous control problem with dense rewards and pixel-based observations
(Schwarting et al., 2021). Each track consists of n tiles, with cars receiving a reward of 1000/n or
500/n, depending on if they reach the tile first or second respectively. An additional penalty of −0.1
is applied at every timestep. Episodes finish when all tiles have been driven over by at least one car.
If a car drives out of bounds of the map (rectangle area encompassing the track), the car "dies" and
the episode is terminated. Each agent receives a 96 × 96 × 3 image as observation at each timestep.
The action space consists of 3 simultaneous moves that change the gas, brakes, and steering direction


                                                    16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


  (a) F1-Australia     (b) F1-Austria      (c) F1-Bahrain      (d) F1-Belgium        (e) F1-Brazil


   (f) F1-China        (g) F1-France       (h) F1-Germany      (i) F1-Hungary         (j) F1-Italy


(k) F1-LagunaSeca     (l) F1-Malaysia      (m) F1-Mexico       (n) F1-Monaco      (o) F1-Netherlands


  (p) F1-Portugal      (q) F1-Russia      (r) F1-Singapore       (s) F1-Spain         (t) F1-UK


                                            (u) F1-USA

  Figure 9: Evaluation Formula 1 tracks for MultiCarRacing originally from Jiang et al. (2021a).


of the car. For this environment, we recognise the agent with a higher episodic return as the winner
of that episode.
All tracks used to train student agents are procedurally generated by an environment generator, which
was built on top of the original MultiCarRacing environment (Schwarting et al., 2021). Each track
consists of a closed loop around which the agents must drive a full lap. In order to increase the
expressiveness of the original MultiCarRacing, we reparameterized the tracks using Bézier curves. In
our experiments, each track consists of a Bézier curve based on 12 randomly sampled control points
within a fixed radius of B/2 of the centre O of the playfield with B × B size.
For training, additional reward shaping was introduced similar to (Ma, 2019): an additional reward
penalty of −0.1 for driving on the grass, a penalty of −0.5 for driving backwards, as well as an
early termination if cars spent too much time on grass. These are all used to help terminate less
informative episodes. We utilise a memory-less agent with a frame stacking = 4 and with sticky
actions = 8. After training the agents on randomly generated tracks, we assess their robustness on
previously unseen 20 real-world Formula 1 (F1) tracks designed to challenge professional racecar
drivers proposed by (Jiang et al., 2021a) and shown in Figure 9.


                                                 17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


C     I MPLEMENTATION D ETAILS

In this section, we detail the agent architectures, hyperparameter choices, and evaluation procedures
used in our experiments discussed in Section 4. We use PPO to train the student agent in all
experiments. Table 2 summarises our final hyperparameter choices for all methods.
All experiments are performed on an internal cluster. Each job (representing a seed) is performed
with a single Tesla V100 GPU and 10 CPUs. For each method, we train 10 LaserTag agents for
approximately 7 days and 5 MultiCarRacing agents for approximately 15 days.

C.1    L ASERTAG

Agent Architecture: The student policy architecture is adapted from (Dennis et al., 2020; Jiang
et al., 2021a). Our model encodes the partial grid observation using a convolution layer (3 × 3 kernel,
stride length 1, 16 filters) followed by a ReLU activation layer over the flattened convolution outputs.
This is then passed through an LSTM with hidden dimension 256, followed by two fully-connected
layers, each with a hidden dimension of size 32 with ReLU activations, to produce the action logits
over the 5 possible actions. The model does not receive the agent’s direction as input.
Evaluation Procedure: For each pair of baselines, we evaluate cross-play performance between
all pairs of random seeds (10 × 10 combinations) over 5 episodes on 13 human-designed LaserTag
levels, resulting in a total of 6500 evaluation episodes for a given checkpoint.
Choice of Hyperparameters: Many of our hyperparameters are inherited from previous works such
as (Dennis et al., 2020; Jiang et al., 2021b;a; Parker-Holder et al., 2022) with some small changes.
We selected the best performing settings based on the average return on the unseen validation levels
against previously unseen opponents on at least 5 seeds.
We conducted a coarse grid search over student learning rate in {5 ∗ 10−4 , 10−4 , 5 ∗ 10−5 , 10−5 },
number of minibatches per epoch in {1, 2, 4}, entropy coefficients in {0, 10−3 , 5∗10−3 }, and number
of epochs in {2, 5, 10}. For agent storage, we tested adding a copy of the student agent in the storage
after every {2000, 4000, 6000, 8000} student update. For PFSP, we compute the win rate between
agents in the last 128 episodes. We further conducted a grid search over the entropy parameter of
fhard in {1.5, 2, 3} and a smoothing constant which adds a small value to each probability in PFSP
with {0.1, 0.2} values so that all previous checkpointed agents have a nonzero probability to be
replayed again.3 For the parameters of PLR, we conducted a grid search over level replay rate p in
{0.5, 0.9}, buffer size in {4000, 8000, 12000}, staleness coefficient ρ in {0.3, 0.7}, as well as the
level replay score functions in {MaxMC, PVL} (see Appendix C.3 for information on score functions
in PLR). For M AESTRO, we evaluated the co-player exploration coefficients in {0.05, 0.1}, and
per-agent environment buffer sizes in {500, 750, 1000, 1200}.

C.2    M ULTI C AR R ACING

Agent Architecture: The student policy architecture is based on the PPO implementation in (Ma,
2019). The model utilises an image embedding module consisting of a stack of 2D convolutions with
square kernels of sizes 2, 2, 2, 2, 3, 3, channel outputs of 8, 16, 32, 64, 128, 256, and stride lengths
of 2, 2, 2, 2, 1, 1 respectively, resulting in an embedding of size 256. This is then passed through a
fully-connected layer with a hidden size of 100, followed by a ReLU nonlinearity. Then, the output
is fed through two separate fully-connected layers, each with a hidden size of 100 and an output
dimension equal to the action dimension, followed by softplus activations. We then add 1 to each
component of these two output vectors, which serve as the α and β parameters respectively for the
Beta distributions used to sample each action dimension. We normalize rewards by dividing rewards
by the running standard deviation of returns so far encountered during the training.
Evaluation Procedure: For each pair of baselines, we evaluate cross-play performance between all
pairs of random seeds (5 × 5 combinations) over 5 episodes on 21 OOD Formula 1 tracks Jiang et al.
(2021a), resulting in a total of 2625 evaluation episodes for a given checkpoint.

   3
     Otherwise, if the student agent wins all the episodes in their first encounter against opponent B, B will have
0 probability of being selected again.


                                                       18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Table 2: Hyperparameters used for training each method in the LaserTag and MultiCarRacing
environments.

                        Parameter                        LaserTag    MultiCarRacing
                        PPO
                        γ                                   0.995              0.99
                        λGAE                                 0.95               0.9
                        PPO rollout length                    256               125
                        PPO epochs                               5                 8
                        PPO mini-batches per epoch               4                 4
                        PPO clip range                         0.2               0.2
                        PPO number of workers                   32                32
                        Adam learning rate                   1e-4              1e-4
                        Adam ϵ                               1e-5              1e-5
                        PPO max gradient norm                  0.5               0.5
                        PPO value clipping                    yes                 no
                        Return normalization                    no              yes
                        Value loss coefficient                 0.5               0.5
                        Student entropy coefficient            0.0               0.0

                        PLR
                        Replay rate, p                       0.5                0.5
                        Buffer size, K                     4000               8000
                        Scoring function                 MaxMC                PVL
                        Prioritization                      rank              rank
                        Temperature, β                       0.3                1.0
                        Staleness coefficient, ρ             0.3                0.7

                        FSP
                        Agent checkpoint interval           8000               400

                        PFSP
                        fhard entropy coef                      2                2
                        Win rate episodic memory              128              128

                        M AESTRO
                        λ coef                                0.1               0.1
                        Buffer size for B members           1000              1000


Choice of Hyperparameters: Many of our hyperparameters are inherited from (Jiang et al., 2021a)
with some small changes. We conducted a limited grid search over student learning rate in {10−4 , 3 ∗
10−4 }, number of actors in {16, 32}, PPO rollout length in {125, 256}. For agent storage, we tested
adding a copy of the student agent in the storage after every {200, 400} student update. For PFSP,
we compute the win rate between agents in the last 128 episodes, while recognising the agent with a
higher episodic return as the winner. For the parameters of PLR, we conducted a grid search over level
buffer size in {4000, 6000, 8000}, staleness coefficient ρ in {0.3, 0.7}, as well as the level replay
prioritisation in {rank, proportional} (Jiang et al., 2021a). For M AESTRO, we evaluated the co-player
exploration coefficients in {0.05, 0.1}, and per-agent environment buffer sizes in {500, 1000}.
Given the poor performance of a random co-player on the MultiCarRacing domain, agents are added
to co-player populations in M AESTRO as well as FSP- and PFSP-based baselines only after 400 PPO
updates. All baselines are trained using SP until that point.


C.3   R EGRET A PPROXIMATIONS

Jiang et al. (2021a) proposes the following two score functions to approximate regret in PLR.
Maximum Monte Carlo (MaxMC) mitigates some of the bias of the PVL by replacing the value target
with the highest empirical return observed on the given environment variation throughout training.
MaxMC ensures that the regret estimate does not depend on the agent’s current policy. It takes the
              PT
form of (1/T ) t=0 Rmax − V (st ).


                                                    19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                                   LaserTag-Eval [13 Tasks]                LaserTag-Eval [13 Tasks]
                                         0.2                                     0.2


                     Cross-Play Return
                                         0.1                                     0.1
                                         0.0                                     0.0
                                         0.1                                     0.1
                                         0.2                                     0.2
                                               0                           40K         0                           40K
                                                       # Student Updates                       # Student Updates



Figure 10: Ablation Study Results. Comparing M AESTRO against two variants: M AESTRO-R and
M AESTRO-P. Plots show the mean and standard error across 10 training seeds.


Positive Value Loss (PVL) estimates the regret by computing the difference between the maximum
achieved return and predicted return on an episodic basis. When GAE (Schulman   Pet al., 2016) is used

                                                                      PT          T
to estimate bootstrapped value targets, this loss takes the form of T1 t=0 max    k=t (γλ)
                                                                                           k−t
                                                                                               δk , 0 ,
where λ and γ are the GAE and MDP discount factors respectively, and δt , the TD-error at timestep t.
In this work, we use MaxMC regret approximation in the LaserTag domain and PVL in MultiCarRac-
ing.

D     A BLATION S TUDY
We perform an ablation study to evaluate the effectiveness of co-player selection in M AESTRO from
a population based on their per-environment regret scores, as described in Equation (1). We consider
different methods for selecting a co-player in M AESTRO (line 6 in Algorithm 1). M AESTRO-R
samples the co-player uniformly at random, whilst M AESTRO-P uses PFSP’s win rate heuristic for
opponent prioritisation. Figure 10 illustrates that M AESTRO outperforms both variants in terms of
sample-efficiency and robustness.

E     F ULL R ESULTS
Agents are trained for 40000 PPO updates on LaserTag and 4500 PPO updates on MCR.

E.1     M AESTRO VERSUS S PECIALISTS

Figures 11 and 12 show the cross-play performances between M AESTRO and specialist agents trained
directly on the target environments for LaserTag and MultiCarRacing, respectively.

E.2     C ROSS -P LAY R ESULTS

E.2.1    L ASERTAG C ROSS -P LAY
Figures 13 and 14 illustrate the round-robins returns with and without normalization between
M AESTRO and other baselines throughout training on each held-out evaluation environment in
LaserTag. Figure 15 shows the round-robin returns between M AESTRO and other baselines after the
training.

E.2.2    M ULTI C AR R ACING C ROSS -P LAY
Figure 16 illustrate the round-robin returns between M AESTRO and other baselines on each track
of the Formula 1 benchmark (Jiang et al., 2021a). Figures 17, 18, and Figure 19 show the win
rates, returns, and average time on grass during cross-play between M AESTRO and each baseline on
Formula 1 benchmark.



                                                                            20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                              LaserTag-Eval [4 Tasks]                                            Lasertag-Ruins-N2-v0                                         Lasertag-FourRooms-N2-v0                                                    Lasertag-Empty-N2-v0                                            Lasertag-Corridor-Easy-N2-v0
                    0.50                                                                  0.4                                                               0.50                                                                0.50
Cross-Play Return


                                                                      Cross-Play Return


                                                                                                                                                                                                            Cross-Play Return
                                                                                                                                        Cross-Play Return


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Cross-Play Return
                    0.25                                                                  0.2                                                               0.25                                                                                                                                          0.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                0.25
                    0.00                                                                  0.0                                                               0.00                                                                0.00                                                                      0.0
                    0.25                                                                  0.2                                                               0.25                                                                0.25
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          0.5
                    0.50                                                                  0.4                                                               0.50                                                                0.50
                          0                                     40K                         0                                     40K                           0                                     40K                             0                                         40K                         0                         40K
                                 # Student Updates                                                 # Student Updates                                                # Student Updates                                                        # Student Updates                                                    # Student Updates
                           LaserTag-Eval [4 Tasks]                                               Lasertag-Ruins-N2-v0                                         Lasertag-FourRooms-N2-v0                                                    Lasertag-Empty-N2-v0                                             Lasertag-Corridor-Easy-N2-v0
                    0.4                                                                   0.4                                                               0.4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                0.5                                                                       0.50
Cross-Play Return


                                                                      Cross-Play Return


                                                                                                                                        Cross-Play Return


                                                                                                                                                                                                            Cross-Play Return


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Cross-Play Return
                    0.2                                                                   0.2                                                               0.2                                                                                                                                           0.25
                    0.0                                                                   0.0                                                               0.0                                                                 0.0                                                                       0.00
                    0.2                                                                   0.2                                                               0.2                                                                                                                                           0.25
                    0.4                                                                                                                                                                                                         0.5
                                                                                          0.4                                                               0.4                                                                                                                                           0.50
                      0                                         40K                          0                                    40K                          0                                      40K                         0                                             40K                           0                       40K
                                 # Student Updates                                                 # Student Updates                                                # Student Updates                                                        # Student Updates                                                    # Student Updates


Figure 11: Cross-play between M AESTRO and specialist agents trained directly on the target environ-
ment in LaserTag.


                                                         Formula 1 [3 Tasks]                                                       F1-UK-v0                                                          F1-Belgium-v0                                                               F1-Spain-v0
                                                                                                                            500
                                                        400                                                                                                                                    400
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          400
                                                                                                                            400
                                  Cross-Play Return


                                                                                                      Cross-Play Return


                                                                                                                                                                         Cross-Play Return


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Cross-Play Return


                                                        300                                                                                                                                    300
                                                                                                                            300                                                                                                                                           300
                                                        200                                                                                                                                    200                                                                        200
                                                                                                                            200
                                                        100                                                                 100                                                                100                                                                        100

                                                          0                                                                   0                                                                  0                                                                          0
                                                         Formula 1 [3 Tasks]                                                0.7   F1-UK-v0                                                           F1-Belgium-v0                                                              F1-Spain-v0
                                                        0.6                                                                                                                                    0.7                                                                        0.6
                                                                                                                            0.6
                                  Cross-Play Win Rate


                                                                                                      Cross-Play Win Rate


                                                                                                                                                                         Cross-Play Win Rate


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Cross-Play Win Rate


                                                        0.5                                                                                                                                    0.6                                                                        0.5
                                                                                                                            0.5
                                                        0.4                                                                                                                                    0.5                                                                        0.4
                                                                                                                            0.4
                                                        0.3                                                                                                                                    0.4
                                                                                                                            0.3                                                                                                                                           0.3
                                                                                                                                                                                               0.3
                                                        0.2                                                                 0.2                                                                                                                                           0.2
                                                                                                                                                                                               0.2
                                                        0.1                                                                 0.1                                                                0.1                                                                        0.1
                                                        0.0                                                                 0.0                                                                0.0                                                                        0.0



Figure 12: Cross-play between M AESTRO and specialist agents trained directly on the target environ-
ment in MultiCarRacing.


                                                                                                                                                                       21
   Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                     LaserTag-Eval [13 Tasks]                                                                      Lasertag-Arena1                                                                             Lasertag-Arena2                                                                     Lasertag-Corridor1                                                                       Lasertag-Corridor2
                       1.0                                                                                          1.0                                                                                                                                                                              1.0
                                                                                                                                                                                                              1.0                                                                                                                                                                             1.0
Normalised RR Return


                                                                                             Normalised RR Return


                                                                                                                                                                                       Normalised RR Return


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Normalised RR Return


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Normalised RR Return
                       0.8                                                                                          0.8                                                                                       0.8                                                                                    0.8                                                                                      0.8
                       0.6                                                                                          0.6                                                                                       0.6                                                                                    0.6                                                                                      0.6
                       0.4                                                                                          0.4                                                                                       0.4                                                                                    0.4                                                                                      0.4
                       0.2                                                                                          0.2                                                                                       0.2                                                                                    0.2                                                                                      0.2
                                                                                                                    0.0                                                                                       0.0                                                                                    0.0                                                                                      0.0
                       0.0
                             0                                                         40K                                0                                                      40K                                0                                                   40K                                0                                                     40K                                0                             40K
                                         # Student Updates                                                                          # Student Updates                                                                          # Student Updates                                                                    # Student Updates                                                                        # Student Updates
                                         Lasertag-Cross                                                                           Lasertag-FourRooms                                                                        Lasertag-LargeCorridor                                                                  Lasertag-Ruins                                                                           Lasertag-Ruins2
                       1.0                                                                                          1.0                                                                                       1.0                                                                                    1.0                                                                                      1.0
Normalised RR Return


                                                                                             Normalised RR Return


                                                                                                                                                                                       Normalised RR Return


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Normalised RR Return


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Normalised RR Return
                       0.8                                                                                          0.8                                                                                       0.8                                                                                    0.8                                                                                      0.8
                       0.6                                                                                          0.6                                                                                       0.6                                                                                    0.6                                                                                      0.6
                       0.4                                                                                          0.4                                                                                       0.4                                                                                    0.4                                                                                      0.4
                       0.2                                                                                          0.2                                                                                       0.2                                                                                    0.2                                                                                      0.2
                       0.0                                                                                          0.0                                                                                       0.0                                                                                    0.0                                                                                      0.0
                             0                                                         40K                                0                                                      40K                                0                                                   40K                                0                                                     40K                                0                             40K
                                         # Student Updates                                                                          # Student Updates                                                                          # Student Updates                                                                    # Student Updates                                                                        # Student Updates
                                                                                   Lasertag-SixteenRooms                                                          1.4
                                                                                                                                                                                 Lasertag-Star                                                                          Lasertag-Maze1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Lasertag-Maze2
                                                                     1.0                                                                                          1.2                                                                                        1.25                                                                                 1.0
                                              Normalised RR Return


                                                                                                                                           Normalised RR Return


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Normalised RR Return
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Normalised RR Return
                                                                     0.8                                                                                          1.0                                                                                        1.00                                                                                 0.8
                                                                                                                                                                  0.8                                                                                        0.75                                                                                 0.6
                                                                     0.6
                                                                                                                                                                  0.6                                                                                        0.50
                                                                     0.4                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          0.4
                                                                                                                                                                  0.4                                                                                        0.25
                                                                     0.2                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          0.2
                                                                                                                                                                  0.2                                                                                        0.00
                                                                     0.0                                                                                                                                                                                     0.25                                                                                 0.0
                                                                                                                                                                  0.0
                                                                           0                                                         40K                                0                                                       40K                                 0                                                40K                                0                                                     40K
                                                                                      # Student Updates                                                                         # Student Updates                                                                       # Student Updates                                                                       # Student Updates


   Figure 13: Normalised round-robin return in cross-play between M AESTRO and 6 baselines on all
   LaserTag evaluation environments throughout training (combined and individual). Plots show the
   mean and standard error across 10 training seeds.


                                     LaserTag-Eval [13 Tasks]                                                                       Lasertag-Arena1                                                                            Lasertag-Arena2                                                                     Lasertag-Corridor1                                                                       Lasertag-Corridor2
                        0.3                                                                                                                                                                                    0.4
                                                                                                                     0.2                                                                                                                                                                              0.4
                                                                                                                                                                                                               0.3                                                                                                                                                                             0.2
                        0.2                                                                                          0.1                                                                                       0.2                                                                                    0.2
RR Return


                                                                                             RR Return


                                                                                                                                                                                       RR Return


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              RR Return


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       RR Return


                        0.1                                                                                          0.0                                                                                       0.1                                                                                                                                                                             0.0
                                                                                                                     0.1                                                                                       0.0                                                                                    0.0
                        0.0
                                                                                                                     0.2                                                                                       0.1                                                                                                                                                                             0.2
                        0.1                                                                                          0.3                                                                                       0.2                                                                                    0.2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               0.4
                                 0                                                     40K                                    0                                                  40K                                    0                                               40K                                    0                                                 40K                                    0                         40K
                                         # Student Updates                                                                          # Student Updates                                                                           # Student Updates                                                                    # Student Updates                                                                        # Student Updates
                                          Lasertag-Cross                                                             0.5
                                                                                                                                  Lasertag-FourRooms                                                           0.4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Lasertag-LargeCorridor                                                                   Lasertag-Ruins                                                                           Lasertag-Ruins2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      0.4
                        0.4                                                                                          0.4                                                                                       0.3                                                                                    0.3                                                                                      0.4
                                                                                                                     0.3
                                                                                                                                                                                                               0.2                                                                                    0.2
RR Return


                                                                                             RR Return


                                                                                                                                                                                       RR Return


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              RR Return


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       RR Return


                        0.2                                                                                          0.2                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       0.2
                                                                                                                                                                                                               0.1                                                                                    0.1
                                                                                                                     0.1
                        0.0                                                                                          0.0                                                                                       0.0                                                                                    0.0                                                                                      0.0
                                                                                                                     0.1                                                                                       0.1                                                                                    0.1
                        0.2                                                                                          0.2                                                                                                                                                                              0.2                                                                                      0.2
                                                                                                                                                                                                               0.2
                                 0                                                     40K                                    0                                                  40K                                    0                                               40K                                    0                                                 40K                                    0                         40K
                                         # Student Updates                                                                          # Student Updates                                                                           # Student Updates                                                                    # Student Updates                                                                        # Student Updates
                                                                                   Lasertag-SixteenRooms                                                                         Lasertag-Star                                                                          Lasertag-Maze1                                                                           Lasertag-Maze2
                                                                      0.4                                                                                          0.4                                                                                       0.3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   0.20
                                                                      0.3                                                                                          0.3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             0.2                                                                                   0.15
                                                                      0.2                                                                                          0.2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   0.10
                                              RR Return


                                                                                                                                           RR Return


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      RR Return


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           RR Return


                                                                                                                                                                   0.1                                                                                       0.1
                                                                      0.1                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          0.05
                                                                                                                                                                   0.0
                                                                      0.0                                                                                                                                                                                    0.0                                                                                   0.00
                                                                                                                                                                   0.1                                                                                                                                                                             0.05
                                                                      0.1                                                                                                                                                                                    0.1
                                                                                                                                                                   0.2                                                                                                                                                                             0.10
                                                                      0.2
                                                                               0                                                     40K                                    0                                                   40K                                 0                                                40K                                    0                                                 40K
                                                                                       # Student Updates                                                                        # Student Updates                                                                       # Student Updates                                                                        # Student Updates


   Figure 14: Round-robin return in cross-play between M AESTRO and 6 baselines on all LaserTag
   evaluation environments throughout training (combined and individual). Plots show the mean and
   standard error across 10 training seeds.


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  22
 Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                    LaserTag-Eval [13 Tasks]                               Lasertag-Arena1                                   Lasertag-Arena2                                Lasertag-Corridor1                             Lasertag-Corridor2
                                                                                                                   0.10
             0.10                                                                                                                                                    0.10                                           0.2
                                                                   0.1
                                                                                                                   0.05                                              0.05                                           0.1
             0.05


                                                      RR Return


                                                                                                                                                                                                       RR Return
                                                                   0.0                                                                                                                                              0.0
RR Return


                                                                                                      RR Return


                                                                                                                                                        RR Return
                                                                                                                                                                     0.00
             0.00                                                                                                  0.00
                                                                                                                                                                     0.05                                           0.1
                                                                   0.1
             0.05                                                                                                  0.05                                              0.10                                           0.2
             0.10                                                  0.2                                                                                               0.15                                           0.3
                                                                                                                   0.10

                        Lasertag-Cross                                    Lasertag-FourRooms                              Lasertag-LargeCorridor                             Lasertag-Ruins                                 Lasertag-Ruins2
             0.15                                                                                                  0.15                                              0.2                                            0.15
                                                                   0.10
             0.10                                                                                                                                                                                                   0.10
                                                                                                                   0.10                                              0.1
             0.05                                                  0.05                                                                                                                                             0.05


                                                                                                                                                        RR Return
                                                                                                                   0.05
RR Return


                                                      RR Return


                                                                                                      RR Return


                                                                                                                                                                                                       RR Return
             0.00                                                  0.00                                                                                                                                             0.00
                                                                                                                                                                     0.0
             0.05                                                                                                  0.00                                                                                             0.05
             0.10                                                  0.05                                                                                              0.1
                                                                                                                   0.05                                                                                             0.10
             0.15                                                  0.10                                                                                                                                             0.15
                                                                                                                   0.10                                              0.2
             0.20                                                                                                                                                                                                   0.20

                                        0.15
                                               Lasertag-SixteenRooms                               Lasertag-Star                                     Lasertag-Maze1                                 Lasertag-Maze2
                                                                                            0.15
                                        0.10                                                0.10                                              0.10                                           0.05
                                        0.05                                                0.05
                                                                                                                                              0.05
                            RR Return


                                                                               RR Return


                                                                                                                                 RR Return


                                                                                                                                                                                 RR Return
                                                                                            0.00                                                                                             0.00
                                        0.00
                                                                                            0.05                                              0.00
                                        0.05                                                                                                                                                 0.05
                                                                                            0.10                                              0.05
                                        0.10                                                0.15
                                        0.15                                                0.20                                              0.10                                           0.10


Figure 15: Returns in a round-robin tournament between M AESTRO and 6 baselines on all LaserTag
evaluation environments (combined and individual). Plots show the mean and standard error across
10 training seeds.


                    Formula 1 [21 Tasks]                                   F1-Australia-v0                                   F1-Austria-v0                                   F1-Bahrain-v0                                  F1-Belgium-v0
                                                                  600
                                                                                                                                                                    400
            400                                                   500                                             400                                                                                              400
                                                                  400                                                                                               300
            300                                                                                                   300                                                                                              300
RR Return


                                                      RR Return


                                                                                                      RR Return


                                                                                                                                                        RR Return


                                                                                                                                                                                                       RR Return
                                                                  300                                                                                               200
            200                                                                                                   200                                                                                              200
                                                                  200
            100                                                                                                   100                                               100                                            100
                                                                  100
              0                                                     0                                               0                                                 0                                              0

            500
                         F1-Brazil-v0                             400
                                                                            F1-China-v0                                      F1-France-v0                           350     F1-Germany-v0                                   F1-Hungary-v0
                                                                                                                  500                                               300                                            500
            400
                                                                  300                                             400                                               250                                            400
RR Return


                                                      RR Return


                                                                                                      RR Return


                                                                                                                                                        RR Return


                                                                                                                                                                                                       RR Return


            300                                                                                                                                                     200
                                                                  200                                             300                                                                                              300
            200                                                                                                                                                     150
                                                                                                                  200                                                                                              200
                                                                  100                                                                                               100
            100                                                                                                   100                                                                                              100
                                                                                                                                                                     50
              0                                                     0                                               0                                                 0                                              0

            600
                         F1-Italy-v0                                      F1-LagunaSeca-v0                                  F1-Malaysia-v0                                   F1-Mexico-v0                                   F1-Monaco-v0
                                                                  500                                                                                               500                                            500
                                                                                                                  300
            500
                                                                  400                                             250                                               400                                            400
            400
RR Return


                                                      RR Return


                                                                                                      RR Return


                                                                                                                                                        RR Return


                                                                                                                                                                                                       RR Return


                                                                  300                                             200                                               300                                            300
            300                                                                                                   150
                                                                  200                                                                                               200                                            200
            200                                                                                                   100
            100                                                   100                                              50                                               100                                            100
              0                                                     0                                               0                                                 0                                              0
                     F1-Netherlands-v0                                     F1-Portugal-v0                                     F1-Russia-v0                                  F1-Singapore-v0                                  F1-Spain-v0
            500                                                   500                                                                                               500
                                                                                                                  500
            400                                                   400                                                                                               400                                            400
                                                                                                                  400
RR Return


                                                      RR Return


                                                                                                      RR Return


                                                                                                                                                        RR Return


                                                                                                                                                                                                       RR Return


            300                                                   300                                                                                               300                                            300
                                                                                                                  300
            200                                                   200                                                                                               200                                            200
                                                                                                                  200
            100                                                   100                                             100                                               100                                            100

              0                                                     0                                               0                                                 0                                              0

                                                                                           500
                                                                                                    F1-UK-v0                                          F1-USA-v0
                                                                                                                                             500
                                                                                           400                                               400
                                                                               RR Return


                                                                                                                                 RR Return


                                                                                           300                                               300
                                                                                           200                                               200
                                                                                           100                                               100
                                                                                             0                                                 0


 Figure 16: Round-robin returns between M AESTRO and 6 baselines on all Formula 1 tracks (combined
 and individual). Plots show the mean and standard error across 5 training seeds.


                                                                                                                               23
   Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                      0.8
                            Formula 1 [21 Tasks]                                F1-Australia-v0                                               F1-Austria-v0                                                  F1-Bahrain-v0                                F1-Belgium-v0
                                                                         0.8                                                            0.7                                                                                                         0.8
                                                                                                                                                                                                      0.8
Cross-Play Win Rate


                                                   Cross-Play Win Rate


                                                                                                                  Cross-Play Win Rate


                                                                                                                                                                                Cross-Play Win Rate


                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Cross-Play Win Rate
                      0.6                                                                                                               0.6
                                                                         0.6                                                                                                                                                                        0.6
                                                                                                                                        0.5                                                           0.6
                      0.4                                                                                                               0.4                                                                                                         0.4
                                                                         0.4                                                                                                                          0.4
                                                                                                                                        0.3
                      0.2                                                0.2                                                            0.2                                                           0.2                                           0.2
                                                                                                                                        0.1
                      0.0                                                0.0                                                            0.0                                                           0.0                                           0.0
                                F1-Brazil-v0                                     F1-China-v0                                                  F1-France-v0                                                  F1-Germany-v0                                 F1-Hungary-v0
                                                                                                                                                                                                      0.8
                      0.8                                                0.8                                                            0.8                                                                                                         0.8
Cross-Play Win Rate


                                                   Cross-Play Win Rate


                                                                                                                  Cross-Play Win Rate


                                                                                                                                                                                Cross-Play Win Rate


                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Cross-Play Win Rate
                                                                         0.6                                                                                                                          0.6
                      0.6                                                                                                               0.6                                                                                                         0.6

                                                                         0.4                                                            0.4                                                           0.4                                           0.4
                      0.4

                      0.2                                                0.2                                                            0.2                                                           0.2                                           0.2

                      0.0                                                0.0                                                            0.0                                                           0.0                                           0.0
                                F1-Italy-v0                                    F1-LagunaSeca-v0                                               F1-Malaysia-v0                                                 F1-Mexico-v0                                 F1-Monaco-v0
                      0.8                                                                                                               0.8                                                                                                         0.8
                                                                         0.8                                                                                                                          0.8
Cross-Play Win Rate


                                                   Cross-Play Win Rate


                                                                                                                  Cross-Play Win Rate


                                                                                                                                                                                Cross-Play Win Rate


                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Cross-Play Win Rate
                      0.6                                                                                                               0.6                                                                                                         0.6
                                                                         0.6                                                                                                                          0.6

                      0.4                                                0.4                                                            0.4                                                           0.4                                           0.4

                      0.2                                                0.2                                                            0.2                                                           0.2                                           0.2

                      0.0                                                0.0                                                            0.0                                                           0.0                                           0.0
                             F1-Netherlands-v0                                  F1-Portugal-v0                                                 F1-Russia-v0                                                 F1-Singapore-v0                                F1-Spain-v0
                      0.8                                                                                                               0.8                                                                                                         0.8
                                                                         0.8                                                                                                                          0.8
Cross-Play Win Rate


                                                   Cross-Play Win Rate


                                                                                                                  Cross-Play Win Rate


                                                                                                                                                                                Cross-Play Win Rate


                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Cross-Play Win Rate
                      0.6                                                                                                               0.6                                                                                                         0.6
                                                                         0.6                                                                                                                          0.6
                      0.4                                                                                                               0.4                                                           0.4                                           0.4
                                                                         0.4
                      0.2                                                0.2                                                            0.2                                                           0.2                                           0.2

                      0.0                                                0.0                                                            0.0                                                           0.0                                           0.0
                                                                                                                 F1-UK-v0                                                     F1-USA-v0
                                                                                                           0.7                                                          0.8
                                                                                     Cross-Play Win Rate


                                                                                                                                                  Cross-Play Win Rate


                                                                                                           0.6
                                                                                                           0.5                                                          0.6
                                                                                                           0.4
                                                                                                                                                                        0.4
                                                                                                           0.3
                                                                                                           0.2                                                          0.2
                                                                                                           0.1
                                                                                                           0.0                                                          0.0


   Figure 17: Win rates in cross-play between M AESTRO vs each of the 6 baselines on all Formula 1
   tracks (combined and individual). Plots show the mean and standard error across 5 training seeds.


                                                                                                                                                24
   Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                          Formula 1 [21 Tasks]                              F1-Australia-v0                                          F1-Austria-v0                                       500
                                                                                                                                                                                                F1-Bahrain-v0                              F1-Belgium-v0
                    500                                                                                                                                                                                                              500
                                                                     600                                                       400                                                       400                                         400
                    400
Cross-Play Return


                                                 Cross-Play Return


                                                                                                           Cross-Play Return


                                                                                                                                                                     Cross-Play Return


                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Cross-Play Return
                                                                     500
                                                                     400                                                       300                                                       300                                         300
                    300
                                                                     300                                                       200                                                       200
                    200                                                                                                                                                                                                              200
                                                                     200
                    100                                                                                                        100                                                       100                                         100
                                                                     100
                      0                                                0                                                         0                                                         0                                           0

                    600       F1-Brazil-v0                                   F1-China-v0                                       600
                                                                                                                                     F1-France-v0                                              F1-Germany-v0                               F1-Hungary-v0
                                                                                                                                                                                         400
                    500                                              400                                                       500                                                                                                   500
Cross-Play Return


                                                 Cross-Play Return


                                                                                                           Cross-Play Return


                                                                                                                                                                     Cross-Play Return


                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Cross-Play Return
                    400                                                                                                                                                                  300                                         400
                                                                     300                                                       400
                    300                                                                                                        300                                                       200                                         300
                                                                     200
                    200                                                                                                        200                                                                                                   200
                                                                     100                                                                                                                 100
                    100                                                                                                        100                                                                                                   100
                      0                                                0                                                         0                                                         0                                           0
                              F1-Italy-v0                            600   F1-LagunaSeca-v0                                          F1-Malaysia-v0                                             F1-Mexico-v0                               F1-Monaco-v0
                                                                                                                               350                                                       600
                    600                                                                                                                                                                                                              500
                                                                     500                                                       300                                                       500
                    500
Cross-Play Return


                                                 Cross-Play Return


                                                                                                           Cross-Play Return


                                                                                                                                                                     Cross-Play Return


                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Cross-Play Return
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     400
                                                                     400                                                       250                                                       400
                    400                                                                                                                                                                                                              300
                                                                     300                                                       200
                    300                                                                                                                                                                  300
                                                                                                                               150                                                                                                   200
                    200                                              200                                                                                                                 200
                                                                                                                               100
                    100                                              100                                                        50                                                       100                                         100
                      0                                                0                                                         0                                                         0                                           0
                           F1-Netherlands-v0                                F1-Portugal-v0                                            F1-Russia-v0                                             F1-Singapore-v0                              F1-Spain-v0
                                                                     600                                                       600
                    500                                                                                                                                                                                                              500
                                                                     500                                                                                                                 500
                                                                                                                               500
Cross-Play Return


                                                 Cross-Play Return


                                                                                                           Cross-Play Return


                                                                                                                                                                     Cross-Play Return


                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Cross-Play Return
                    400                                                                                                                                                                  400                                         400
                                                                     400                                                       400
                    300                                                                                                                                                                  300                                         300
                                                                     300                                                       300
                    200                                              200                                                       200                                                       200                                         200
                    100                                              100                                                       100                                                       100                                         100
                      0                                                0                                                         0                                                         0                                           0
                                                                                                          F1-UK-v0                                                 F1-USA-v0
                                                                                                    500                                                      600
                                                                                                                                                             500
                                                                                                    400
                                                                                Cross-Play Return


                                                                                                                                         Cross-Play Return


                                                                                                                                                             400
                                                                                                    300
                                                                                                                                                             300
                                                                                                    200
                                                                                                                                                             200
                                                                                                    100                                                      100
                                                                                                      0                                                        0


   Figure 18: Returns in cross-play between M AESTRO vs each of the 6 baselines on all Formula 1
   tracks (combined and individual). Plots show the mean and standard error across 5 training seeds.


                                                                                                                                       25
  Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                       Formula 1 [21 Tasks]                   700
                                                                     F1-Australia-v0                                     F1-Austria-v0                                       F1-Bahrain-v0                           F1-Belgium-v0
                1000                                                                                              700
                                                                                                                                                                     1400
                                                              600                                                 600                                                                                         600
                 800                                                                                                                                                 1200
                                                              500                                                 500                                                                                         500
                                              Time on Grass


                                                                                                  Time on Grass


                                                                                                                                                                                              Time on Grass
                                                                                                                                                                     1000
Time on Grass


                                                                                                                                                     Time on Grass
                 600                                          400                                                 400                                                                                         400
                                                                                                                                                                      800
                                                              300                                                 300                                                 600                                     300
                 400
                                                              200                                                 200                                                 400                                     200
                 200                                                                                                                                                                                          100
                                                              100                                                 100                                                 200
                   0                                            0                                                   0                                                   0                                       0
                          F1-Brazil-v0                                 F1-China-v0                                       F1-France-v0                                       F1-Germany-v0                            F1-Hungary-v0
                700                                                                                               1000                                               800                                      1000
                                                              1200
                600                                           1000                                                 800                                                                                         800
Time on Grass


                                                                                                                                                     Time on Grass
                                              Time on Grass


                                                                                                  Time on Grass


                                                                                                                                                                                              Time on Grass
                500                                                                                                                                                  600
                                                               800                                                 600                                                                                         600
                400
                                                               600                                                                                                   400
                300                                                                                                400                                                                                         400
                200                                            400
                                                                                                                   200                                               200                                       200
                100                                            200
                  0                                              0                                                   0                                                 0                                         0
                           F1-Italy-v0                               F1-LagunaSeca-v0                                    F1-Malaysia-v0                                      F1-Mexico-v0                            F1-Monaco-v0
                600                                           1400                                                                                                   1400                                     800
                                                                                                                  1200
                500                                           1200                                                                                                   1200
                                                                                                                  1000                                                                                        600
Time on Grass


                                                                                                                                                                                              Time on Grass
                                                              1000
                                              Time on Grass


                                                                                                  Time on Grass


                                                                                                                                                     Time on Grass



                400                                                                                                                                                  1000
                                                               800                                                 800
                300                                                                                                                                                   800
                                                                                                                   600                                                                                        400
                                                               600                                                                                                    600
                200                                                                                                400
                                                               400                                                                                                    400                                     200
                100                                            200                                                 200                                                200
                  0                                              0                                                   0                                                  0                                       0
                       F1-Netherlands-v0                              F1-Portugal-v0                                     F1-Russia-v0                                       F1-Singapore-v0                           F1-Spain-v0
                                                              1200                                                800                                                1000                                     800
                800
                                                              1000                                                                                                    800
                                                                                                                  600                                                                                         600
Time on Grass


                                                                                                  Time on Grass


                                                                                                                                                                                              Time on Grass
                                              Time on Grass


                                                                                                                                                     Time on Grass


                600                                            800
                                                                                                                                                                      600
                                                               600                                                400                                                                                         400
                400                                                                                                                                                   400
                                                               400
                200                                                                                               200                                                                                         200
                                                               200                                                                                                    200
                  0                                              0                                                  0                                                   0                                       0

                                                                                          1000
                                                                                                 F1-UK-v0                                           F1-USA-v0
                                                                                                                                             1000
                                                                                           800
                                                                                                                                              800
                                                                          Time on Grass


                                                                                                                             Time on Grass


                                                                                           600                                                600
                                                                                           400                                                400
                                                                                           200                                                200
                                                                                             0                                                  0


  Figure 19: Time on grass during cross-play between M AESTRO vs each of the 6 baselines on all
  Formula 1 tracks (combined and individual). Plots show the mean and standard error across 5 training
  seeds.


                                                                                                                          26
