Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


A NALOGY-F ORMING T RANSFORMERS FOR F EW-S HOT
3D PARSING
 Nikolaos Gkanatsios∗, Mayank Singh∗ , Zhaoyuan Fang,
 Shubham Tulsiani & Katerina Fragkiadaki
 School of Computer Science
 Carnegie Mellon University
 Pittsburgh, PA 15213, USA
 {ngkanats,mayanks2,zhaoyuaf,stulsian,katef}@cs.cmu.edu



                                                A BSTRACT

             We present Analogical Networks, a model that encodes domain knowledge explic-
             itly, in a collection of structured labelled 3D scenes, in addition to implicitly, as
             model parameters, and segments 3D object scenes with analogical reasoning: in-
             stead of mapping a scene to part segments directly, our model first retrieves related
             scenes from memory and their corresponding part structures, and then predicts anal-
             ogous part structures for the input scene via an end-to-end learnable modulation
             mechanism. By conditioning on more than one retrieved memories, composi-
             tions of structures are predicted, that mix and match parts across the retrieved
             memories. One-shot, few-shot or many-shot learning are treated uniformly in
             Analogical Networks, by conditioning on the appropriate set of memories, whether
             taken from a single, few or many memory exemplars, and inferring analogous
             parses. We show Analogical Networks are competitive with state-of-the-art 3D
             segmentation transformers in many-shot settings, and outperform them, as well as
             existing paradigms of meta-learning and few-shot learning, in few-shot settings.
             Analogical Networks successfully segment instances of novel object categories
             simply by expanding their memory, without any weight updates.


                                                                 Ask not what it is, ask what it is like.
                                                                                                    Moshe Bar


1       I NTRODUCTION

The dominant paradigm in existing deep visual learning is to train high-capacity networks that
map input observations to task-specific outputs. Despite their success across a plethora of tasks,
these models struggle to perform well in few-shot settings where only a small set of examples are
available for learning. Meta-learning approaches provide one promising solution to this by enabling
efficient task-specific adaptation of generic models, but this specialization comes at the cost of poor
performance on the original tasks as well as the need to adapt separate models for each novel task.
We introduce Analogical Networks, a semi-parametric learning framework for 3D scene parsing that
pursues analogy-driven prediction: instead of mapping the input scene to part segments directly, the
model reasons analogically and maps the input to modifications and compositions of past labelled
visual experiences. Analogical Networks encode domain knowledge explicitly in a collection of
structured labelled scene memories as well as implicitly, in model parameters. Given an input 3D
scene, the model retrieves relevant memories and uses them to modulate inference and segment
object parts in the input point cloud. During modulation, the input scene and the retrieved memories
are jointly encoded and contextualized via cross-attention operations. The contextualized memory
part features are then used to segment analogous parts in the 3D input scene, binding the predicted
part structure to the one from memory, as shown in Figure 1. Given the same input scene, the
    ∗
        Equal contribution


                                                      1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Figure 1: Analogical Networks form analogies between retrieved memories and the input scene
by using memory part encodings as queries to localize corresponding parts in the scene. Retrieved
memories (2nd and 5th columns) modulate segmentation of the input 3D point cloud (1st and 4th
columns, respectively). We indicate corresponding parts between the memory and the input scene
with the same color. Cross-object part correspondences emerge even without any part association
or semantic part labelling supervision (5th row). For example, the model learns to correspond the
parts of a clock and a TV set, without ever trained with such cross scene part correspondence. Parts
shown in black in columns 3 and 6 are decoded from scene-agnostic queries and thus they are not
in correspondence to any parts of the memory scene. Conditioning the same input point cloud on
memories with finer or coarser labellings results in segmentation of analogous granularity (3rd row).



output prediction changes with varying conditioning memories. For example, conditioned on visual
memories of varying label granularity, the model segments the input in a granularity analogous to
the one of the retrieved memory. One-shot, few-shot or many-shot learning are treated uniformly in
Analogical Networks, by conditioning on the appropriate set of memories. This is very beneficial
over methods that specifically target few-shot only scenarios, since, at test time, an agent usually
cannot know whether a scene is an example of many-shot or few-shot categories.
Analogical Networks learn to bind memory part features to input scene part segments. Fine-grained
part correspondence annotations across two 3D scenes are not easily available. We devise a novel
within-scene pre-training scheme to encourage correspondence learning across scenes. We augment
(rotate and deform) a given scene in two distinct ways, and train the modulator to parse one of them
given the other as its modulating memory, bypassing the retrieval process. During this within-scene
training, we have access to the part correspondence between the memory and the input scene, and we
use it to supervise the query-to-part assignment process. We show within-scene training helps our
model learn to associate memory queries to similarly labelled parts across scenes without ever using
cross-scene part correspondence annotations, as shown in Figure 1.
We test our model on the PartNet benchmark of Mo et al. (2019) for 3D object segmentation. We
compare against state-of-the-art (SOTA) 3D object segmentors, as well as meta-learning and few-
shot learning (Snell et al., 2017) baselines adapted for the task of 3D parsing. Our experiments


                                                 2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


show that Analogical Networks perform similarly to the parametric alone baselines in the standard
many-shot train-test split and particularly shine over the parametric baselines in the few-shot setting:
Analogical Networks segment novel instances much better than parametric existing models, simply
by expanding the memory repository with encodings of a few exemplars, even without any weight
updates. We further compare against variants of our model that consider memory retrieval and
attention without memory query binding, and thus lack explicit analogy formation, as well as other
ablative versions of our model to quantify the contribution of the retriever and the proposed within-
scene memory-augmented pre-training. Our code and models are publicly available in the project
webpage: http://analogicalnets.github.io/.

2    R ELATED WORK
Few-shot prediction: meta-learning and learning associations A key goal for our approach
is to enable accurate inference in few-shot settings. Previous approaches (Finn et al., 2017; Rusu
et al., 2018; Snell et al., 2017; Wang et al., 2018b; Bar et al., 2022; Mangla et al., 2020; Wang
et al., 2020; Nguyen & Todorovic, 2019; Liu et al., 2020; Tian et al., 2020; Yang et al., 2020) that
target similar settings can be broadly categorized as relying on either meta-learning or learning better
associations. Meta-learning approaches tackle few-shot prediction by learning a generic model that
can be efficiently adapted to a new task of interest from a few labelled examples. While broadly
applicable, these methods result in catastrophic forgetting of the original task during adaptation and
thus require training a new model for each task of interest. Moreover, the goal of learning generic
and rapidly adaptable models can lead to suboptimal performance over the base tasks with abundant
data. An alternative approach for the few-shot setting is to learn better associations. For example,
the category of a new example may be inferred by transferring the label(s) from the one (or few)
closest samples (Snell et al., 2017; Sung et al., 2018). While this approach obviates the need for
adapting models and can allow prediction in few-shot and many-shot settings, the current approaches
are only applicable to global prediction, e.g., image labels. Our work can be viewed as extending
such association-based methods to allow predicting fine-grained and generic visual structures using
our proposed modulation-based prediction mechanism.
Memory-augmented neural networks Analogical Networks is a type of memory-augmented neural
networks. Memory-augmentation of parametric models permits fast learning with few examples,
where data are saved in and can be accessed from the memory immediately after their acquisition
(Santoro et al., 2016), while learning via parameter update is slow and requires multiple gradient
iterations on de-correlated examples. External memories have recently been used to scale up language
models (Borgeaud et al., 2021; Khandelwal et al., 2019), and alleviate from the limited context
window of parametric transformers (Wu et al., 2022), as well as to store knowledge in the form of
entity mentions (de Jong et al., 2021), knowledge graphs (Das et al., 2022) and question-answer pairs
(Chen et al., 2022). Memory attention layers in these models are used to influence the computation
of transformer layers and have proven very successful for factual question answering, but also for
sentence completion over their parametric counterparts.

In-context learning In-context learning (ICL) (Brown et al., 2020) aims to induce a model to
perform a task by feeding in input-output examples along with an unlabeled query example. The
primary advantage of in-context learning is that it enables a single model to perform many tasks
immediately without fine-tuning. Analogical Networks are in-context learners in that they infer
the part segmentation of an object 3D point cloud in the context of retrieved labelled object 3D
point clouds. While in language models ICL emerges at test time while training unsupervised (and
out-of-context) for language completion, Analogical Networks are trained in-context with related
examples using supervision and self-supervision. Although in prompted language models (Huang
et al., 2022; Brown et al., 2020) the input-output pairs are currently primarily decided by the engineer,
in Analogical Networks they are automatically inferred by the retriever.

3    A NALOGICAL N ETWORKS FOR 3D OBJECT PARSING
The architecture of Analogical Networks is illustrated in Figure 2. Analogical Networks are analogy-
forming transformer networks for part segmentation where queries that decode entities in the input
scene are supplied by retrieved part-encoded labelled scenes, as well as by the standard set of


                                                   3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Figure 2: Architecture for Analogical Networks. Analogical Networks are comprised of retriever
and modulator sub-networks. In the retriever, labelled memories and the (unlabelled) input point
cloud are separately encoded into feature embeddings and the top-k most similar memories to the
present input are retrieved. In the modulator, each retrieved memory is encoded into a set of part
feature embeddings and initializes a query that is akin to a slot to be “filled” with the analogous part
entity in the present scene. These queries are appended to a set of learnable parametric scene-agnostic
queries. The modulator contextualizes the queries with the input point cloud through iterative self
and cross-attention operations that also update the point features of the input. When a memory part
query decodes a part in the input point cloud, we say the two parts are put into correspondence by the
model. We color them with the same color to visually indicate this correspondence.


scene-agnostic parametric queries of detection transformers (Carion et al., 2020). When a memory
part query is used to decode a part segmentation in the input scene, we say the two parts, in the
memory and the input, are put into correspondence. By using memory queries to decode parts in the
input, our model forms analogies between detected part graphs in the input scene and part graphs
in the modulating memories. Then, metadata, such as semantic labels, attached on memory queries
automatically propagate to the detected parts.
Analogical Networks are comprised of two main modules: (i) A retriever, that takes as input a 3D
object point cloud and a memory repository of labelled 3D object point clouds, and outputs a set of
relevant memories for the scene at hand, and (ii) a modulator, that jointly encodes the memories and
the input scene and predicts its 3D part segmentation.

Retriever The retriever has access to a memory repository of labelled 3D object point clouds. Each
labelled training example is a memory in this repository. Examples labelled with different label
granularities constitute separate memories. The retriever encodes each memory example as well as
the input point cloud into distinct normalized 1D feature encodings. The top-k memories are retrieved
by computing an inner product between the input point cloud feature and the memory features.

Modulator The modulator takes as input the retrieved memories and the unlabelled input point
cloud and predicts part segments and semantic labels for the present scene. The input scene is encoded
into a set of 3D point features. Each memory scene is encoded into a set of 1D part encodings, one for
each annotated part in the memory, which we call memory part queries f m ∈ Rc×M , in accordance
to parametric queries used to decode objects in DETR (Carion et al., 2020). The input points, memory
part queries, and parametric queries are contextualized via a set of cross and self-attention operations,
that iteratively update all queries and point features. Then, each of the contextualized queries predicts
a segmentation mask proposal through inner-product with the contextualized point features, as well as
an associated confidence score for the predicted part. These part segmentation proposals are matched
to ground-truth part binary masks using Hungarian matching (Carion et al., 2020). For the mask
proposals that are matched to a ground-truth mask, we compute the segmentation loss, which is a
per-point binary cross-entropy loss (Vu et al., 2022; Cheng et al., 2021b). We also supervise the
confidence score of all queries. For implementation details, please see the Appendix, Section 6.1.
Our modulator network resembles detection and segmentation transformers for 2D images (Carion
et al., 2020; Cheng et al., 2021a) where a set of learnable 1D vectors, termed parametric queries,
iteratively cross-attend to input image features and self-attend among themselves to predict object
segmentation masks in the input scene. The key difference between our modulator network and


                                                   4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


existing detection transformers are that retrieved memory entity encodings are used as queries, i.e.,
candidates for decoding parts in the input point cloud, alongside the standard set of scene-agnostic
parametric queries, as shown in Figure 2. Additional differences are that we update the point features
alongside the queries in the cross-attention layers, which we found helped performance. Finally, we
operate in 3D point clouds as opposed to 2D images.

3.1   T RAINING

Analogical Networks aim to learn to associate parts in the retrieved memory graphs with parts in the
input point cloud. Semantic part labels can only partially supervise this fine-grained part association,
since retrieved memories can be too different from the input scene. We train our model in two stages
to facilitate this fine-grained association learning:
                            1. Within-scene training: We apply two distinct augmentations (rota-
                            tions and deformations (Kim et al., 2021)) to each training 3D point cloud,
                            and use one as the input scene and the other as the modulating memory,
                            as shown in Figure 3. In this case, we have access to ground-truth part
                            associations between the parts of the memory and the input scene, which
                            we use to supervise each memory part query to decode the corresponding
                            part in the input cloud, and we do not use Hungarian matching. We call
                            this within-scene training since both the input and memory come from
                            the same scene instance.
                            2. Cross-scene training: During cross-scene training, the modulating
                            memories are sampled from the top-k retrieved memories per input scene.
                            We show in our experimental section that accurate memory query to
                            input part associations emerge during Hungarian matching in cross-scene
                            training, even without using part association ground-truth, thanks to the
                            within-scene pre-training. This is important, as often we cannot have fine-
                            grained annotations of structure correspondence across scene exemplars.
Figure 3: Within-scene
pre-training.              In Analogical Networks, the retrieval process is not end-to-end differen-
                           tiable with respect to the downstream scene parsing task. This is because
                           i) we have no ground-truth annotations for retrieval, and ii) the retrieved
                           memories are contextualized with the input through dense cross-attention
operations which do not allow gradients to flow to the retriever’s encoding process. We pre-train the
encoder and modulator parameters independently of the retriever using within-scene training. We
then use the modulator’s encoder weights as the retriever’s frozen encoder (adding a parameter-free
average pooling layer on top). In the Appendix, we include pseudo-code for within-scene training in
Algorithm 1 and cross-scene training in Algorithm 2.


4     E XPERIMENTS

We test Analogical Networks on PartNet (Mo et al., 2019), an established benchmark for 3D object
segmentation. PartNet contains 3D object instances from multiple object categories, annotated with
parts in three different levels of granularity. We split PartNet object categories into base and novel
categories. Our base categories are Chair, Display, Storage Furniture, Bottle, Clock, Door, Earphone,
Faucet, Knife, Lamp, Trash Can, Vase and our novel categories are Table, Bed, Dishwasher and
Refrigerator. We consider two experimental paradigms: 1. Many-shot: For the exemplars of the
base categories we consider the standard PartNet train/test splits. Our model and baselines are trained
in the base category training sets, and tested on segmenting instances of the base categories in the
test set. 2. Few-shot: K labelled examples from each novel category are given and the model is
tasked to segment new examples of these categories. This tests few-shot adaptation. We consider
K = 1 and K = 5. We aggregate results across multiple K-shot learning tasks (episodes). We test
two versions of our model: i) AnalogicalNets single-mem, which is Analogical Networks
with a single modulating memory, and ii) AnalogicalNets multi-mem, with five modulating
memories. Unless mentioned explicitly, Analogical Networks will imply the single-memory model.
Our experiments aim to answer the following questions:


                                                   5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


      1. How do Analogical Networks compare against parametric-alone state-of-the-art models in
         many-shot and few-shot 3D object segmentation?
      2. How well do Analogical Networks adapt few-shot via memory expansion, without any
         weight update?
      3. How do Analogical Networks compare against alternative memory-augmented networks
         where retrieved memory part encodings are attended to but not used for decoding parts?
      4. How well do Analogical Networks learn part-based associations across scenes without part
         association ground-truth and semantic label supervision?

Evaluation metrics We use the Adjusted Random Index (ARI) as our label-agnostic segmentation
quality metric (Rand, 1971), which is a clustering score ranging from −1 (worst) to 1 (best). ARI
calculates the similarity between two point clusterings while being invariant to the order of the
cluster centers. We compute 100× ARI using the publicly available implementation of (Kabra et al.,
2019). We use mean Average Precision (mAP) per part (Mo et al., 2019) for semantic part instance
segmentation and mean intersection over union (mIoU) for 3D point semantic segmentation.

Baselines We compare our model to existing models in the literature. We further compare against
strong parametric baseline models we develop; the latter ended up outperforming all previous existing
works in the many-shot settings. We consider the following baseline models:

• PartNet of (Mo et al., 2019) is a 3D segmentation network with the same backbone as our model.
  This model implements “queries” as a fixed number of sets of MLPs that operate over the encoded
  input point cloud. Each set contains one MLP for per-pixel confidence and one for part confidence.
  The same losses used by our model are used to supervise this baseline.
• DETR3D is a 3D segmentation transformer network with the same backbone as our model and
  similar segmentation prediction heads and losses, but without any memory retrieval, akin to the 3D
  equivalent of a state-of-the-art 2D image segmentor (Carion et al., 2020; Athar et al., 2021). We
  update the point features in the decoder layers, same as in our model, which we found to boost
  performance. Contrary to DETR3D, Analogical Networks attend to external memories.
• PrototypicalNets is an adaptation of the episodic prototypical networks for image classifica-
  tion of (Snell et al., 2017) to the task of 3D object part segmentation. Specifically, given a set of
  N labelled point clouds, we form average feature vectors for each semantic labelled part and use
  them as queries to segment points into corresponding part masks through inner-product decoding.
  Contrary to PrototypicalNets, Analogical Networks contextualize the memory queries and
  the input scene. PrototypicalNets require a retriever that knows the category label of the
  input scene, so it has access to privileged information. Without this assumption, we got very low
  performance from this model.

Ablations We compare our model to the following variants and ablative versions:

• Re-DETR3D (Retrieval-DETR3D) is a variant of Analogical Networks that attends to retrieved part
  memory encodings but does not use them to decode parts. Instead, all parts are decoded from the
  parametric scene-agnostic queries. Different from Analogical Networks, analogies cannot emerge
  between a memory and the input scene since this model does not represent such correspondence
  explicitly, but only implicitly, in the attention operations.
• AnalogicalNets w/o pretrain is our AnalogicalNets single-mem model with-
  out any within-scene (pre)training.
• AnalogicalNets OrclCategoryRetrv is our AnalogicalNets single-mem
  model with a privileged retriever that has access to the ground-truth category label of the in-
  put and only retrieves memories of the same category label.

4.1   M ANY AND FEW- SHOT 3D OBJECT SEGMENTATION

The PartNet benchmark provides three levels of segmentation annotations per object instance where
level 3 is the most fine-grained. We train and test our model and baselines on all three levels. We
use a learnable level embedding as additional input for our baselines PartNetand DETR3D, as is


                                                  6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                                                 Novel Categories         Base Categories
 Method                                    Fine-tuned?
                                                         1-shot ARI (↑) 5-shot ARI (↑)   Many shot ARI (↑)
                                               ✗              26.1             26.1            54.3
 PartNet
                                               ✓          22.0 ± 0.90      25.9 ± 0.87          -
                                               ✗              30.4             30.4            74.3
 DETR3D
                                               ✓          39.4 ± 1.44      52.7 ± 1.44          -
                                               ✗          38.2 ± 1.79      46.8 ± 0.66         74.3
 Re-DETR3D
                                               ✓          46.5 ± 2.61      55.6 ± 1.82          -
                                               ✗          49.0 ± 0.80      52.0 ± 1.11         72.5
 AnalogicalNets single-mem
                                               ✓          50.6 ± 2.72      57.0 ± 1.33          -
                                               ✗                -          52.1 ± 0.75         74.2
 AnalogicalNets multi-mem
                                               ✓                -          56.4 ± 1.81          -
                                               ✗          51.2 ± 0.96      53.8 ± 1.03         75.6
 AnalogicalNets OrclCategoryRetrv
                                               ✓          52.6 ± 2.96      58.3 ± 1.36          -

Table 1: Semantics-free 3D part segmentation performance on the PartNet benchmark. Without
any fine-tuning, Analogical Networks outperform DETR3D by more than 20% in the few-shot setup.
Even upon fine-tuning, Analogical Networks outperform DETR3D by 4.3% ARI.


usually the case in multi-task models (Jang et al., 2022). In the many-shot setting, we train our model
and baselines jointly across all base categories and test them across all of them as well, using the
standard PartNet train/test splits. For Analogical Networks and Re-DETR3D, all examples in the
training set become part of their memory repository. In the few-shot setting, PartNet and DETR3D
adapt by weight finetuning on the K-shot task. Analogical Networks and Re-DETR3D adapt in two
ways: i) by expanding the memory of the model with the novel K-shot support examples, and ii) by
further adapting the weights via fine-tuning to segment the K examples. In this case, the memory set
is only the novel labelled support set instances. The retriever does not have access to the object
category information in any of the many-shot or few-shot settings unless explicitly stated so.

4.1.1     S EMANTICS - FREE I NSTANCE S EGMENTATION
In this section, we train all models and baselines for semantics-free object part segmentation, without
any semantic labelling objectives. We show quantitative semantic-agnostic many-shot and few-shot
part segmentation results in Table 1. For the few-shot setting, we show both fine-tuned and non-fine-
tuned models. For the few-shot performance, we report mean and standard deviation over 10 tasks
where we vary the K-shot support set. Our conclusions are as follows:
(i) Analogical Networks dramatically outperform DETR3D in few-shot part segmentation. While in
the many-shot setting the two models have similar performance, when adapting few-shot to novel
categories, Analogical Networks and all their variants dramatically outperform parametric alone
DETR3D, both before and after fine-tuning.
(ii) Analogical networks can adapt few-shot simply by memory expansion, without weight updates.
Indeed, the 5-shot performance of our model is close before and after fine-tuning in the novel
categories (52.0% versus 57.0% ARI).
(iii) AnalogicalNets multi-mem outperform the single-memory version in many-shot learn-
ing with on par few-shot performance.
(iv) Re-DETR3D adapt few-shot better than DETR3D. Still, before weight fine-tuning in the few-shot
test set, this memory-augmented variant exhibits worse performance than our single-memory model
(46.8% versus 52.0% ARI).
(v) A retriever that better recognizes object categories would provide a performance boost, especially
in the many-shot setting.

4.1.2     E MERGENT C ROSS - SCENE C ORRESPONDENCE
Within-scene pre-training promotes correspondences between memory and input parts. We show that
memory parts can propagate any labels they are associated with to the cross-scene corresponding
input parts they decode. We quantify the ability to propagate semantic instance parts in Table 2. All
variants of Analogical Networks are trained without any semantic labelling objectives. For reference,
we also train the baselines DETR3D and PrototypicalNets for both object part segmentation


                                                   7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                                      Novel Categories   Novel Categories   Base Categories
                      Method                               1-shot             5-shot          Many-shot
                                                      mIoU      mAP      mIoU      mAP      mIoU     mAP
 DETR3D∗                                              21.5      18.3     30.6      27.5     55.9     53.6
 AnalogicalNets single-mem w/o pretrain                5.0       3.3      4.7       3.9      7.8      6.2
 AnalogicalNets single-mem                            20.4      18.2     26.0      25.0     44.3     42.0
 AnalogicalNets multi-mem                               -         -      27.8      25.8     49.2     47.9
 PrototypicalNets∗                                    27.5        -      29.0        -      30.0       -
 AnalogicalNets OrclCategoryRetrv                     26.2      25.2     30.2      30.2     50.6     48.7

Table 2: Part Semantic and Part Instance Segmentation performance on the PartNet benchmark.
∗
  indicates training with semantic labels.

                                                                     Novel Categories        Chair
        Method                                     Fine-tuned?
                                                                      5-shot ARI (↑)        ARI (↑)
                                                          ✗                28.5              76.0
        DETR3D trained on “Chair”
                                                          ✓            47.7 ± 2.31             -
                                                          ✗                30.4              75.7
        DETR3D
                                                          ✓            52.7 ± 1.44             -
                                                          ✗            33.8 ± 0.89           76.5
        Analogical Networks trained on “Chair”
                                                          ✓            50.4 ± 1.60             -
                                                          ✗            52.0 ± 1.11           76.3
        Analogical Networks
                                                          ✓            57.0 ± 1.33             -

Table 3:      Few-shot learning for single-category and multi-category trained models.
Analogical Networks learn better few-shot when trained across all categories, while DETR3D does
not improve its few shot learning performance when trained across more categories.


and part labelling. Analogical Networks predict semantic part labels only via propagation from
memory part queries f m that decode parts in the scene, and does not produce any semantic labels for
parts decoded by parametric queries f p , so by default it will make a mistake each time a parametric
query is used. We found more than 80% of parts are decoded by memory part queries on average,
while for AnalogicalNets multi-mem this ratio is 98%. For the few-shot settings in Table 2,
all models are fine-tuned on the few given examples. Similar to our model, PrototypicalNets
propagate semantic labels of the prototypical part features. We evaluate PrototypicalNets only
for semantic segmentation since it cannot easily produce instance segments: if multiple part instances
share the same semantic label, this model assumes they belong to the same semantic prototype. Our
conclusions are as follows:
(i) Analogical Networks show very competitive semantic and instance segmentation accuracy via
label propagation through memory part queries, despite having never seen semantic labels at train-
ing time. This shows our model learns cross-scene part associations without any semantic
information.
(ii) AnalogicalNets single-mem w/o pretrain has much worse semantic segmentation
performance which suggests within-scene pre-training much helps cross-scene associations to
emerge without semantic information.
(iii) PrototypicalNets achieves high 1-shot performance but does not scale with more data and
is unable to handle both few-shot and many-shot settings efficiently.
(iv) A retriever that better recognizes object categories boosts performance of Analogical Networks
over DETR3D in the few-shot settings.

4.1.3    M ULTI - CATEGORY TRAINING HELPS FEW- SHOT ADAPTATION IN
         A NALOGICAL N ETWORKS
We compare our model and baselines on their ability to improve few-shot learning performance
with more diverse training data in Table 3. We train each model under two setups: i) training only
on instances of “Chair”, which is the most common category—approximately 40% of our training
examples fall into this category—(refer to Table 5 for statistics of the training data distribution)


                                                  8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


and, ii) training on “all” categories. We test the performance of each model on 5-shot learning.
Our conclusions are as follows: (i) Models trained on a single category usually fail to few-shot
generalize to other classes with or w/o fine-tuning, despite their strong performance on the training
class. (ii) DETR3D does not improve in its ability to adapt few-shot with more diverse training data,
in contrast to Analogical Networks.
In the Appendix, we show the effect of different retrieval mechanisms (6.2, 6.3) and qualitative results
on more benchmarks (6.4).

4.2   L IMITATIONS

A set of future directions that are necessary for Analogical Networks to scale beyond segmentation
of single-object scenes are the following: (i) The retriever in Analogical Networks operates currently
over whole object memories and is not end-to-end differentiable with respect to the downstream task.
Sub-object part-centric memory representations would permit fine-grained retrieval of visual memory
scenes. We further plan to explore alternative supervision for the retriever module inspired by works in
the language domain (Izacard et al., 2022; Izacard & Grave, 2021). (ii) Scaling Analogical Networks
to segmentation of complete, multi-object 3D scenes in realistic home environments requires scaling
up the size of memory collection. It would further necessitate bootstrapping fine-grained object
part annotations, missing from 3D scene datasets (Dai et al., 2017), by transferring knowledge
of object part compositions from PartNet. Such semi-supervised fine-grained scene parsing is an
exciting avenue of future work. (iii) So far we have assumed the input to Analogical Networks to be a
complete 3D point cloud. However, this is hardly ever the case in reality. Humans and machines need
to make sense of single-view, incomplete and noisy observations. Extending Analogical Networks
with generative heads that not only detect analogous parts in the input, but also inpaint or complete
missing parts, is a direct avenue for future work.


5     C ONCLUSION

We presented Analogical Networks, a semi-parametric model for associative 3D visual parsing that
puts forward an analogical paradigm of corresponding input scenes to compositions and modifications
of memory scenes and their labelled parts, instead of mapping scenes to segments directly. By
casting visual parsing as analogical correspondence, Analogical Networks can few-shot learn better
than parametric alone models. One-shot, few-shot or many-shot learning are treated uniformly in
Analogical Networks, by conditioning to the appropriate set of memories, whether taken from a single,
few or many memory exemplars, and inferring analogous parses. We showed Analogical Networks
outperform SOTA parametric and meta-learning baselines in few-shot 3D parsing. We further showed
correspondences emerge across scenes without semantic supervision, as a by-product of the analogical
inductive bias and our within-scene pre-training. In his seminal work “the proactive brain” (Bar,
2007), Moshe Bar argues for the importance of analogies and associations in human reasoning—
highlighting how associations of novel inputs to analogous representations in memory can drive
perceptual inference. Analogical Networks operationalize these insights in a retrieval-augmented
in-context 3D parsing framework, with analogy formation between retrieved memory graphs and
input scene segmentations.


R EPRODUCIBILITY S TATEMENT

To ensure the reproducibility of the empirical results, we include a pseudo-code of the main model
components and training pipeline in the Appendix. We have made our code publicly available on
GitHub.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

This work is supported by Sony AI, a DARPA Young Investigator Award, an NSF CAREER award,
an AFOSR Young Investigator Award, a Verisk AI Faculty Research Award, and DARPA Machine
Common Sense.


                                                   9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


R EFERENCES
Ali Athar, Jonathon Luiten, Alexander Hermans, Deva Ramanan, and Bastian Leibe. Hodor: High-
  level object descriptors for object re-segmentation in video learned from static images, 2021. URL
  https://arxiv.org/abs/2112.09131.

Amir Bar, Yossi Gandelsman, Trevor Darrell, Amir Globerson, and Alexei A Efros. Visual prompting
 via image inpainting. NeurIPS, 2022.

Moshe Bar. The proactive brain: Using analogies and associations to generate predictions. Trends in
 Cognitive Sciences, 11(7):280–289, 2007. doi: 10.1016/j.tics.2007.05.005.

Sebastian Borgeaud, Arthur Mensch, Jordan Hoffmann, Trevor Cai, Eliza Rutherford, Katie Mil-
  lican, George van den Driessche, Jean-Baptiste Lespiau, Bogdan Damoc, Aidan Clark, Diego
  de Las Casas, Aurelia Guy, Jacob Menick, Roman Ring, Tom Hennigan, Saffron Huang, Loren
  Maggiore, Chris Jones, Albin Cassirer, Andy Brock, Michela Paganini, Geoffrey Irving, Oriol
  Vinyals, Simon Osindero, Karen Simonyan, Jack W. Rae, Erich Elsen, and Laurent Sifre. Improv-
  ing language models by retrieving from trillions of tokens. CoRR, abs/2112.04426, 2021. URL
  https://arxiv.org/abs/2112.04426.

Tom B. Brown, Benjamin Mann, Nick Ryder, Melanie Subbiah, Jared Kaplan, Prafulla Dhariwal,
  Arvind Neelakantan, Pranav Shyam, Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, Sandhini Agarwal, Ariel
  Herbert-Voss, Gretchen Krueger, Tom Henighan, Rewon Child, Aditya Ramesh, Daniel M. Ziegler,
  Jeffrey Wu, Clemens Winter, Christopher Hesse, Mark Chen, Eric Sigler, Mateusz Litwin, Scott
  Gray, Benjamin Chess, Jack Clark, Christopher Berner, Sam McCandlish, Alec Radford, Ilya
  Sutskever, and Dario Amodei. Language models are few-shot learners. CoRR, abs/2005.14165,
  2020. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2005.14165.

Nicolas Carion, Francisco Massa, Gabriel Synnaeve, Nicolas Usunier, Alexander Kirillov, and Sergey
  Zagoruyko. End-to-End Object Detection with Transformers. In Proc. ECCV, 2020.

Shaoyu Chen, Jiemin Fang, Qian Zhang, Wenyu Liu, and Xinggang Wang. Hierarchical aggregation
  for 3d instance segmentation. 2021 IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision
  (ICCV), pp. 15447–15456, 2021.

Wenhu Chen, Pat Verga, Michiel de Jong, John Wieting, and William Cohen. Augmenting pre-
 trained language models with qa-memory for open-domain question answering, 2022. URL
 https://arxiv.org/abs/2204.04581.

Xiaobai Chen, Aleksey Golovinskiy, and Thomas A. Funkhouser. A benchmark for 3d mesh
  segmentation. ACM Trans. Graph., 28:73, 2009.

Bowen Cheng, Ishan Misra, Alexander G. Schwing, Alexander Kirillov, and Rohit Girdhar. Masked-
  attention mask transformer for universal image segmentation. CoRR, abs/2112.01527, 2021a. URL
  https://arxiv.org/abs/2112.01527.

Bowen Cheng, Alexander G. Schwing, and Alexander Kirillov. Per-pixel classification is not all you
  need for semantic segmentation. In NeurIPS, 2021b.

Angela Dai, Angel X. Chang, Manolis Savva, Maciej Halber, Thomas Funkhouser, and Matthias
  Nießner. Scannet: Richly-annotated 3d reconstructions of indoor scenes, 2017. URL http:
 //arxiv.org/abs/1702.04405. cite arxiv:1702.04405.

Rajarshi Das, Ameya Godbole, Ankita Naik, Elliot Tower, Robin Jia, Manzil Zaheer, Hannaneh
  Hajishirzi, and Andrew McCallum. Knowledge base question answering by case-based reasoning
  over subgraphs, 2022. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2202.10610.

Michiel de Jong, Yury Zemlyanskiy, Nicholas FitzGerald, Fei Sha, and William Cohen. Mention
 memory: incorporating textual knowledge into transformers through entity mention attention.
 CoRR, abs/2110.06176, 2021. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2110.06176.


                                                10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Chelsea Finn, Pieter Abbeel, and Sergey Levine. Model-agnostic meta-learning for fast adaptation of
  deep networks. In Doina Precup and Yee Whye Teh (eds.), Proceedings of the 34th International
  Conference on Machine Learning, volume 70 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pp.
  1126–1135. PMLR, 06–11 Aug 2017. URL https://proceedings.mlr.press/v70/
  finn17a.html.
Wenlong Huang, Fei Xia, Ted Xiao, Harris Chan, Jacky Liang, Pete Florence, Andy Zeng, Jonathan
 Tompson, Igor Mordatch, Yevgen Chebotar, Pierre Sermanet, Noah Brown, Tomas Jackson, Linda
 Luu, Sergey Levine, Karol Hausman, and Brian Ichter. Inner monologue: Embodied reasoning
 through planning with language models, 2022. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2207.
 05608.
Gautier Izacard and Edouard Grave. Distilling Knowledge from Reader to Retriever for Question
  Answering. In ICLR 2021 - 9th International Conference on Learning Representations, Vienna,
  Austria, May 2021. URL https://hal.archives-ouvertes.fr/hal-03463398.
Gautier Izacard, Patrick Lewis, Maria Lomeli, Lucas Hosseini, Fabio Petroni, Timo Schick, Jane
  Dwivedi-Yu, Armand Joulin, Sebastian Riedel, and Edouard Grave. Few-shot learning with retrieval
  augmented language models, 2022. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2208.03299.
Eric Jang, Alex Irpan, Mohi Khansari, Daniel Kappler, Frederik Ebert, Corey Lynch, Sergey Levine,
  and Chelsea Finn. BC-Z: zero-shot task generalization with robotic imitation learning. CoRR,
  abs/2202.02005, 2022. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2202.02005.
Li Jiang, Hengshuang Zhao, Shaoshuai Shi, Shu Liu, Chi-Wing Fu, and Jiaya Jia. Pointgroup:
  Dual-set point grouping for 3d instance segmentation. 2020 IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer
  Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), pp. 4866–4875, 2020.
R. K. Jones, Aalia Habib, and Daniel Ritchie. Shred: 3d shape region decomposition with learned
  local operations. ArXiv, abs/2206.03480, 2022.
Rishabh Kabra, Chris Burgess, Loic Matthey, Raphael Lopez Kaufman, Klaus Greff, Malcolm
  Reynolds, and Alexander Lerchner. Multi-object datasets. https://github.com/deepmind/multi-
  object-datasets/, 2019.
Urvashi Khandelwal, Omer Levy, Dan Jurafsky, Luke Zettlemoyer, and Mike Lewis. Generalization
  through memorization: Nearest neighbor language models, 2019. URL https://arxiv.org/
  abs/1911.00172.
Sihyeon Kim, Sanghyeok Lee, Dasol Hwang, Jaewon Lee, Seong Jae Hwang, and Hyunwoo J Kim.
  Point cloud augmentation with weighted local transformations. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF
  International Conference on Computer Vision, pp. 548–557, 2021.
Yang Li and Tatsuya Harada. Lepard: Learning partial point cloud matching in rigid and deformable
  scenes. 2022 IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), pp.
  5544–5554, 2021.
Yongfei Liu, Xiangyi Zhang, Songyang Zhang, and Xuming He. Part-aware prototype network
  for few-shot semantic segmentation. In European Conference on Computer Vision, pp. 142–158.
  Springer, 2020.
Ilya Loshchilov and Frank Hutter.      Decoupled weight decay regularization.      arXiv preprint
   arXiv:1711.05101, 2017.
Puneet Mangla, Nupur Kumari, Abhishek Sinha, Mayank Singh, Balaji Krishnamurthy, and Vi-
  neeth N Balasubramanian. Charting the right manifold: Manifold mixup for few-shot learning. In
  Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Winter Conference on Applications of Computer Vision (WACV),
  March 2020.
Jiayuan Mao, Chuang Gan, Pushmeet Kohli, Joshua B. Tenenbaum, and Jiajun Wu. The neuro-
   symbolic concept learner: Interpreting scenes, words, and sentences from natural supervision.
   CoRR, abs/1904.12584, 2019. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/1904.12584.


                                               11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


M. Minsky. A framework for representing knowledge. In R. J. Brachman and H. J. Levesque (eds.),
 Readings in Knowledge Representation, pp. 245–262. Kaufmann, Los Altos, CA, 1985. URL
 http://web.media.mit.edu/˜minsky/papers/Frames/frames.html.
Kaichun Mo, Shilin Zhu, Angel X. Chang, Li Yi, Subarna Tripathi, Leonidas J. Guibas, and Hao
  Su. PartNet: A large-scale benchmark for fine-grained and hierarchical part-level 3D object
  understanding. In The IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR),
  June 2019.
Khoi Nguyen and Sinisa Todorovic. Feature weighting and boosting for few-shot segmentation. In
 Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision, pp. 622–631, 2019.
Charles Qi, Li Yi, Hao Su, and Leonidas J. Guibas. PointNet++: Deep Hierarchical Feature Learning
  on Point Sets in a Metric Space. In Proc. NIPS, 2017.
W. M. Rand. Objective criteria for the evaluation of clustering methods. Journal of the American
 Statistical Association, 66:846–850, 1971.
Andrei A Rusu, Dushyant Rao, Jakub Sygnowski, Oriol Vinyals, Razvan Pascanu, Simon Osin-
  dero, and Raia Hadsell. Meta-learning with latent embedding optimization. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:1807.05960, 2018.
Adam Santoro, Sergey Bartunov, Matthew Botvinick, Daan Wierstra, and Timothy Lillicrap. Meta-
  learning with memory-augmented neural networks. In Proceedings of the 33rd International Con-
  ference on International Conference on Machine Learning - Volume 48, ICML’16, pp. 1842–1850.
  JMLR.org, 2016.
Oana Sidi, Oliver Matias van Kaick, Yanir Kleiman, Hao Zhang, and Daniel Cohen-Or. Unsupervised
  co-segmentation of a set of shapes via descriptor-space spectral clustering. Proceedings of the
  2011 SIGGRAPH Asia Conference, 2011.
Jake Snell, Kevin Swersky, and Richard Zemel. Prototypical networks for few-shot learning. In
  I. Guyon, U. Von Luxburg, S. Bengio, H. Wallach, R. Fergus, S. Vishwanathan, and R. Gar-
  nett (eds.), Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 30. Curran Asso-
  ciates, Inc., 2017. URL https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper/2017/file/
  cb8da6767461f2812ae4290eac7cbc42-Paper.pdf.
Jianlin Su, Yu Lu, Shengfeng Pan, Bo Wen, and Yunfeng Liu. RoFormer: Enhanced Transformer
   with Rotary Position Embedding. ArXiv, abs/2104.09864, 2021.
Chunyu Sun, Xin Tong, and Yang Liu. Semantic segmentation-assisted instance feature fusion for
  multi-level 3d part instance segmentation. Computational Visual Media, 2022.
Flood Sung, Yongxin Yang, Li Zhang, Tao Xiang, Philip H.S. Torr, and Timothy M. Hospedales.
  Learning to compare: Relation network for few-shot learning. In Proceedings of the IEEE
  Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), June 2018.
Zhuotao Tian, Hengshuang Zhao, Michelle Shu, Zhicheng Yang, Ruiyu Li, and Jiaya Jia. Prior guided
  feature enrichment network for few-shot segmentation. IEEE transactions on pattern analysis and
  machine intelligence, 2020.
Mikaela Angelina Uy, Quang-Hieu Pham, Binh-Son Hua, Duc Thanh Nguyen, and Sai-Kit Yeung.
 Revisiting point cloud classification: A new benchmark dataset and classification model on real-
 world data. 2019 IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision (ICCV), pp. 1588–1597,
 2019.
Thang Vu, Kookhoi Kim, Tung Minh Luu, Xuan Thanh Nguyen, and Chang-Dong Yoo. Softgroup
  for 3d instance segmentation on point clouds. ArXiv, abs/2203.01509, 2022.
Weiyue Wang, Ronald Yu, Qiangui Huang, and Ulrich Neumann. Sgpn: Similarity group proposal
 network for 3d point cloud instance segmentation. 2018 IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer
 Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 2569–2578, 2018a.


                                               12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Xiaogang Wang, Xun Sun, Xinyu Cao, Kai Xu, and Bin Zhou. Learning fine-grained segmentation
  of 3d shapes without part labels. 2021 IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
  Recognition (CVPR), pp. 10271–10280, 2021.
Xiaolong Wang, Yufei Ye, and Abhinav Gupta. Zero-shot recognition via semantic embeddings and
  knowledge graphs. CoRR, abs/1803.08035, 2018b. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/1803.
  08035.
Xin Wang, Thomas E Huang, Trevor Darrell, Joseph E Gonzalez, and Fisher Yu. Frustratingly simple
  few-shot object detection. arXiv preprint arXiv:2003.06957, 2020.
Yuhuai Wu, Markus N. Rabe, DeLesley Hutchins, and Christian Szegedy. Memorizing transformers,
  2022. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2203.08913.
Boyu Yang, Chang Liu, Bohao Li, Jianbin Jiao, and Qixiang Ye. Prototype mixture models for
  few-shot semantic segmentation. In European Conference on Computer Vision, pp. 763–778.
  Springer, 2020.
Kexin Yi, Jiajun Wu, Chuang Gan, Antonio Torralba, Pushmeet Kohli, and Joshua B. Tenenbaum.
  Neural-symbolic VQA: disentangling reasoning from vision and language understanding. CoRR,
  abs/1810.02338, 2018. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/1810.02338.
Kexin Yi, Chuang Gan, Yunzhu Li, Pushmeet Kohli, Jiajun Wu, Antonio Torralba, and Joshua B.
  Tenenbaum. CLEVRER: collision events for video representation and reasoning. CoRR,
  abs/1910.01442, 2019. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/1910.01442.
Fenggen Yu, Kun Liu, Yan Zhang, Chenyang Zhu, and Kai Xu. Partnet: A recursive part decomposi-
  tion network for fine-grained and hierarchical shape segmentation. 2019 IEEE/CVF Conference on
  Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), 2019.
Biao Zhang and Peter Wonka. Point cloud instance segmentation using probabilistic embeddings.
  2021 IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), pp. 8879–8888,
  2021.
Xingyi Zhou, Rohit Girdhar, Armand Joulin, Phillip Krähenbühl, and Ishan Misra. Detecting twenty-
  thousand classes using image-level supervision, 2022. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/
  2201.02605.


                                               13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


6     A PPENDIX

Our Appendix is organized as follows: In Section 6.1, we provide implementation details and pseudo-
code for training Analogical Networks. In Section 6.2 we ablate Analogical Networks’ performance
under varying memory retrieval schemes in 5-shot setting and show qualitative results for the retriever
in Section 6.3. We show more results on noisy point clouds (ScanObjectNN (Uy et al., 2019) dataset)
in 6.4. We provide extensive qualitative visual object parsing results for single and multi-memory
variants of Analogical Networks in section 6.5. Lastly, we discuss additional related literature in
Section 6.6.

6.1   I MPLEMENTATION D ETAILS AND T RAINING P SEUDO C ODE

The modulator encodes the input scene S and each retrieved memory scene M into a set of 3D point
features using PointNet++ backbone. We encode positional information using rotary 3D positional
encodings (Su et al., 2021; Li & Harada, 2021), which have the property that P (x)T P (y) = P (y −x),
where P the positional encoding function and x, y two 3D points. These embeddings are multiplied
with queries and keys in the attention operations, thus making attention translation-invariant. For
memory queries, we use the centroid of the corresponding memory part to compute positional
encodings. For scene-agnostic queries, we use the center of the input object.
Each labelled part p in each memory M is encoded into an 1D feature vector fpM by average pooling
its point features. Next, the queries (memory and scene-agnostic combined) self-attend and cross-
attend to the input point features and update themselves; point features self-attend and cross-attend to
queries to also update themselves. This input feature update is a difference from existing detection
transformers, where only the queries are updated. We consider 6 layers of self and cross-attention.
Lastly, we upsample the point features to the original resolution using convolutional layers (Qi
et al., 2017) and compute an inner product between each query and point feature to compute the
segmentation mask for each query. The output of the modulator is a set of Nq segmentation mask
proposals and corresponding confidence scores, where Nq is the total number of queries. At training
time, these proposals are matched to ground-truth instance binary masks using the Hungarian
matching algorithm (Carion et al., 2020). For the proposals that are matched to a ground-truth
instance, we compute the segmentation loss, which is a per-point binary cross-entropy loss (Vu et al.,
2022; Cheng et al., 2021b). We also supervise the confidence score of each query, similar to (Carion
et al., 2020). The target labels are 1 for the proposals matched with a ground-truth part and 0 for
non-matched. We found it beneficial to apply these losses after every cross-attention layer in the
modulator. At test time, we multiply the per point mask occupancy probability with tiled confidence
scores to get a Np × Nq tensor (Np is the number of points); then each point is assigned to the
highest scoring query by computing inner product and taking per-point argmax over the queries. The
modulator’s weights are trained with within-scene and cross-scene training where the modulating
memories are sampled from the top-k retrieved memories. During cross-scene training, we further
co-train with within-scene training data.
For both stages of training (i.e. within-scene correspondence pre-training and cross-scene training),
we use AdamW optimizer (Loshchilov & Hutter, 2017) with an initial learning rate of 2e−4 and
batch size of 16. We train the model for 100 epochs within-scene and 60 cross-scene. For few-shot
fine-tuning/evaluation, we use AdamW optimizer with an initial learning rate of 3e−5 and batch size
of 8. We fine-tune for 90 epochs and we report the performance across 10 different episodes, where
each episode has a different set of K support samples. We describe Analogical Networks’ training
details in pseudo-code for within (Algorithm 1) and cross-scene training (Algorithm 2) respectively.
For our DETR3D baseline we use same hyperparameters and train for 250 epochs. Training takes
approximately 15 and 20 minutes per epoch on a single NVIDIA A100 gpu for DETR3D and
Analogical Networks respectively. For the multi-memory model we reduce the batch size to 8 and
the learning rate to 1e−4. Each epoch takes around 50 minutes.

6.2   P ERFORMANCE UNDER VARYING R ETRIEVAL S CHEMES

In the few-shot setting, we evaluate the performance of Analogical Networks under varying memory
retrieval schemes in Table 4. We compare against a hypothetical oracle retriever that can fetch


                                                  14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Algorithm 1: Pseudo code for within-scene correspondence pre-training of Analogical Networks
# S: input point cloud, M: memory point cloud, Np: numbers of points in S or M, N:
     sub-sampled points, C: number of feature channels, P: number of parts in M
# augment: a sequence of standard 3D point cloud augmentations
# pc_encoder: point cloud encoder
# Xp(M): ground-truth label assignment of points in parts, copied directly from
    the memory
# part_encoder: Computes the part features using mean pooling
# pos_encode: Adds positional encoding
# upsampler: Upsamples point cloud
# Segmentation_Loss: Cross entropy loss to assign each point to the Hungarian
    matched query.
for S in dataloader: # load a batch with B samples
   M = S # the memory is the un-augmented version
   S = augment(S) # the input is augmented
   # S : B x Np x 3 and M: B x Np x 3
   # Compute point features
   FˆS = pc_encoder(S) # B x N x C
   FˆM = pc_encoder(M) # B x N x C
      # Initialize memory part queries
      fˆM = part_encoder(FˆM) # B x P x C
      # Compute positional embedding
      x_pos = pos_encode(FˆS)
      y_pos = pos_encode(fˆM) # B x P x C
      Loss = 0
      # Do multiple layers of modulation using Self-Attn and Cross-Attn
      for layer in num_layers:
         x = Cross-Attn(x, y, x_pos, y_pos) # B x N x C
         y = Cross-Attn(y, x, y_pos, x_pos) # B x P x C
         x = Self-Attn(x, x_pos) # B x N x C
         y = Self-Attn(y, y_pos) # B x P x C
        X = upsampler(x) # B x Np x C
        point_query_similarity = matmul(normalize(X), normalize(y.T)) # B x Np x P
        Loss += Segmentation_Loss(argmax(point_query_similarity, -1), Xp(M))

      # optimizer step
      loss.backward()
      optimizer.step()


the most helpful (in terms of resulting ARI) memory for each input. All examined retrievers are
category-constrained, i.e., they have access to the object category of the input and retrieve an object
of the same category. Our conclusions are as follows: (i) Analogical Networks with an oracle
memory retriever perform better than Analogical Networks using memories retrieved by the
retriever. This suggests that better training of our retriever or exploring its co-training with the rest
of our model could have significant impact in improving its performance. (ii) Considering any of
the 5-shot exemplars randomly does worse than using memories retrieved by our retriever.



6.3     Q UALITATIVE P ERFORMANCE OF THE R ETRIEVER

We show qualitative results of the retriever on multiple classes, both seen (Figure 4) during training
and unseen (Figure 5). We observe the following: (i) The retriever considers fine-grained object
similarities and not only class information. To illustrate this, we include two examples for the
“Chair” and “Earphone” classes in Figure 4, as well as the “Bed” and “Refrigerator” classes in Figure
5. Different instances of the same category retrieve very different memories, that share both structural
and semantic similarities with the respective input point cloud. (ii) The retriever generalizes to
novel classes, not seen during training, as shown in Figure 5.


                                                   15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Algorithm 2: Pseudo code for cross-scene training of Analogical Networks
# S: input point cloud, M: retrieved memory point cloud, Np: numbers of points in
    S or M, N: sub-sampled points, C: number of feature channels, P: number of
    parts in M, target_classes: semantic classes of ground-truth parts of S
# Q: number of learnable scene-agnostic queries
# pc_encoder: point cloud encoder
# Xp_Hungarian: Hungarian matched label assignment of points in S to queries
# yp_Hungarian: Hungarian matched label assignment of queries to GT parts in S
# matched: indices of queries that have been matched to a ground-truth part
# part_encoder: Computes the part features using mean pooling
# pos_encode: Adds positional encoding
# upsampler: Upsamples point cloud
# Objectness_Loss: Binary cross entropy loss to decide which queries (scene-
    agnostic+learnable) would be responsible for decoding parts
# Segmentation_Loss: Cross entropy loss to assign each point to the hungarian
    matched query.
# Semantic_Loss: Cross entropy loss to map hungarian matched queries to semantic
    classes
for S,M in dataloader: # load a batch with B samples
   # S : B x Np x 3 and M: B x Np x 3
   # Compute point features
   FˆS = pc_encoder(S) # B x N x C
   FˆM = pc_encoder(M) # B x N x C

      # Initialize memory part queries
      fˆM = part_encoder(FˆM) # B x P x C
      # Compute positional embedding
      x_pos = pos_encode(FˆS)
      y = pos_encode(Concatenate(fˆM, scene_agnostic_queries)) # B x (P + Q) x C
      Loss = 0
      # Do multiple layers of modulation using Self-Attn and Cross-Attn
      for layer in num_layers:
         x = Cross-Attn(x, y, x_pos, y_pos) # B x N x C
         y = Cross-Attn(y, x, y_pos, x_pos) # B x P x C
         x = Self-Attn(x) # B x N x C
         y = Self-Attn(y) # B x P x C
        X = upsampler(x) # B x Np x C
        point_query_similarity = matmul(normalize(X), normalize(y.T)) # B x Np x (P +
             Q)

        Loss += Segmentation_Loss(armax(point_query_similarity, -1), Xp_Hungarian) +
             Objectness_Loss(y, yp_Hungarian) + Semantic_Loss(y[matched],
            target_classes)

      # optimizer step
      loss.backward()
      optimizer.step()



                                                                                      Novel Category:
                Method                    Fine-tuned?    Modulating Memory
                                                                                      5-shot ARI (↑)
                                                         Random category-constr.       48.5 ± 0.76
                                                         Retriever category-constr.    50.3 ± 1.12
 AnalogicalNets single-mem                      ✗        Oracle                        61.9 ± 1.22
                                                         Random category-constr.       53.5 ± 1.28
                                                         Retriever category-constr.    55.8 ± 1.16
 AnalogicalNets single-mem                     ✓         Oracle                        62.3 ± 0.66

Table 4: Ablations on ARI segmentation performance under varying retrieval schemes for
5-shot on 4 novel categories.


6.4     E VALUATION ON S CAN O BJECT NN DATASET (U Y ET AL ., 2019)

We test Analogical Networks on ScanObjectNN (Uy et al., 2019), which contains noisy and incom-
plete real-world point clouds. We split the training into 11 classes seen during training (bag, bin, box,
cabinet, chair, desk, door, pillow, shelf, sink, sofa) and 4 unseen (bed, display, table, toilet). Note


                                                    16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                            Base Categories                                                          Novel Categories
                    Storage                             Ear                             Trash
 Chair   Display               Bottle   Clock  Door            Faucet    Knife   Lamp           Vase   Table   Bed     Dishwasher       Refrigerator
                   Furniture                           phone                             Can
 6323     928        2269       436     554     225     228     648      327     2207    321    1076   8218    194         181              187


Table 5: Number of samples per category in the PartNet dataset (Mo et al., 2019). Note that
each sample has annotations for three levels of segmentation granularity.


that ScanObjectNN is not consistently labelled. For example, as we show in rows 5 and 6 of Figure
12, the legs of a chair may be annotated as a single part or multiple parts in the dataset. Although
the PartNet dataset provides the “level” information, there is no such information in ScanObjectNN.
Therefore we only qualitatively evaluate our model in Figure 12 for base classes and in Figure 13 for
novel classes. We can see that our predictions are always plausible and consistent with the retrieved
memory, even if the expected label space is different. We additionally visualize retrieval results in
Figure 14.

6.5      Q UALITATIVE R ESULTS FOR S INGLE -M EMORY AND M ULTI -M EMORY
         A NALOGICAL N ETWORKS

In this section, we show our model’s qualitative results for object parsing. In the Figures 6, 7, 8, 9,
10, 11, 12, 13 we use the following 5-column pattern:

         • Unlabelled input point cloud
         • Memory used for modulation
         • Object parsing generated using only the memory part queries (not the scene-agnostic queries).
           In this column, regions that are not decoded by a memory part query are colored in black.
         • Final predicted segmentation parsing using both memory-initialized queries and scene-
           agnostic queries. Regions that are colored in black in the third column but colored differently
           in the fourth column are decoded by scene-agnostic queries.
         • Input point cloud’s ground truth segmentation at the granularity level of the memory.

We qualitatively show the emergence of part correspondence between retrieved memory (column
2) and the input point cloud parsed using memory queries (column 3). Parts having the same color
in columns 2 and 3 demonstrate correspondence, i.e. a part in column 2 decodes the part with the
same color in column 3. Analogical Networks promote correspondence of parts on both base (Figure
6 bottom and 7) and novel (Figure 6 top and 8) categories. This correspondence is semantic but also
geometric, as can be seen in Figure 10. When multiple memories are available, Analogical Networks
mix and match parts of different memories to parse the input. Furthermore, we show parsing results
for AnalogicalNets single-mem w/o pretrain in Figure 11. We observe that all of
memory part query are inactive in the parsing stage. This demonstrates the utility of within-scene
pre-training, as without this pre-training part correspondence does not emerge, as shown in Figure
11. Lastly, we show that Analogical Networks generalize to noisy and incomplete point clouds in
ScanObjectNN.

6.6      A DDITIONAL RELATED WORK

Neural-symbolic models Analogical Networks are a type of neural-symbolic model that represents
knowledge explicitly, in terms of structured visual memories, where each one is a graph of part-
entity neural embeddings. A structured visual memory can be considered the neural equivalent of
a FRAME introduced in (Minsky, 1985), “a graph of nodes and their relations for representing
a stereotyped situation, like being in a certain kind of living room, or going to a child’s birthday
party”, to quote Minsky (1985). FRAME nodes would operate as “slots” to be filled with specific
entities, or symbols, in the visual scene. Symbol detection would be carried out by a separate state
estimation process such as general-purpose object detectors (Zhou et al., 2022), employed also by
recent neuro-symbolic models (Yi et al., 2018; Mao et al., 2019; Yi et al., 2019). In-the-wild detection
of symbols (e.g., chair handles, faucet tips, fridge doors) typically fails, which is the reason why
these earlier symbolic systems of knowledge, largely disconnected from the sensory input, have not
been widely adopted. Analogical Networks take a step towards addressing these shortcomings by


                                                                        17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


including symbol detection as part of inference itself, through a top-down modulation that uses the
context represented in the memory graph, to jointly search for multiple entities and localize them in
context of one another.
3D instance segmentation has been traditionally approached as a clustering problem (Chen et al.,
2009; Sidi et al., 2011). Point-based methods learn either translation vectors mapping every point
to its instance’s center (Jiang et al., 2020; Chen et al., 2021; Vu et al., 2022) or similarities across
points (Wang et al., 2018a; Zhang & Wonka, 2021), followed by one or more stages of clustering.
Similarly, (Wang et al., 2021; Jones et al., 2022) oversegment the point cloud into small regions and
then merge them into parts. Yu et al. (2019) recursively decompose a point cloud into segments of
finer resolution. (Mo et al., 2019; Sun et al., 2022) learn representative vectors that form clusters by
voting for each point. However, these approaches usually assume a fixed label space and need to train
a separate model for each sub-task. In contrast, we employ Detection Transformers (Carion et al.,
2020) for instance segmentation by repurposing the query vectors to act as representative vectors.
We extend this set of queries with memory-initialized queries, enabling in-context reasoning. This
allows us to train one model across all categories. As our results show, in absence of such memory
contextualization, training one model across multiple categories hurts generalization (Table 3).


                                                  18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Figure 4: Top-4 retrieved results for each input point cloud. Examples from base classes of PartNet
(Mo et al., 2019) dataset. Note that instances of the same category can retrieve different memories,
focusing on structural similarity and not only semantic.
                                                19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Figure 5: Top-4 retrieved results for each input point cloud. Examples from novel classes of PartNet
(Mo et al., 2019) dataset. Note that instances of the same category can retrieve different memories,
focusing on structural similarity and not only semantic. This behavior generalizes to novel classes as
well, even if the model has never seen such geometries before.


                                                 20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


          Figure 6: More qualitative object parsing results using Analogical Networks.


                                               21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


   Figure 7: More qualitative object parsing results that are predicted by Analogical Networks.


                                               22
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Figure 8: Qualitative results on novel category samples from PartNet dataset (Mo et al., 2019) using
Analogical Networks without fine-tuning.

                                                23
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Figure 9: Modulation using multi-memory Analogical Networks. Our model takes as input 5 different
memories simultaneously and then parses the object. Each row shows the effect of a different memory.
All memories decode simultaneously and we show which part each one decodes in the third column.
In the fourth column we show the combined predictions of all memories and scene-agnostic queries.


                                                24
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Figure 10: To qualitatively evaluate the effect of modulation in parsing, we modulate the input point
cloud with a different category object and show its corresponding object parsing that is predicted by
Analogical Networks. The model is able to generalize geometric correspondences across instances
of totally different classes, e.g. display and clock.


                                                 25
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Figure 11: We show the parsing of input point cloud using AnalogicalNets single-mem
w/o pretrain. Most regions are black in column 3, denoting that memory part queries do not
decode anything and everything is being decoded by scene-agnostic queries. This highlights the role
of within-scene pre-training for the emergence of part correspondence.


                                                26
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Figure 12: Results on base category samples from ScanObjectNN (Uy et al., 2019) using
Analogical Networks.

                                               27
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Figure 13: Results on novel category samples from ScanObjectNN (Uy et al., 2019) using
Analogical Networks.


Figure 14: Top-4 retrieved results for the input point cloud from ScanObjectNN (Uy et al., 2019)
dataset.


                                               28
