Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


T IER BALANCING : T OWARDS DYNAMIC FAIRNESS
OVER U NDERLYING C AUSAL FACTORS

 Zeyu Tang1 , Yatong Chen2 , Yang Liu2 , and Kun Zhang1,3
 1
   Department of Philosophy, Carnegie Mellon University
 2
   Computer Science and Engineering Department, University of California, Santa Cruz
 3
   Machine Learning Department, Mohamed bin Zayed University of Artificial Intelligence
  zeyutang@cmu.edu, ychen592@ucsc.edu, yangliu@ucsc.edu, kunz1@cmu.edu



                                             A BSTRACT
          The pursuit of long-term fairness involves the interplay between decision-making
         and the underlying data generating process. In this paper, through causal modeling
         with a directed acyclic graph (DAG) on the decision-distribution interplay, we
         investigate the possibility of achieving long-term fairness from a dynamic perspec-
         tive. We propose Tier Balancing, a technically more challenging but more natural
         notion to achieve in the context of long-term, dynamic fairness analysis. Different
         from previous fairness notions that are defined purely on observed variables, our
         notion goes one step further, capturing behind-the-scenes situation changes on
         the unobserved latent causal factors that directly carry out the influence from the
         current decision to the future data distribution. Under the specified dynamics, we
         prove that in general one cannot achieve the long-term fairness goal only through
         one-step interventions. Furthermore, in the effort of approaching long-term fair-
         ness, we consider the mission of “getting closer to” the long-term fairness goal and
         present possibility and impossibility results accordingly.


1    I NTRODUCTION
The long-term fairness endeavor inevitably involves the interplay between decision policies and the
underlying data generating process: when deriving a decision-making system, one usually makes
use of data at hand; when we deploy such a system, the decision would impact how data will look in
the future (Perdomo et al., 2020; Liu et al., 2021). To understand why and how a data distribution
responds to decision-making strategies, the investigation has to resort to causal modeling. The pursuit
of long-term fairness, in turn, should also consider the changes in the underlying causal factors.
Various fairness notions with different flavors have been proposed in the literature: associative
fairness notions that capture the correlation or dependence between variables, e.g., Demographic
Parity (Calders et al., 2009), Equalized Odds (Hardt et al., 2016); causal fairness notions that involve
modeling causal relations between variables, e.g., Counterfactual Fairness (Kusner et al., 2017;
Russell et al., 2017), Path-Specific Counterfactual Fairness (Chiappa, 2019; Wu et al., 2019), Causal
Multi-Level Fairness (Mhasawade & Chunara, 2021). The previously proposed fairness notions
are with respect to a snapshot of the static reality, and do not have a built-in capacity to model the
distribution-decision interplay in the long-term fairness pursuit.
In the effort of enforcing fairness in the dynamic setting, researchers have approached the problem
from different angles: they provide causal modeling for fairness notions (Creager et al., 2020), analyze
the delayed impact or downstream effect on utilities (Liu et al., 2018; Heidari et al., 2019; Kannan
et al., 2019; Nilforoshan et al., 2022), enforce fairness in sequential or online decision-making (Joseph
et al., 2016; Liu et al., 2017; Hashimoto et al., 2018; Heidari & Krause, 2018; Bechavod et al., 2019),
investigate the relation between the long-term population qualification and fair decisions (Zhang
et al., 2020), take into consideration the user behavior/action when deriving a decision policy (Zhang
et al., 2019; Ustun et al., 2019; Miller et al., 2020; von Kügelgen et al., 2022), provide fairness
transferability guarantee across domains (Schumann et al., 2019; Singh et al., 2021), or derive robust
fair predictors (Coston et al., 2019; Rezaei et al., 2021). The proposed dynamic fairness enforcing


                                                   1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


procedures usually limit their scope of consideration to only observed variables, and the fairness
audit is performed directly on the decision or statistics defined on observed data.
In order to have a built-in capacity to capture the influence from the current decision to future data
distributions, and more importantly, to induce a fair future in the long run, in this paper, we propose
Tier Balancing, a long-term fairness notion that characterizes the interplay between decision-making
and data dynamics through a detailed causal modeling with a directed acyclic graph (DAG). For
example, the latent socio-economic status (whose estimation can be the output of a FICO credit score
model), although not directly measurable, plays an important role in credit applications. We are
motivated by the goal of inducing a fair future by actually balancing the inherent socio-economic
status, i.e., the “tier”, of agents from different groups. We summarize our contributions as follows:
           • We formulate Tier Balancing, a fairness notion from the dynamic and long-term perspective
             that characterizes the decision-distribution interplay with a detailed causal modeling over
             both observed variables and latent causal factors.
           • Under the specified data dynamics, we prove that in general, one cannot directly achieve the
             long-term fairness goal only through a one-step intervention, i.e., static decision-making.
           • We consider the possibility of getting closer to the long-term fairness goal through a sequence
             of algorithmic interventions, and present possibility and impossibility results derived from
             the one-step analysis of the decision-distribution interplay.

2       P ROBLEM S ETUP
In this section, we present the formulation of the problem of interest. We first demonstrate in
Section 2.1 a detailed causal modeling of the interplay between decision-making and data dynamics.
Then in Section 2.2, we formulate Tier Balancing, a long-term fairness notion that captures the
decision-distribution interplay with the presented causal modeling.

2.1       C AUSAL M ODELING OF D ECISION -D ISTRIBUTION I NTERPLAY ON DAG

Let us denote the time step as T with domain of value N+ . At time step T , let us denote the protected
feature as AT with domain of value A = {0, 1}, additional feature(s) as XT,i with domain of
value Xi , the (unmeasured) underlying causal factor HT (we call it “tier”) with domain of value
H = (0, 1], the (unobserved) ground truth label YT(ori) and the observed label YT(obs) , with domain of
value Y = {0, 1}, and the decision DT with domain of value D = {0, 1}. Figure 1 shows the causal
modeling of the interplay between decision-making and underlying data generating processes, which
involves multiple dynamics (from T = t to T = t + 1).1

Underlying data dynamics (stationary components) Considering the fact that the underlying
data dynamics are relatively stable with respect to the timescale of decision-making (e.g., the societal
changes happen at a much larger time scale compared to a particular credit application decision), we
assume that processes governing how (Yt(ori) , Xt,i ) are generated from (Ht , At ) for each individual
in the population are stationary and do not change over different T = t. We also assume that the
underlying data generating process that governs how Ht+1 is updated from (Ht , Yt(ori) , Dt ) across
                                                                                (obs)               (ori)
time steps is stationary, and so are the process governing the observation of Yt+1    given (Dt , Yt+1    )
and the process governing the update of At+1 from At .
The tier Ht fully captures the individual’s key property that is directly relevant to the scenario of
interest, and therefore is the cause of Yt(ori) and Xt,i ’s instead of the other way around. For example,
the improvement in the socio-economic status can be reflected through an increase in income, while
manipulating one’s income only by changing the recorded number does not affect the actual ability
to repay the loan. The determination of causal direction aligns with causal modelings in previous
literature (see, e.g., Zhang et al. 2020).

Decision-making dynamics (non-stationary components) The institution (decision maker) as-
signs decision Dt to each individual according to the observed features (At , Xt,i ) and the outcome
    1
        Due to the space limit, we provide additional discussions on decision-distribution interplay in Appendix B.1.


                                                           2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                       T =t−1                          T =t                     T =t+1
              At−1          Ht−1           Ht                  At               Ht+1             At+1

                              (ori)           (ori)                               (ori)
               ···          Yt−1          Yt          Xt,1 Xt,2 Xt,3            Yt+1             ···

                                           (obs)                                  (obs)
               θt−1         Dt−1         Yt               θt        Dt          Yt+1             θt+1

Figure 1: The causal modeling of the decision-distribution interplay. The circle (diamond) indicates
          that the corresponding variable (underlying factor) is unobservable.


record Yt(obs) . The interpretation of the aforementioned variables depends on the problem at hand.
For instance, in the credit application scenario where Dt denotes the application decision (approval
or denial), we can interpret the latent tier Ht as the underlying socio-economic status of an individual.
Since the decision-making strategy can vary across different time steps, we explicitly introduce
the underlying factor θt (e.g., a hyperparameter or an auxiliary variable) to indicate such (possible)
non-stationary property of decision-making. The causal path from θt to θt+1 indicates the similarity
between decision-making strategies as time goes by (e.g., the continuing interest on utility), although
strategies themselves are not necessarily identical across different time steps.
We interpret the variable Yt(ori) as “whether or not one would repay the loan were he/she approved the
credit at T = t − 1 (which might not be the case in reality)”. The variable Yt(obs) is observed only
if this individual actually got approved at T = t − 1, i.e., Dt−1 = 1. We distinguish between the
underlying ground truth Yt(ori) and the observed record Yt(obs) because of their different roles in the
decision-distribution interplay. On the one hand, only Yt(obs) is observed and therefore accessible to
the decision maker (e.g., for training and evaluation). On the other, since the potential outcome Yt(ori)
reflects individual’s inherent characteristic, which is not directly relevant to whether it is observable,
Yt(ori) is utilized when the underlying data generating process specifies the update from Ht to Ht+1 .

2.2      T HE N OTION OF T IER BALANCING

Definition 2.1 (K-Step Tier Balancing). Under the specified dynamics, starting from any time step
T and a given K ≥ 0, let us denote a sequence of K decision-making strategies as DT :T +K−1 :=
{DT , ..., DT +K−1 } (an empty set if K = 0), and the latest hidden tier after K-step decision-making
as HT +K . We say DT :T +K−1 satisfies K-Step Tier Balancing, if at T + K the following condition
holds true (where “⊥⊥” denotes statistical independence):
                 ⊥ AT +K , where HT +K is updated from (HT , YT(ori)
           HT +K ⊥                                                    :T +K−1 , DT :T +K−1 ).      (1)
Equation 1 captures the statistical consequence in the future (in the form of an associative relationship)
induced by the interplay between the underlying data dynamics and decision-making policies along
the way. The causal modeling is essential in capturing our long-term fairness goal, since the attainment
of Tier Balancing is an induced outcome of a sequence of K decision-making strategies DT :T +K−1
(which are indispensable although the fairness notion itself is not explicitly defined on decisions).
Our Tier Balancing notion of algorithmic fairness is distinguished from previously proposed fairness
notions in several important ways.2 To begin with, Tier Balancing has a built-in dynamic flavor,
whose definition involves variables that span across multiple time steps. Therefore the audit of
Tier Balancing inevitably requires long-term and dynamic analysis, which is very different from
previously proposed (both associative and causal) fairness notions defined with respect to a static
snapshot of reality (e.g., Calders et al., 2009; Hardt et al., 2016; Kusner et al., 2017; Chiappa, 2019).
Besides, considering the fact that the decision-distribution interplay often involves situation changes
in the hidden causal factors, Tier Balancing extends the scope of fairness consideration beyond only
observed variables to hidden causal factors, which makes our notion a technically more challenging
but more natural long-term fairness goal to achieve. The endeavor to explore the possibility of
defining fairness in terms of latent causal factors is not an unrealistic fantasy. Recent advances in
causal discovery literature have established identifiability results (under certain assumptions) on
   2
       Due to the space limit, we provide detailed discussions on related works in Appendix A.


                                                          3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


causal structures among latent variables (Xie et al., 2020; Adams et al., 2021; Kivva et al., 2021; Xie
et al., 2022), which provide not only a theoretical justification, but also an indication of the potential,
for our effort in exploring long-term fairness endeavor through modeling latent causal factors.
Furthermore, although Tier Balancing is not directly defined in terms of the decisions themselves,
Tier Balancing is characterized with a detailed causal modeling that involves both decision-making
and data dynamics. The explicit causal modeling of the decision-distribution interplay offers both
challenges and opportunities for more principled fairness inquiries in the long-term, dynamic context
(Hu & Chen, 2018; Liu et al., 2018; Mouzannar et al., 2019; Heidari et al., 2019; Zhang et al., 2020).
In Definition 2.1, we specify the step K at which Tier Balancing is evaluated. If K = 0, i.e.,
HT ⊥  ⊥ AT happens to be attained initially (although in general it may not be the case), Tier Balancing
is attained at the beginning.3 When HT ⊥   ̸ ⊥ AT and K ≥ 1, K-Step Tier Balancing is achieved with
respect to the underlying causal factor HT +K .

3       C HARACTERIZING T IER BALANCING
In Section 2, we propose a detailed causal modeling of the interplay between decision-making and
underlying data generating processes, based on which we formulate a novel long-term fairness notion
Tier Balancing. Our model is applicable to a wide range of resource allocation scenarios, e.g., hiring
practice (Hu & Chen, 2018; Kannan et al., 2019), credit application (Liu et al., 2018), predictive
policing (Ensign et al., 2018; Elzayn et al., 2019).
For the clarity of discussion, in this section we consider a running example of credit application where
agents in a fixed population repeatedly apply for credit. We first demonstrate how one can apply the
proposed causal modeling in the credit application scenario in Section 3.1. Then in Section 3.2, we
characterize the Single-step Tier Imbalance Reduction (STIR) term for the purpose of conducting
one-step analysis on the Tier Balancing notion of long-term fairness.

3.1       M ODELING D ETAIL OF D ECISION -D ISTRIBUTION I NTERPLAY

As shown in Figure 1, the unmeasured latent causal factor Ht (the hidden socio-economic status) is
the actual root cause of the ground truth label Yt(ori) as well as the (possibly) observed label Yt(obs) (the
repayment record). For any given tier Ht = ht , let us assume that the unobserved ground truth Yt(ori)
is sampled from a Bernoulli distribution with ht as the success probability, and that the observed
repayment record Yt(obs) depends on both the ground truth label Yt(ori) and the previously received
decision Dt−1 :

                            = Yt(ori)    if Dt−1 = 1,
                  Yt(obs)                                  where Yt(ori) ∼ Bernoulli(ht ).                (2)
                            is undefined if Dt−1 = 0,

From Equation 2 we can see that Yt(obs) is a masked copy of Yt(ori) (masked by Dt−1 ), and we have
the following proposition capturing the property of the marginal distribution of Yt(obs) :
Proposition 3.1. At time step T = t, for any Ht = ht ∈ (0, 1], under the specified dynamics, among
the population where ground truth is actually observable, i.e., Yt(obs) is not undefined, we have:
                                             Yt(obs) ∼ Bernoulli(ht ).

Proposition 3.1 captures the fact that among the population where repayment record Yt(obs) is observed,
the marginal distributions of Yt(obs) and Yt(ori) are actually identical. This property indicates that
although one does not have access to the unobserved tier, i.e., the socio-economic status H, one can
still use the observed Y (obs) as a bridge to infer its behavior.
Fact 3.2. Let A be the domain of value for the protected feature At , and E be the domain of value for
all other exogenous noise terms Et . For each time step T = t, we can represent Dt , Yt(ori) , and Ht
                       (ori)                                                       (ori)
via functions gtD , gtY , and ft respectively, where gtD : A × E → {0, 1}, gtY : A × E → {0, 1},
                                                                  (ori)
and ft : A × E → (0, 1], i.e., Dt = gtD (At , Et ), Yt(ori) = gtY (At , Et ), and Ht = ft (At , Et ).
    3
        In Appendix B.2, we analyze the scenario in which Tier Balancing is initially satisfied.


                                                          4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Notice that Fact 3.2 represents variables Dt , Yt(ori) , and Ht with functions of all root causes (including
the protected feature At and exogenous noise terms Et ) in the system without explicitly specifying the
respective functional forms, which may depend on further assumptions on the joint distribution and
the time step T = t.4 Fact 3.2 is a direct result of representing causal relations with a functional causal
model (FCM) (Spirtes et al., 1993; Pearl, 2009), and is for the purpose of notational convenience in
later analysis.5
Assumption 3.3 (Multiplicative update of underlying tier). Let αD , αY ∈ [0, 12 ) be the parameters
that capture the influences from current decision Dt and ground truth Yt(ori) to next step:

                   Ht+1 = min 1, Ht · 1 + αD (2Dt − 1) + αY (2Yt(ori) − 1) .                    (3)

Assumption 3.3 states that Ht+1 treats Ht as a baseline, with increase or decrease in a multiplicative
form based on agent’s received decision and repayment information. We are inspired by the evolution
theory where multiplicative updates have been a common modeling choice to capture updates in
relevant statistics (Friedman & Sinervo, 2016; Dawkins & Davis, 2017). The explicit dependency
on the update parameters, αD and αY , related to Dt and Yt(ori) respectively, characterizes the two
important aspects of our model: the update in individuals’ tier potentially depends on the received
decision Dt , as well as the ground truth Yt(ori) (even if unobserved).6 The condition αD , αY ∈ [0, 12 )
makes sure that Ht+1 > 0, and the min{·, 1} operation makes sure that Ht+1 is upper-capped by 1.
In practical scenarios where agents repetitively apply for resource (e.g., in our running example of
credit application) at each time step T = t, with the entire group remains unchanged, we have:
Assumption 3.4. The protected feature at time step T = t + 1 is an identical copy of that at T = t:
                                           ∀ T = t : At+1 = At .                                              (4)

3.2     O NE - STEP A NALYSIS T OWARDS T IER BALANCING

In Definition 2.1 we established the long-term fairness goal. Considering the dynamic property of
this fairness notion, apart from defining “what exactly is fair in the long run”, in order to bridge the
cognitive gap we also need to clarify the meaning of “getting closer to the long-term fairness goal”,
i.e., achieving the long-term fairness goal through a sequence of algorithmic interventions. In this
section, we present the one-step theoretical analysis framework and characterize the Single-step Tier
Imbalance Reduction (STIR) term ∆STIR |t+1 t   for the purpose of investigating Tier Balancing.

3.2.1    S INGLE - STEP T IER I MBALANCE R EDUCTION (STIR)
Recall that the long-term fairness objective is the independence between the protected feature AT
and the hidden tier HT = fT (AT , ET ) (at a time step T ). Equivalently, we would like HT to not be
a function of AT . We can view fT (0, ET ) and fT (1, ET ) as two dependent random variables, and
quantify the amount of “getting closer to the long-term fairness goal” by comparing the absolute
difference between fT (0, ET ) and fT (1, ET ) before (when T = t) and after (when T = t + 1)
one-step update, and see if the gap decreases. Since the individual-level exogenous noise term ET is
the input, this comparison of absolute differences is on the individual level. Therefore in order to
quantitatively characterize the overall amount of “getting closer to the long-term fairness goal”, we
need to take into account different possible combinations of decision Dt and outcome Yt(ori) (when
T = t) for each individual, and aggregate the individual-level comparisons over the population.
                                        (ori)
Given combinations of D         t and Yt , when Et = ϵ, we denote the conditional joint probability density
of ft (0, Et ), ft (1, Et ) as qt ft (0, ϵ), ft (1, ϵ) | d, d′ , y, y ′ := qt ft (0, ϵ), ft (1, ϵ) | gtD (0, ϵ) =
                        (ori)                 (ori)
d, gtD (1, ϵ) = d′ , gtY (0, ϵ) = y, gtY (1, ϵ) = y ′ , and calculate the Single-step Tier Imbalance
Reduction (STIR) term from T = t to T = t + 1, denoted by ∆STIR |t+1          t   , as following:7
   4
      We implicitly adopt the assumption that the protected feature itself is not caused by other variables.
   5
      In Appendix B.3, we discuss the role of exogenous terms Et in Fact 3.2.
    6
      In Assumption 3.3 we explicitly specify that we are considering Yt(ori) instead of Yt(obs) . At T = t, every
individual has a binary ground truth Yt(ori) . However, it might not be the case that everyone has an observable
Yt(obs) (since Yt(obs) is undefined for an individual if its Dt−1 = 0).


                                                        5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


    ∆STIR |t+1
           t   := E [ |ft+1 (0, Et+1 ) − ft+1 (1, Et+1 )| ] − E [ |ft (0, Et ) − ft (1, Et )| ]
            X                           Z  Z
                             ′     ′

    =               Pt (d, d , y, y ) ·           qt ft (0, ϵ), ft (1, ϵ) | d, d′ , y, y ′                       (5)
         d,d′ ,y,y ′ ∈{0,1}                 ϵ∈E    ξ∈E

        · |φt+1 (ξ)| − |φt (ϵ)| · 1{φt+1 (ξ) = Gt (ft , gtD , gtY ; d, d′ , y, y ′ , ϵ, αD , αY )}dξdϵ,
                                                                          (ori)



where φt (ϵ) := ft (0, ϵ) − ft (1, ϵ), Gt is a function whose value only relies on the information
available at time step T = t, and Pt (d, d′ , y, y ′ ) is the joint distribution of (d, d′ , y, y ′ ):
                                                                           (ori)            (ori)
   Pt (d, d′ , y ′ , y ′ ) := Pt gtD (0, Et ) = d, gtD (1, Et ) = d′ , gtY (0, Et ) = y, gtY (1, Et ) = y ′ .
We can then characterize “getting closer to long-term fairness goal” via the inequality ∆STIR |t+1
                                                                                               t   < 0.

3.2.2     S IMPLIFICATION A SSUMPTIONS
From Equation 5 we can see that the calculation of ∆STIR |t+1        t  requires knowledge about the gap
comparison for each individual |φt+1 (et+1 )| − |φt (et )|, the conditional joint density before one-step
dynamics qt ft (0, ϵ), ft (1, ϵ) | d, d′ , y, y ′ , and the joint probability for different combinations of
decision and ground truth before one-step dynamics Pt (d, d′ , y, y ′ ). In order to quantitatively analyze
the property of ∆STIR |t+1
                        t   , it is essential that we have access to all three aforementioned quantities.
To begin with, we need to know the instantiations of φt+1 (et+1 ) given φt (et ) under the specified
dynamics. Luckily, as we have illustrated in Table 4, Table 5, and Table 6 of Appendix, under the
specified dynamics we can list all possible cases of the term φt+1 (et+1 ) given φt (et ).
Besides, we
    ′      ′
               need additional knowledge on the conditional joint density qt ft (0, ϵ), ft (1, ϵ) |
d, d , y, y . For the purpose of better elaboration, we present two assumptions on the behavior
of this conditional joint density – a qualitative assumption and a quantitative assumption:
Assumption 3.5 (Qualitative assumption). For any time step T = t and any exogenous term
                                      (ori)                    (ori)
Et = ϵ ∈ E, let us denote y = gtY (0, ϵ) and y ′ = gtY (1, ϵ). The following inequalities hold:

                 Pt ft (0, ϵ) > ft (1, ϵ) | y > y ′ > Pt ft (0, ϵ) < ft (1, ϵ) | y > y ′ ,
                                                                                                                  (6)
                 Pt ft (0, ϵ) < ft (1, ϵ) | y < y ′ > Pt ft (0, ϵ) > ft (1, ϵ) | y < y ′ .
Assumption 3.6 (Quantitative assumption). On top of Assumption                        3.5, let us further assume that
the conditional joint density qt ft (0, ϵ), ft (1, ϵ) | d, d′ , y, y ′ satisfies the following condition:
                                                         ( (up)
                                              ′      ′
                                                            γdd′ yy′ if ft (0, ϵ) ≤ ft (1, ϵ)
                qt ft (0, ϵ), ft (1, ϵ) | d, d , y, y =       (low)
                                                                                                     ,            (7)
                                                            γdd    ′ yy ′   if ft (0, ϵ) > ft (1, ϵ)
       (low)        (up)           (low)       (up)               ′       (low)       (up)               ′
where γdd ′ yy ′ + γdd′ yy ′ = 2, γdd′ yy ′ < γdd′ yy ′ when y < y , and γdd′ yy ′ > γdd′ yy ′ when y > y .


Assumption 3.5 is rather mild, stating that for any given exogenous noise term (of an individual)
Et = et , whenever the ground truth Yt(ori) favors certain demographic group, it is more likely that the
underlying tier also favors the same group. Assumption 3.6 is just a special case of Assumption 3.5,
with quantitative characteristics built-in for technical purposes.8
Lastly, we need to know the (behavior of) joint probability density Pt (d, d′ , y, y ′ ) for all combina-
tions of (d, d′ , y, y ′ ). In fact, as we shall see in Section 4, when taking into consideration certain
characteristics of the predictor, the joint probability Pt (d, d′ , y, y ′ ) would follow some patterns that
can simplify the analysis.

4       O NE - STEP A NALYSIS T OWARDS THE L ONG - TERM FAIRNESS G OAL
In this section, we consider the possibility of attaining the long-term fairness goal with (a sequence of)
one-step interventions. We first present a negative result that in general one cannot hope to achieve the
long-term fairness goal through a single one-step intervention, i.e., static decision-making. In light of
this result, we further investigate the possibility of getting closer to the long-term fairness goal with a
sequence of one-step interventions, and present possibility and impossibility results accordingly.
    7
    The details of the derivation can be found in Appendix B.4.
    8
    In Appendix B.5, we present illustrative figures to demonstrate the connection between qualitative and
quantitative assumptions.


                                                         6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


4.1     T HE G ENERAL I MPOSSIBILITY OF ACHIEVING 1-S TEP T IER BALANCING

In the following theorem, we prove that it is in general impossible to achieve Ht+1 ⊥        ⊥ At+1 when
initially Ht ⊥
             ̸ ⊥ At , i.e., in general we cannot achieve Tier Balancing with a single one-step intervention.
Theorem 4.1. Let us consider the general situation where both Dt and Yt(ori) are dependent with At ,
         ̸ ⊥ At , Yt(ori) ⊥
i.e., Dt ⊥                ̸ ⊥ At . Then under Fact 3.2, Assumption 3.3, and Assumption 3.4, as well as the
specified dynamics, when Ht ⊥        ̸ ⊥ At , only if at least one of the following conditions holds true for all
et ∈ E can we possibly attain Ht+1 ⊥          ⊥ At+1 :
      (1) The ratio fftt (0,e  t)
                           (1,et ) has a specific domain of value fftt (1,e
                                                                        (0,et )
                                                                            t)
                                                                                = 1±αD ±αY
                                                                                  1±αD ±αY ;
      (2) Positive (negative) label is exclusive to the advantaged (disadvantaged) group, and everyone
           receives a positive decision (if αD > αY );
      (3) Negative (positive) labels only appear in the advantaged (disadvantaged) group, and every-
           one receives a positive decision (if αD > αY );
      (4) Everyone has a positive label, but the positive decision is exclusive to the advantaged group
           (if αD < αY );
      (5) Everyone has a positive label, but the positive decision is exclusive to the disadvantaged
           group (if αD < αY ).
Theorem 4.1 lists all possible ways to directly achieve the long-term fairness goal (under the specified
condition). As we can see that all of these conditions are rather restrictive: Condition (1) imposes
strong conditions on the functional form of f (·). In particular, when ft (0, et ), ft (1, et ) are both
continuous random variables with non-zero density everywhere on the support (0, 1], the ratio is still
a continuous random variable (because the density is simply an integral over positive multiplications).
We can see that the event specified in Condition (1) is a zero-measure one. Conditions (2-5) all require
trivial decision-making policies. Therefore, in general one cannot directly achieve the long-term
fairness goal. We need to consider the possibility of approaching the goal step-by-step.

4.2     P OSSIBILITY OF G ETTING C LOSER TO T IER BALANCING VIA O NE - STEP I NTERVENTIONS

In Section 4.1, we have seen that under the specified dynamics, single one-step intervention is in
general not enough in order to achieve long-term fairness. In this section, we investigate if certain
strategy can get closer to the long-term fairness goal through a sequence of algorithmic interventions.
If we follow the same principle to derive the decision-making policy from the data at each time step,
one-step analysis suffices for the purpose of studying the interplay between decision and distribution.

4.2.1    O NE - STEP A NALYSIS ON P ERFECT P REDICTOR
In this section, we consider the perfect predictor, where the predicted output equals to the underlying
ground truth, i.e., Dt = Yt(ori) . The output of the perfect predictor Dt is fully specified by the value
of ground truth Yt(ori) , and therefore is conditionally independent from the protected feature At given
Yt(ori) . Based on the definition of Equalized Odds (Hardt et al., 2016), the prefect predictor is also the
best possible Equalized Odds predictor (at time step t) with an accuracy of 100%.
Furthermore, the joint probability Pt (d, d′ , y, y ′ ) for a perfect predictor is not always positive for
any possible combination of (d, d′ , y, y ′ ). We have the following sufficient condition for this joint
probability to be zero:
                            d ̸= y, or d′ ̸= y ′ =⇒ Pt (d, d′ , y, y ′ ) = 0.                          (8)
With the help of this additional knowledge on the joint probability Pt (d, d′ , y, y ′ ), we can quanti-
tatively analyze the Single-step Tier Imbalance Reduction (STIR) term ∆STIR |t+1       t  and present the
following impossibility result for the perfect predictor:
Theorem 4.2. Let us consider the general situation where both Dt and Yt(ori) are dependent with At ,
         ̸ ⊥ At , Yt(ori) ⊥
i.e., Dt ⊥                ̸ ⊥ At . Under Fact 3.2, Assumption 3.3, and Assumption 3.4, and Assumption 3.6,
as well as the specified dynamics, when Ht ⊥       ̸ ⊥ At , the perfect predictor does not have the potential to
get closer to the long-term fairness goal after one-step intervention, i.e.,
                                                      (Perfect Predictor) t+1
                               Dt = Yt(ori) =⇒ ∆STIR                      t
                                                                              > 0.                           (9)

Compared to Theorem 4.1 that one in general cannot directly attain the long-term fairness goal
(balanced tier) through a one-step intervention, Theorem 4.2 provides further insights regarding


                                                       7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                                                                                   0.8
                                                       T =t           T = t + 20                                                                 T =t           T = t + 20
        0.6                                  0.5
                             A=0                                                                                       A=0


                                   Density


                                                                                                                             Density
                                                                                       A           0.6                                 0.5                                       A


    H


                                                                                               H
                             A=1                                                                                       A=1
                                                                                           0                                                                                         0
        0.4                                                                                        0.4
                                             0.0                                           1                                           0.0                                           1
                                                   0          1   0                1                                                         0          1   0                1
              0     10        20                        H                 H                              0    10        20                        H                 H
                         T                                                                                         T

              (a) the latent causal factor H is sampled from                                             (b) the latent causal factor H is sampled from
                  truncated-Gaussian distributions                                                           Uniform distributions

Figure 2: Illustration of the interplay between decision with perfect predictors and data dynamics (20
          steps) on simulated data, with different initialization of tier Ht .


what mission is possible through repetitive one-step interventions. In particular, under relatively
mild assumptions, Theorem 4.2 establishes the impossibility of even getting closer to the long-term
fairness goal through one-step interventions with the perfect predictor.

4.2.2             O NE - STEP A NALYSIS ON C OUNTERFACTUAL FAIR P REDICTOR
In this section, we consider the Counterfactual Fair (Kusner et al., 2017) predictor. Similar to the
one-step analysis on perfect predictors, we need to make use of the characteristic of Counterfactual
Fair predictors to simplify the quantitative analysis on the term ∆STIR |t+1
                                                                         t   .
The definition of Counterfactual Fairness requires the predictor to satisfy gtD (0, Et ) = gtD (1, Et )
within each time step T = t. Therefore, we have the following sufficient condition for the joint
probability Pt (d, d′ , y, y ′ ) to be zero:
                                             d ̸= d′ =⇒ Pt (d, d′ , y, y ′ ) = 0.                                (10)
                                                                                        (ori)
Theorem 4.3. Let us consider the general situation where both Dt and Yt                       are dependent with At ,
         ̸ ⊥ At , Yt(ori) ⊥
i.e., Dt ⊥                ̸ ⊥ At . Let us further assume that the data dynamics satisfies αD ∈ (0, 12 ), αY = 0.
Then under Fact 3.2, Assumption 3.3, Assumption 3.4, and Assumption 3.6, as well as the specified
dynamics, when Ht ⊥          ̸ ⊥ At , it is possible for the Counterfactual Fair predictor to get closer to the
long-term fairness goal after one-step intervention, if certain properties of the data dynamics and the
predictor
            behavior are satisfied simultaneously, i.e.,
    gtD (0, Et ) = gtD (1, Et ), Pt (1,1,0,1)+Pt (1,1,1,0) < 27
                                            Pt (0,0,0,1)+Pt (0,0,1,0)
                                                                      8           (Counterfactual Fair) t+1
                                                    1                       =⇒ ∆STIR                        < 0. (11)
    αD ∈ P            t (1,1,0,1)+Pt (1,1,1,0) 3
                      Pt (0,0,0,1)+Pt (0,0,1,0)
                                                             1
                                                       − 1, 2 , αY = 0                                  t

Theorem 4.3 demonstrates the possibility (not guarantee) of getting closer to the long-term fairness
goal through one-step interventions (under certain conditions) with Counterfactual Fair predictors.
Compared to the general impossibility results for perfect predictors (Theorem 4.2), there are additional
requirements (on both data dynamics and Pt (d, d′ , y, y ′ )) accompanying the possibility result for
Counterfactual Fair predictors. That being said, Theorem 4.3 clearly illustrates that the understanding
of data dynamics through a detailed causal modeling, combined with a suitable decision-making
strategy, can provide us with a promising way to approach the long-term dynamic fairness goal
(K-Step Tier Balancing with K > 1), step by step.

5       E XPERIMENTS
In this section, we present experimental results on both simulated and real-world FICO data set
from Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (US) (2007).9 In the sequence of decision-
distribution interplay, the latent causal factor HT is updated according to the specified dynamics
(Equation 3) at each time step. The output of the decision policy (at each time step) depends on the
specific scenario. In particular, we consider perfect predictors and Counterfactual Fair (Kusner et al.,
2017, Level 1 implementation) predictors.

5.1           D ECISION WITH P ERFECT P REDICTORS ON S IMULATED DATA

In Figure 2 we present the 20-step interplay between decision and the underlying data generating
process on the simulated data. The distributions of Ht for different groups are initialized with
    9
        Our code repository is available on Github: https://github.com/zeyutang/TierBalancing.


                                                                                               8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


    1.00
                                            0.75


                                     ACC
    0.75                                                                                       T =t                  T = t + 20
                                            0.50
H                                                       0   10     20             0.4                                                   A
    0.50


                                                                        Density
                                                            T                                                                               0
                                                                                                                                            Black


                                      PA(D = 1)
                                                  1.0
    0.25                                                                          0.2                                                       1
                                                                                                                                            Asian
                                                  0.5                                                                                       2
                                                                                                                                            Hispanic
    0.00                                                                          0.0                                                       3
                                                                                                                                            White
           0       10           20                      0   10     20                   0.0     0.5      1.0   0.0      0.5       1.0
                   T                                        T                                    H                       H
(a) the trend of the changing        (b) the accuracy (top) and approval                (c) the distribution of the underlying hidden tier H among
    tier H at different step             rate (bottom) for different groups                 groups at time step T = t (left) and T = t + 20 (right)

Figure 3: Illustration of the interplay between decision with Counterfactual Fair predictors and the
          data dynamics (20 steps) on the credit score data set. Panel (a) and (b) present the step-by-
          step tracks of update in tier, accuracy, and approval rates for different groups; panel (c)
          presents group-conditioned distributions of tier before (left) and after (right) 20 steps of
          interventions. The legend is shared across panel (a), (b), and (c).


truncated Gaussian distributions and Uniform distributions, respectively. During each time step T = t
we generate ground truth labels Yt(ori) according to data dynamics specified in Section 3.1 and set the
decision Dt to be equal to the ground truth Yt(ori) (perfect predictor as the decision-making policy);
then the pair of (Yt(ori) , Dt ) are utilized by the data dynamics to determine the tier Ht+1 for next step.
As we can see from the left-hand-side figures in panels (a) and (b), the gap between tier for different
groups is enlarged as the time goes by. This indicates that interventions through decision with perfect
predictors did not get closer to the long-term fairness goal.

5.2        D ECISION WITH C OUNTERFACTUAL FAIR P REDICTORS ON C REDIT S CORE DATA

The FICO credit score data set contains 301,536 records of TransUnion credit score from 2003 (Board
of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (US), 2007). In the preprocessed credit score data set
(Hardt et al., 2016), we convert the cumulative distribution function (CDF) of TransRisk score among
different groups into group-wise density distributions of the credit score, and use them as the initial
tier distributions for different groups.
In Figure 3 we present the summary of a 20-step interplay between decision with Counterfactual Fair
predictors and the underlying data generating process on the credit score data set. The Counterfactual
Fair decision-making strategy is retrained after each one-step data dynamics. From Figure 3(a) we can
observe that the gap between step-by-step tracks of tiers for different groups actually decreases before
increasing again (around step 12). This indicates that decision with Counterfactual Fair predictors
does have the potential to get closer to the long-term fairness goal, if the data dynamics and the initial
condition (for each one-step analysis at different time step) satisfy certain properties. Figure 3(a) also
highlight the importance of our dynamic fairness analyzing framework: if one does not model the
interplay between decision and data dynamics, one may well deviate from long-term fairness goal
even after making some progress by getting closer to the fairness objective.

6      C ONCLUSION AND F UTURE W ORK

In this paper, we propose Tier Balancing, a dynamic fairness notion that characterizes the decision-
distribution interplay through a detailed causal model over both observed variables and underlying
causal factors. We characterize Tier Balancing in terms of a one-step analysis framework on Single-
step Tier Imbalance Reduction (STIR). We show that in general one cannot directly achieve the
long-term fairness goal only through a one-step intervention, i.e., static decision-making. We further
show that under certain conditions it is possible (but not guaranteed) for one to get closer to the
long-term fairness goal with (a sequence of) Counterfactual Fair decisions.
Our results highlight the challenges and opportunities of enforcing a fairness notion that has built-
in capacity to model decision-distribution interplay over underlying causal factors. Future works
naturally include developing algorithms to effectively and efficiently enforce the Tier Balancing
notion of long-term, dynamic fairness for various practical scenarios.


                                                                        9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


E THICS S TATEMENT

The motivation of our work is to pursue long-term fairness. The conduct of research is under full
awareness of, and with adherence to, ICLR Code of Ethics. We focus on the decision-distribution
interplay and present a detailed causal modeling on both observed variables and latent causal factors.
We present challenges and opportunities offered by this new type of fairness endeavor, and hope our
work can inspire further research to promote fairness in the long run.

ACKNOWLEDGEMENT

This project was partially supported by the National Institutes of Health (NIH) under Contract
R01HL159805, by the NSF-Convergence Accelerator Track-D award #2134901, by a grant from
Apple Inc., a grant from KDDI Research Inc., and generous gifts from Salesforce Inc., Microsoft
Research, and Amazon Research. YC and YL are partially supported by the National Science
Foundation (NSF) under grants IIS-2143895 and IIS-2040800, and CCF-2023495.

R EFERENCES
Jeffrey Adams, Niels Hansen, and Kun Zhang. Identification of partially observed linear causal
  models: Graphical conditions for the non-gaussian and heterogeneous cases. Advances in Neural
  Information Processing Systems, 34, 2021.
Yahav Bechavod, Katrina Ligett, Aaron Roth, Bo Waggoner, and Steven Z Wu. Equal opportunity in
  online classification with partial feedback. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems,
  32, 2019.
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (US). Report to the congress on credit scoring
  and its effects on the availability and affordability of credit. Board of Governors of the Federal
  Reserve System, 2007.
Toon Calders, Faisal Kamiran, and Mykola Pechenizkiy. Building classifiers with independency
  constraints. In 2009 IEEE International Conference on Data Mining Workshops, pp. 13–18. IEEE,
  2009.
Silvia Chiappa. Path-specific counterfactual fairness. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on
  Artificial Intelligence, volume 33, pp. 7801–7808, 2019.
Amanda Coston, Karthikeyan Natesan Ramamurthy, Dennis Wei, Kush R. Varshney, Skyler Speak-
 man, Zairah Mustahsan, and Supriyo Chakraborty. Fair transfer learning with missing protected
 attributes. In Proceedings of the 2019 AAAI/ACM Conference on AI, Ethics, and Society, pp. 91–98,
 2019.
Elliot Creager, David Madras, Toniann Pitassi, and Richard Zemel. Causal modeling for fairness in
  dynamical systems. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 2185–2195. PMLR,
  2020.
Richard Dawkins and Nicola Davis. The selfish gene. Macat Library, 2017.
Hadi Elzayn, Shahin Jabbari, Christopher Jung, Michael Kearns, Seth Neel, Aaron Roth, and Zachary
  Schutzman. Fair algorithms for learning in allocation problems. In Proceedings of the Conference
  on Fairness, Accountability, and Transparency, pp. 170–179, 2019.
Danielle Ensign, Sorelle A Friedler, Scott Neville, Carlos Scheidegger, and Suresh Venkatasubrama-
  nian. Runaway feedback loops in predictive policing. In Conference on Fairness, Accountability
  and Transparency, pp. 160–171. PMLR, 2018.
Daniel Friedman and Barry Sinervo. Evolutionary games in natural, social, and virtual worlds.
  Oxford University Press, 2016.
Moritz Hardt, Eric Price, and Nati Srebro. Equality of opportunity in supervised learning. In Advances
 in Neural Information Processing Systems, pp. 3315–3323, 2016.


                                                 10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Tatsunori Hashimoto, Megha Srivastava, Hongseok Namkoong, and Percy Liang. Fairness without
  demographics in repeated loss minimization. In International Conference on Machine Learning,
  pp. 1929–1938. PMLR, 2018.
Hoda Heidari and Andreas Krause. Preventing disparate treatment in sequential decision making. In
  IJCAI, pp. 2248–2254, 2018.
Hoda Heidari, Vedant Nanda, and Krishna Gummadi. On the long-term impact of algorithmic decision
  policies: Effort unfairness and feature segregation through social learning. In 36th International
  Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 2692–2701, 2019.
Lily Hu and Yiling Chen. A short-term intervention for long-term fairness in the labor market. In
  Proceedings of the 2018 World Wide Web Conference, pp. 1389–1398, 2018.
Matthew Joseph, Michael Kearns, Jamie H Morgenstern, and Aaron Roth. Fairness in learning:
 Classic and contextual bandits. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 29, 2016.
Sampath Kannan, Aaron Roth, and Juba Ziani. Downstream effects of affirmative action. In
  Proceedings of the Conference on Fairness, Accountability, and Transparency, pp. 240–248, 2019.
Bohdan Kivva, Goutham Rajendran, Pradeep Ravikumar, and Bryon Aragam. Learning latent causal
  graphs via mixture oracles. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 34, 2021.
Matt J Kusner, Joshua Loftus, Chris Russell, and Ricardo Silva. Counterfactual fairness. In Advances
 in Neural Information Processing Systems, pp. 4066–4076, 2017.
Lydia T Liu, Sarah Dean, Esther Rolf, Max Simchowitz, and Moritz Hardt. Delayed impact of fair
  machine learning. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 3150–3158. PMLR,
  2018.
Yang Liu, Goran Radanovic, Christos Dimitrakakis, Debmalya Mandal, and David C Parkes. Cali-
  brated fairness in bandits. arXiv preprint arXiv:1707.01875, 2017.
Yang Liu, Yatong Chen, Zeyu Tang, and Kun Zhang. Model transferability with responsive decision
  subjects. arXiv preprint arXiv:2107.05911, 2021.
Vishwali Mhasawade and Rumi Chunara. Causal multi-level fairness. In Proceedings of the 2021
  AAAI/ACM Conference on AI, Ethics, and Society, pp. 784–794, 2021.
John Miller, Smitha Milli, and Moritz Hardt. Strategic classification is causal modeling in disguise.
  In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 6917–6926. PMLR, 2020.
Hussein Mouzannar, Mesrob I Ohannessian, and Nathan Srebro. From fair decision making to social
  equality. In Proceedings of the Conference on Fairness, Accountability, and Transparency, pp.
  359–368, 2019.
Hamed Nilforoshan, Johann D Gaebler, Ravi Shroff, and Sharad Goel. Causal conceptions of fairness
  and their consequences. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 16848–16887.
  PMLR, 2022.
Judea Pearl. Causality. Cambridge University Press, 2009.
Juan Perdomo, Tijana Zrnic, Celestine Mendler-Dünner, and Moritz Hardt. Performative prediction.
  In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 7599–7609. PMLR, 2020.
Ashkan Rezaei, Anqi Liu, Omid Memarrast, and Brian D Ziebart. Robust fairness under covariate
  shift. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, volume 35, pp. 9419–9427,
  2021.
Chris Russell, Matt J Kusner, Joshua Loftus, and Ricardo Silva. When worlds collide: integrating
  different counterfactual assumptions in fairness. In Advances in Neural Information Processing
  Systems, pp. 6414–6423, 2017.
Candice Schumann, Xuezhi Wang, Alex Beutel, Jilin Chen, Hai Qian, and Ed H Chi. Transfer of
  machine learning fairness across domains. arXiv preprint arXiv:1906.09688, 2019.


                                                11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Harvineet Singh, Rina Singh, Vishwali Mhasawade, and Rumi Chunara. Fairness violations and
  mitigation under covariate shift. In Proceedings of the 2021 ACM Conference on Fairness,
 Accountability, and Transparency, pp. 3–13, 2021.
Peter Spirtes, Clark N Glymour, and Richard Scheines. Causation, prediction, and search. Springer
  New York, 1993.
Berk Ustun, Alexander Spangher, and Yang Liu. Actionable recourse in linear classification. In
  Proceedings of the Conference on Fairness, Accountability, and Transparency, pp. 10–19, 2019.
Julius von Kügelgen, Amir-Hossein Karimi, Umang Bhatt, Isabel Valera, Adrian Weller, and Bernhard
  Schölkopf. On the fairness of causal algorithmic recourse. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference
  on Artificial Intelligence, volume 36, pp. 9584–9594, 2022.
Yongkai Wu, Lu Zhang, Xintao Wu, and Hanghang Tong. Pc-fairness: A unified framework for
  measuring causality-based fairness. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, pp.
  3399–3409, 2019.
Feng Xie, Ruichu Cai, Biwei Huang, Clark Glymour, Zhifeng Hao, and Kun Zhang. Generalized
  independent noise condition for estimating latent variable causal graphs. Advances in Neural
  Information Processing Systems, 33:14891–14902, 2020.
Feng Xie, Biwei Huang, Zhengming Chen, Yangbo He, Zhi Geng, and Kun Zhang. Identification of
  linear non-gaussian latent hierarchical structure. In International Conference on Machine Learning,
  pp. 24370–24387. PMLR, 2022.
Xueru Zhang, Mohammadmahdi Khaliligarekani, Cem Tekin, and Mingyan Liu. Group retention
 when using machine learning in sequential decision making: the interplay between user dynamics
  and fairness. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 32:15269–15278, 2019.
Xueru Zhang, Ruibo Tu, Yang Liu, Mingyan Liu, Hedvig Kjellstrom, Kun Zhang, and Cheng Zhang.
  How do fair decisions fare in long-term qualification? Advances in Neural Information Processing
  Systems, 33:18457–18469, 2020.


                                                12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


S UPPLEMENT TO
“T IER BALANCING : T OWARDS DYNAMIC FAIRNESS
OVER U NDERLYING C AUSAL FACTORS ”

 Zeyu Tang1 , Yatong Chen2 , Yang Liu2 , and Kun Zhang1,3
 1
   Department of Philosophy, Carnegie Mellon University
 2
   Computer Science and Engineering Department, University of California, Santa Cruz
 3
   Machine Learning Department, Mohamed bin Zayed University of Artificial Intelligence
  zeyutang@cmu.edu, ychen592@ucsc.edu, yangliu@ucsc.edu, kunz1@cmu.edu


TABLE OF C ONTENTS : A PPENDIX

A Detailed Discussions on Related Works                                                             14
     A.1 Causal Notions of Fairness . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     14
     A.2 Fairness Inquires in Dynamic Settings . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .      14

B Additional Results, Technical Details, and Discussions                                            15
     B.1 Discussions on the Causal Modeling of Decision-Distribution Interplay . . . . . .          15
     B.2 When Tier Balancing is Initially Satisfied . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     16
     B.3 A Remark on Fact 3.2 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     17
     B.4 Detailed Derivation of ∆STIR |t+1
                                       t   (Section 3.2.1) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .      18
     B.5 Further Illustration on Assumption 3.5 and Assumption 3.6 . . . . . . . . . . . . .        20
     B.6 Additional Experimental Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .      20
     B.7 Potential Limitations of Our Work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .      21

C Proof of Results                                                                                  21
     C.1 Proof for Proposition 3.1 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    21
     C.2 Proof for Theorem 4.1 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .      22
     C.3 Proof for Theorem 4.2 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .      25
     C.4 Proof for Theorem 4.3 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .      31


L IST OF TABLES

     1    When αD > αY , compare cases of Ht+1 with different values of At .        . . . . . . .   37
     2    When αD < αY , compare cases of Ht+1 with different values of At .        . . . . . . .   38
     3    When αD = αY = α, compare cases of Ht+1 with different values of At . . . . . .           39
     4    When αD > αY , list possible instantiations of φt+1 (et+1 ).    . . . . . . . . . . . .   40
     5    When αD < αY , list possible instantiations of φt+1 (et+1 ).    . . . . . . . . . . . .   42
     6    When αD = αY = α, list possible instantiations of φt+1 (et+1 ). . . . . . . . . . .       44


                                                  13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


A     D ETAILED D ISCUSSIONS ON R ELATED W ORKS

In this section, we provide detailed discussions on related works. In particular, considering our
focus on providing a novel long-term fairness notion with the help of the detailed causal modeling of
involved dynamics, we compare our work with previous literature on causal notions of fairness, as
well as fairness inquiries in dynamic settings.

A.1    C AUSAL N OTIONS OF FAIRNESS

Various causal notions of algorithmic fairness have been proposed in the literature, for instance,
fairness notions defined in terms of the (non-)existence of certain causal paths in the graph (Kamiran
et al., 2013; Kilbertus et al., 2017; Zhang et al., 2017), fairness notions defined through estimating or
bounding causal effects (Kusner et al., 2017; Chiappa, 2019; Wu et al., 2019; Mhasawade & Chunara,
2021), fairness notions defined with respect to statistics on certain factual/counterfactual groups (Imai
& Jiang, 2020; Coston et al., 2020; Mishler et al., 2021). The proposed causal notions audit fairness
in an instantaneous manner, i.e., the fairness inquires are with respect to a snapshot of reality, and
the scope of consideration is limited to observed variables only. Our Tier Balancing notion has a
built-in capacity to inquire fairness in the long-term and dynamic setting, which is very different
from instantaneous causal fairness notions (beyond the fact that our notion encompasses latent causal
factors).
While we can detect and measure discrimination based on previous (instantaneous) causal notions of
fairness (e.g., the existence of certain causal paths or causal effects), eliminating such existence of
causal paths or causal effects is a valid goal to achieve but might not be the means one should opt for.
To begin with, there is no guarantee that eliminating a causal path or effect results in non-existence
of such causal path or effect in the future under the interplay between decision-making and data
dynamics. Furthermore, the data generating processes represented in the causal model might not be
easily manipulable under the same timescale of decision-making (e.g., the ones governed by nature
and/or the mode and structure of a society). One cannot expect that the manipulation on the causal
model (for the purpose of enforcing fairness notions) directly translate to real-world changes in the
underlying data generating processes.
Different from previous causal fairness notions, instead of directly “going against” the underlying data
generating process (e.g., by eliminating certain causal path or causal effect), our Tier Balancing notion
encourages “working with” the underlying data generating processes. With a detailed causal modeling
of the decision-distribution interplay, Tier Balancing emphases on the possibility of inducing a future
data distribution that is fair in the long run.

A.2    FAIRNESS I NQUIRES IN DYNAMIC S ETTINGS

Previous literature have considered dynamic fairness in specific practical scenarios, for instance,
opportunity allocation in labor market (Hu & Chen, 2018), a pipeline consisting of college admission
followed by hiring (Kannan et al., 2019), opportunity allocation in credit application (Liu et al., 2018),
and resource allocation in predictive policing (Ensign et al., 2018). Different from previous literature,
we present a detailed causal modeling of the decision-distribution interplay that is general enough
to be applicable in various resource allocation problems (e.g., loan applications, hiring practices)
while also being specific enough to encompass nuances in data dynamics for the particular practical
scenario of interest.
In terms of the analyzing framework, closely related works have considered the one-step analysis
(Liu et al., 2018; Kannan et al., 2019; Mouzannar et al., 2019; Zhang et al., 2019). However, previous
works focus on the long-term effect of imposing certain fairness notions that are readily available, for
example, Demographic Parity (Calders et al., 2009; Liu et al., 2018; Mouzannar et al., 2019) and
Equal Opportunity (Hardt et al., 2016; Liu et al., 2018). In our work, we formulate a novel notion
of long-term fairness, namely, Tier Balancing, and explore the possibility of providing a fairness
notion that characterizes the dynamic nature of decision-distribution interplay through detailed causal
modeling on both observed variables and latent causal factors.
In terms of the modeling choice for data dynamics, most closely related works model data dynamics
using variants of Markov Decision Processes (MDPs) (Jabbari et al., 2017; Siddique et al., 2020;


                                                   14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Zhang et al., 2020; D’Amour et al., 2020; Wen et al., 2021; Zimmer et al., 2021; Ge et al., 2021).
For example, Zhang et al. (2020) consider the partially observed Markov decision process (POMDP)
model, and conduct evolution and equilibrium analysis with respect to Demographic Parity and
Equal Opportunity notions of fairness. The dynamics are modeled through transition matrices on
group-level qualification rates. Compared to the modeling of transition matrices in MDPs, our model
is more fine-grained and on the individual level, answering the call for “richer and more complex
modelings [of involved dynamics]” in previous literature (Hu & Chen, 2018).
Another closely related work is the one-step analysis on the impact of causal fairness notions on
downstream utilities conducted by Nilforoshan et al. (2022). They consider a detailed causal modeling
on the college admission running example and analyze previously proposed (instantaneous) causal
fairness notions, namely, Counterfactual Predictive Parity (Coston et al., 2020), Counterfactual
Equalized Odds (Coston et al., 2020), and Conditional Principal Fairness (Imai & Jiang, 2020).
Our work is different in several ways: instead of utilizing a static graph, we focus on the decision-
distribution interplay and explicitly capture both observed and latent variables along the temporal
axis; different from analyzing one-step downstream consequence in terms of utility, we formulate a
long-term fairness goal and investigate the challenges and opportunities revealed by the notion.


B     A DDITIONAL R ESULTS , T ECHNICAL D ETAILS , AND D ISCUSSIONS

In this section, we provide additional results, technical details, and discussions of our work. In
Appendix B.1, we provide additional discussions on our causal modeling of the decision-distribution
interplay; in Appendix B.2, we analyze the situation where Tier Balancing is initially attained;
in Appendix B.3, we discuss the role of exogenous terms and provide a remark on Fact 3.2; in
Appendix B.4, we present the detailed derivation of Single-step Tier Imbalance Reduction (STIR) term
∆STIR |t+1
        t   ; in Appendix B.5, we illustrate the connection between Assumption 3.5 and Assumption
3.6; in Appendix B.6, we present additional experimental results; in Appendix B.7, we discuss
potential limitations of our work.

B.1     D ISCUSSIONS ON THE C AUSAL M ODELING OF D ECISION -D ISTRIBUTION I NTERPLAY

In Appendix B.1.1, we provide additional details of the involved dynamics in the causal modeling of
the decision-distribution interplay. In Appendix B.1.2, we discuss the relation between the practical
scenarios and the modeled dynamics.

B.1.1    A DDITIONAL M ODELING D ETAILS OF THE I NVOLVED DYNAMICS

We use Xt,i ’s to represent three different patterns (instead of the number of count) of variables with
respect to how observed features are caused by the protected feature At and the latent causal factor
Ht . There are three types of observed features: (1) features that only have the latent causal factor Ht
as the case, e.g., Xt,1 , (2) features that have both the latent causal factor Ht and the protected feature
At as cause, e.g., Xt,2 , and (3) features that only have the protected feature At as the cause, e.g,.
Xt,3 . For conciseness, we omit features that are not relevant to the practical scenario of interest, i.e.,
variables that are not causally relevant to (Ht , At ). One can replace Xt,i ’s with the actual number of
additional features together with the causal relations among them in specific practical scenarios.
At every time step T = t, the decision-making strategy Dt is trained on the joint distribution
               (obs)
(At , Xt,i , Yt      ). However, when making the decision, Dt only takes (At , Xt,i ) as input. Since we
are modeling causal relations in data generating processes, we only include a directed edge in the
DAG if there is a causal relation between variables. Therefore, the data generating process of Dt
                                       (obs)
does not involve an edge between Yt          and Dt .

B.1.2    T HE P RACTICAL S CENARIOS OF I NTEREST

As we can see from previous literature (discussed in Appendix A.2), the modeling choices are closely
related to the practical scenarios of interest, and therefore, can be very different in terms of modeling
details of the involved dynamics in long-term and dynamic settings.


                                                   15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Our causal modeling of repetitive resource application and allocation keeps track of individual-
level situation changes, and enables informative and principled analysis on the decision-distribution
interplay in different practical scenarios. For example, in credit application (e.g., Liu et al. 2018),
the agents are clients and the latent causal factor (tier) can be individual’s socio-economic status or
creditworthiness; in predictive policing (e.g., Ensign et al. 2018), the agents are neighborhoods and
the latent tier can be neighborhood’s safety ratings; in the dual market pipeline (e.g., temporary labor
markets followed by the permanent labor market considered in Hu & Chen 2018) or the admission-
followed-by-hiring pipeline (e.g., Kannan et al. 2019), the agents are applicants who subject to a
sequence of decisions and the latent tier can be the relevant qualification for the school program and
the job.
However, when the decision received by the individual is once in a lifetime (or at least very long time
compared to the timescale of the decision-making), repeated application and allocation of resource
may not be a suitable modeling choice. For example, college admission decisions are made on a
yearly basis but an individual does not repeatedly apply for college every single year (Mouzannar
et al., 2019). In this case, if we focus on the decision made by a specific college, it is more natural to
study changes in the population in terms of the group-level qualification profiles (Mouzannar et al.,
2019). As another example, in the context of health care (e.g., Mhasawade & Chunara 2021), when
the resource takes the form of the medical treatment for the purpose of improving health outcome, not
all treatment requires regular doses and therefore, repeated allocation modeled on the individual-level
may not be an optimal choice. One can, for instance, resort to the modeling at the level of subgroups
as an alternative (Mhasawade & Chunara, 2021).
Considering the difference in semantics of fairness in various practical scenarios, previous literature
has pointed out that there is in general no one-size-fits-all solution for algorithmic fairness (e.g.,
Kearns & Roth 2019). By presenting a detailed causal modeling for the decision-distribution interplay,
we do not intend to provide a general framework to encompass long-term fairness considerations in
all practical scenarios. Instead, we would like to demonstrate the opportunities and challenges and
hope our work can inspire further research.

B.2   W HEN T IER BALANCING IS I NITIALLY S ATISFIED

In the paper we have presented possibility and impossibility results to achieve, or get closer to, the
long-term fairness goal when Tier Balancing is not initially satisfied. It is natural to wonder what
we should do if we find out that Tier Balancing happen to be satisfied during fairness audit. In
fact, as we shall see in Proposition B.1, if Tier Balancing is satisfied as the initial condition, under
the specified dynamics, one can use Demographic Parity (Calders et al., 2009) decision-making
strategy to maintain the status of satisfying Tier Balancing. This indicates that when Tier Balancing
is satisfied (as a lucky initial condition, or as a result of K-step interventions), we have at least one
way to maintain the fair state of affairs.
Proposition B.1. When Tier Balancing is initially satisfied, i.e., Ht ⊥
                                                                      ⊥ At , under Fact 3.2, Assumption
3.3, and Assumption 3.4, as well as the specified dynamics, the Demographic Parity decision-
making strategy, i.e., Dt ⊥
                          ⊥ At , can ensure Tier Balancing still holds true for the next time step, i.e.,
Ht+1 ⊥⊥ At+1 .


Proof. To begin with, since Ht ⊥    ⊥ At , by Fact 3.2, Ht is not a function of At . As a direct result,
Yt(ori) is also not a function of At (since the distribution of Yt(ori) is fully determined by the value of
Ht = ht ). Besides, since Dt satisfies Demographic Parity, Dt ⊥       ⊥ At , and therefore by Fact 3.2, Dt
is not a function of At .
According to Assumption 3.3, under the specified dynamics, Ht+1 is fully determined by
(Ht , Dt , Yt(ori) ), among which none of them is a function of At . Then, we have Ht+1 is not a
function of At .
Recall that in the specified dynamics, the same group of agents repetitively apply for credit with the
entire group unchanged. According to Assumption 3.4, At+1 is an identical copy of At . Therefore
we have Ht+1 is not a function of At+1 , i.e., Ht+1 ⊥
                                                    ⊥ At+1 .



                                                   16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                      T =t−1                                 T =t                            T =t+1
             At−1            Ht−1             Ht                           At                Ht+1     At+1

                               (ori)             (ori)                                        (ori)
              ···           Yt−1            Yt            Xt,1 Xt,2 Xt,3                     Yt+1     ···

                                               (obs)                                          (obs)
             θt−1            Dt−1           Yt                   θt              Dt          Yt+1     θt+1

                                                             T =t
                             !
                             ǫ Ht       Ht               ǫXt,1    ǫXt,2         ǫXt,3   At    ǫ Dt


                            ǫY (ori)   Yt
                                            (ori)
                                                         Xt,1         Xt,2      Xt,3
                              t


                            !
                            ǫY (obs)    (obs)
                                       Yt                              θt               Dt
                              t


Figure 4: The causal modeling of the decision-distribution interplay. The circle indicates that the
          corresponding variable is unobserved. We use diamond to denote the underlying causal
          factor and explicitly indicate the (potential) non-stationary nature of the decision-making
          strategies across time.


B.3    A R EMARK ON FACT 3.2

Let us first present the definition of a functional causal model (Spirtes et al., 1993; Pearl, 2009):
Definition B.2 (Functional Causal Model). We can represent a causal model with a tuple (E, V, F)
such that:

      (1) V is a set of observed variables involved in the system of interest;
      (2) E is a set of exogenous variables that we cannot directly observe but contains the background
          information representing all other causes of V and jointly follows a distribution P (E);
      (3) F is a set of functions (also known as structural equations) {f1 , f2 , . . . , fn } where each fi
          corresponds to one variable Vi ∈ V and is a mapping E ∪ V \ {Vi } → Vi .

The triplet (E, V, F) is known as the functional causal model (FCM). We can also capture causal
relations among variables via a directed acyclic graph (DAG), where nodes (vertices) represent
variables and edges represent functional relations between variables and the corresponding direct
causes (i.e., observed parents and unobserved exogenous terms).

For the purpose of illustration, in Figure 4 we present the DAG (at time step T = t) with the
exogenous terms Et explicitly modeled, where Et is the concatenation of individual exogenous
terms:
                              Et = e  ϵH t , e
                                             ϵY (obs) , ϵY (ori) , ϵXt,i , ϵDt .        (B.1)
                                                         t             t

We use the e· symbol on certain exogenous noise terms, e.g., e
                                                             ϵHt and e
                                                                     ϵY (obs) , to denote the fact that
                                                                       t
the corresponding variables are affected by previous time step (T = t − 1), and such influence are
encapsulated into exogenous terms from the standpoint of current time step (T = t). For example,
                                                                           (obs)
the influence from the randomness in Dt−1 (when T = t − 1) on current Yt          is encapsulated into
an exogenous term e ϵY (obs) when T = t.
                        t

As we can see from Figure 4, (At , Et ) are root causes of all other variables
               (ori)     (obs)
(Ht , Xt,i , Yt      , Yt      , Dt ). Applying Definition B.2, we can utilize the functional causal model
and represent each variable with a function (the structural equation) of its direct causes (including
observed parents and unobserved exogenous terms). Then, we can iteratively replace variables with its
                                                                                           (ori)     (obs)
corresponding structural equation and eventually represent variables in (Ht , Xt,i , Yt          , Yt      , Dt )
with functions of only root causes (At , Et ), as summarized in Fact 3.2.


                                                                 17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


The noise terms Et are the unobserved exogenous terms that signify the unique characteristics of
an individual. The utilization of such uniqueness of individual can be found in the estimation of
counterfactual causal effect by making use of the posterior distribution of exogenous noise terms
conditioning on the observed features, e.g., Kusner et al. (2017).

B.4     D ETAILED D ERIVATION OF ∆STIR |t+1
                                        t   (S ECTION 3.2.1)

In this section, we provide the derivation detail of the Single-step Tier Imbalance Reduction (STIR)
term:
      ∆STIR |t+1
             t   := E [ |ft+1 (0, Et+1 ) − ft+1 (1, Et+1 )| ] − E [ |ft (0, Et ) − ft (1, Et )| ](B.2)

Firstly, in Appendix B.4.1, we characterize the conditional joint density of fT (0, ET ), fT (1, ET ) .
Then, in Appendix B.4.2, we focus on the situation changes of each individual from T = t to
T = t + 1 induced by the specified dynamics. Finally, in Appendix B.4.3, we can calculate the
expectation in Equation B.2 by aggregating situation changes for each individual from T = t to
T = t + 1.

B.4.1     C HARACTERIZING C ONDITIONAL J OINT D ENSITY
We can view ft (0, Et ) and ft (1, Et ) as two dependent random variables. Given combinations of Dt
and Yt , we can define their conditional joint probability density when Et = ϵ as qt ft (0, ϵ), ft (1, ϵ) |
d, d′ , y, y ′ and calculate it as following:

         qt ft (0, ϵ), ft (1, ϵ) | d, d′ , y, y ′
                                                                       (ori)           (ori)
     := qt ft (0, ϵ), ft (1, ϵ) | gtD (0, ϵ) = d, gtD (1, ϵ) = d′ , gtY (0, ϵ) = y, gtY (1, ϵ) = y ′
         Z
                                                                                                       (B.3)
     =         1{ft (0, ξ) = ft (0, ϵ), ft (1, ξ) = ft (1, ϵ)}
         ξ∈E
                                                                  (ori)                     (ori)
            · pt Et = ξ | gtD (0, ϵ) = d, gtD (1, ϵ) = d′ , gtY           (0, ϵ) = y, gtY           (1, ϵ) = y ′ dξ,
where 1{·} is the indicator function, and the subscript t of the conditional probability densities (e.g.,
qt (·) and pt (·)) indicates that they (might) change over time with different time step T = t. The
functional form of ft can be convoluted and it is not necessarily the case that ft (0, ·) and ft (1, ·) are
injective mappings E → (0, 1]. Therefore, for the purpose of generality, in Equation B.3 we explicitly
introduce the identity function 1{ft (0, ξ) = ft (0, ϵ), ft (1, ξ) = ft (1, ϵ)} when characterizing the
conditional joint density qt .

B.4.2     C APTURING S ITUATION C HANGES FOR A N I NDIVIDUAL
                                                                                                           (j)     (j)
For a specific individual (j), given the value of individual’s exogenous terms Et = et , let us
                                          (j)          (j)          (j)             (j)          (j)
denote the difference between ft (0, et ) and ft (1, et ) as φt (et ) := ft (0, et ) − ft (1, et ), and
                    (j)              (j)        (j)           (j)            (j)
the sum of ft (0, et ) and ft (1, et ) as ηt (et ) := ft (0, et ) + ft (1, et   ). We introduce φt (·) and
ηt (·) for the conciseness of notation, and we can always map φt (·), ηt (·) back to ft (0, ·), ft (1, ·)
via a coordinate transformation:
                          "              # √                        "          #
                                    (j)                                    (j)
                            ft (0, et )        2 cos π4     sin π4    φt (et )
                                           =           π         π               .                   (B.4)
                                    (j)
                            ft (1, et )       2 − sin 4 cos 4              (j)
                                                                      ηt (et )

                                                       (j)                       (j)                        (j)
Let us consider the connection between φt+1 (et+1 ) = ft+1 (0, et+1 ) − ft+1 (1, et+1 ) in the time
                                     (j)           (j)          (j)
step T = t + 1 and φt (et ) = ft (0, et ) − ft (1, et ) in the time step T = t. We use different
                                                               (j)           (j)         (j)         (j)
time step subscripts for the exogenous terms, e.g., et+1 in φt+1 (et+1 ) and et in φt (et ), since it
                                             (j)     (j)
is not necessarily the case that et+1 = et , even if we are focusing on the same individual from
                                                                                          (ori)
T = t to T = t + 1. Nevertheless, for the given functional forms of ft , gtD , gtY , the combination of
                                                               (j)
(d(j) , d′(j) , y (j) , y ′(j) ), the value of exogenous term et in the initial situation of the current one-step
analysis (when T = t), and the hyperparameters (αD , αY ), we can uniquely derive the value of


                                                       18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


              1.0                                          1.0                                              1.0                                            1.0


                                           ft+1(1, et+1)


                                                                                                                                           ft+1(1, et+1)
  ft(1, et)


                                                                                                ft(1, et)
              0.5                                          0.5                                              0.5                                            0.5


              0.0                                          0.0                                              0.0                                            0.0
                0.0      0.5         1.0                     0.0        0.5      1.0                          0.0      0.5           1.0                     0.0        0.5      1.0
                      ft(0, et)                                    ft+1(0, et+1)                                    ft(0, et)                                      ft+1(0, et+1)
(a) the example of distribution change when the initial (b) the example of distribution change when the initial
    condition satisfies the quantitative assumption         condition satisfies the qualitative assumption

Figure 5: An illustration of the connection between qualitative and quantitative assumptions in
          terms of the    one-step update of the conditional joint distribution qT fT (0, eT ), fT (1, eT ) |
          d, d′ , y, y ′ (when y < y ′ , and from T = t to T = t + 1).

                (j)                        (j)                                  (j)                                                                                            (j)
φt+1 (et+1 ) = ft+1 (0, et+1 ) − ft+1 (1, et+1 ), and list all possible instantiations of φt+1 (et+1 ) in
Table 4 (if αD > αY ), Table 5 (if αD < αY ), and Table 6 (if αD = αY ).
                                                                              (j)                           (j)
Let us denote such mapping from φt (et ) to φt+1 (et+1 ) with the function Gt . For the purpose
of simplifying notations, we can omit the superscript (j) if without ambiguity, since the value of
exogenous terms eT signify the unique characteristics of an individual:
                                                                                                                          (ori)
  φt+1 (et+1 ) := ft+1 (0, et+1 ) − ft+1 (1, et+1 ) = Gt (ft , gtD , gtY                                                          ; d, d′ , y, y ′ , et , αD , αY ). (B.5)
Notice that the value of the function Gt only relies on the information available at time step T = t.

B.4.3               AGGREGATING I NDIVIDUAL -L EVEL S ITUATION C HANGES
We can calculate Single-step Tier Imbalance Reduction, i.e., the term ∆STIR |t+1
                                                                             t   , as following:
∆STIR |t+1
       t   := E [ |ft+1 (0, Et+1 ) − ft+1 (1, Et+1 )| ] − E [ |ft (0, Et ) − ft (1, Et )| ]
 (i)
 = E [ |φt+1 (Et+1 )| − |φt (Et )| ]
 (ii)
     n h
 = E E |φt+1 (ξ)| − |φt (ϵ)|                                                                                Et+1 = ξ,
                                                                                                            | {z }
                                                                     The value of exogenous terms of an individual take value ξ at T = t + 1.

                                                                                                            Et = ϵ,
                                                                                                            | {z }
                                                                     The value of exogenous terms of an individual take value ϵ at T = t.
                                                                                                                      (ori)
                                                                                                                                                                                       io
                                                                           φt+1 (ξ) = Gt (ft , gtD , gtY ; d, d′ , y, y ′ , ϵ, αD , αY )
                                                                           |                           {z                              }
                                                                    This is to make sure that we are keeping track of the same individual in the sense that,
                                                                    φt+1 (ξ) when T = t + 1 is indeed a valid instantiation from φt (ϵ) when T = t.
                                                                 If φt+1 (·) is not a valid instantiation from φt (·), the contribution to the expectation is 0.
                      X                                                Z        Z
 (iii)
  =                                 Pt (d, d′ , y, y ′ ) ·                              qt ft (0, ϵ), ft (1, ϵ) | d, d′ , y, y ′
               d,d′ ,y,y ′ ∈{0,1}                                         ϵ∈E     ξ∈E

               · |φt+1 (ξ)| − |φt (ϵ)| · 1{φt+1 (ξ) = Gt (ft , gtD , gtY ; d, d′ , y, y ′ , ϵ, αD , αY )}dξdϵ,
                                                                        (ori)


                                                                                                                                                                                  (B.6)
where the equality (i) is based on the definition of φt (·) and φt+1 (·); the equality (ii) is derived
from the Law of Iterated Expectation, keeping track of individual-level situation changes in the inner
conditional expectation; the equality (iii) is the aggregation of individual-level situation changes by
plugging in the conditional joint density qt calculated in Appendix B.4.1, joint probability Pt , and
the individual-level situation changes discussed in Appendix B.4.2.
The indicator function 1{φt+1 (ξ) = Gt (ft , gtD , gtY ; d, d′ , y, y ′ , ϵ, αD , αY )} makes sure that we
                                                                                                (ori)


are keeping track of the same individual (whose exogenous noise term equals to ϵ at time t) before
and after the one-step dynamic, even if his/her exogenous noise term equals to ξ at time t + 1, and
that ϵ might not be equal to ξ.


                                                                                          19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


    1.00
                                              0.8


                                  ACC
    0.75
                                                                                        T =t                   T = t + 20
                                              0.6
                                                                            0.4                                                   A
H
    0.50                                            0   10   20


                                                                  Density
                                                                                                                                       0
                                                                                                                                      Black


                                  PA(D = 1)
                                              1.0
    0.25                                                                    0.2                                                        1
                                                                                                                                      Asian
                                              0.5                                                                                      2
                                                                                                                                      Hispanic
    0.00                                                                    0.0                                                       3
                                                                                                                                      White
           0      10         20                     0   10   20                   0.0     0.5      1.0   0.0      0.5       1.0
                  T                                     T                                 H                        H
(a) the trend of the changing (b) the accuracy (top) and approval                 (c) the distribution of the underlying hidden tier H among
    tier H at different step      rate (bottom) for different groups                  groups at time step T = t (left) and T = t + 20 (right)

Figure 6: Illustration of the interplay between decision with accuracy-oriented predictors and the
          data dynamics (20 steps) on the credit score data set. Panel (a) and (b) present the step-by-
          step tracks of update in tier, accuracy, and approval rates for different groups; panel (c)
          presents group-conditioned distributions of tier before (left) and after (right) 20 steps of
          interventions. The legend is shared across panel (a), (b), and (c).


The fact that we are keeping track of the same individual also justifies the practice of only inte-
grating over (conditional) densities with subscript t, e.g., qt (·) and Pt (·), instead of both t and
t + 1. To see this from a different angle, keeping track of situation changes of each individual
(when comparing φt+1 (et+1 ) with φt (et )) also alleviates us from the trouble of estimating (condi-
tional) densities that involve future information.      At the time step t, we do not know the densities
qt+1 ft+1 (0, Et+1 ), ft+1 (1, Et+1 ) | d, d′ , y, y ′ and Pt+1 (d, d′ , y, y ′ ) since they involve future in-
formation Dt+1 and Yt+1 at the standpoint of time step T = t.

B.5        F URTHER I LLUSTRATION ON A SSUMPTION 3.5 AND A SSUMPTION 3.6

In this subsection, we provide further illustrations of the connection between Assumption 3.5 and
Assumption 3.6. In Figure 5 we present          the one-step update of the conditional joint distribution
qT fT (0, eT ), fT (1, eT ) | d, d′ , y, y ′ from T = t to T = t + 1 (we present the case when y < y ′
as an example). For panel (a) and (b), the joint distribution of (fT (0, ET ), fT (1, ET )) is plotted
before and after one-step dynamics, with quantitative and qualitative assumptions respectively. The
distributions are color-coded, the deeper the color, the larger the value of the joint density.
Compared to the qualitative assumption (Assumption 3.5, illustrated in Figure 5b), the quantitative
assumption (Assumption 3.6, illustrated in Figure 5a) is just a special case, with quantitative char-
acteristics built-in for technical purposes (we will make use of Assumption 3.6 in the proofs for
Theorem 4.2 and Theorem 4.3 in Appendix C). From the illustrations in Figure 5, we can also see that
the behaviors of the one-step update of conditional joint density under qualitative and quantitative
assumptions are similar, with deeper color patterns occurring on the upper-left corner, indicating sim-
ilar changes in the corresponding conditional joint densities qT fT (0, eT ), fT (1, eT ) | d, d′ , y, y ′
(when y < y ′ , and from T = t to T = t + 1).

B.6        A DDITIONAL E XPERIMENTAL R ESULTS

In this section, we present additional experimental results on the preprocessed FICO credit score data
set (Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (US), 2007; Hardt et al., 2016). Similar to
the experiment summarized in Figure 3, we convert the cumulative distribution function (CDF) of
group-wise TransRisk scores into group-wise density distributions of the credit score, and use them
as the initial tier distributions for different groups.
We consider utility-maximizing decision-making strategies, i.e., the decision-making policy is ac-
curacy oriented and there is no explicit fairness consideration. In Figure 6 we present the summary
of a 20-step interplay between decision with accuracy-oriented predictors and the underlying data
generating process on the credit score data set. The accuracy-oriented decision-making strategy
is retrained after each one-step data dynamics. From Figure 6(a), there is no obvious evidence
that the gap between step-by-step tracks of tiers for different groups is decreasing over time. This
observation aligns with our theoretical analysis (Theorem 4.2) and simulation results (Figure 2) for
perfect predictors.


                                                                  20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


B.7     P OTENTIAL L IMITATIONS OF O UR W ORK

In this subsection, we discuss potential limitations of our work.

B.7.1    S PECIFIED DYNAMICS VS . C AUSAL D ISCOVERY
In this paper, we present a detailed causal modeling of decision-distribution interplay on DAG
(Section 2.1) and formulate the dynamic fairness notion, Tier Balancing, that captures the long-term
fairness goal over the underlying causal factor.
The research of causal discovery, where the goal is to discover the causal relations among variables
(Spirtes et al., 1993; Shimizu et al., 2006; Zhang & Hyvärinen, 2009; Zhang et al., 2011), is a highly
relevant area but is out of the scope of our paper. Our Tier Balancing notion of dynamic fairness, as
well as our analyzing framework, does not rely on a causal model derived from causal discovery. As
we discussed in the comparison with previous literature in dynamic fairness studies (Appendix A),
our causal model is richer and more complex, which provides the potential of a more principled
reasoning of the essential decision-distribution interplay in the pursuit of long-term fairness. We
acknowledge the fact that it is nice to have the ability to discover the underlying causal model of the
involved dynamics, which would provide further refinements of our dynamic modeling based on the
specific practical scenario of interest. Causal discovery can act as the icing on the cake, but not a
necessary component, of our analysis.

B.7.2    T HE N UMBER AND D IMENSION OF L ATENT C AUSAL FACTORS
In the causal modeling of decision-distribution interplay we present in the paper, we consider one
latent causal factor that carries on the influence of current decision to future distributions. Recent
developments in the identification of causal structures that involve (more than one) latent factors
(Xie et al., 2020; Adams et al., 2021; Kivva et al., 2021; Xie et al., 2022) provide not only a
theoretical justification, but also an indication of the potential, for our effort in exploring long-term
fairness inquires over latent causal factors. We believe that our detailed causal modeling of decision-
distribution interplay (on both observed variables and latent causal factors) and our formulation of
Tier Balancing notion of long-term fairness act as an important first step.

C     P ROOF OF R ESULTS
In this section, we provide proofs for results presented in the paper. For better readability, we provide
an additional Proof (sketch) before proving Theorem 4.1 (proof in Appendix C.2), Theorem 4.2
(proof in Appendix C.3), and Theorem 4.3 (proof in Appendix C.4), respectively.

C.1     P ROOF FOR P ROPOSITION 3.1

Proposition. At time step T = t, for any Ht = ht ∈ (0, 1], under the specified dynamics, among the
population where ground truth is actually observable, i.e., Yt(obs) is not undefined, we have:
                                        Yt(obs) ∼ Bernoulli(ht ).

Proof. To begin with, according the d-separation relation among Dt−1 , Ht , and Yt(ori) on Figure 1,
we notice that Yt(ori) ⊥
                       ⊥ Dt−1 | Ht . Therefore we have:
                                  Yt(ori) ∼ Bernoulli(ht ),
                                  P (Yt(ori) = 1 | Ht = ht ) = ht ,
                                  P (Dt−1 = 1 | Ht = ht ) = d(ht ),
where d(·) is a function d : (0, 1] → [0, 1].
Notice that there is no claim that Dt−1 can be uniquely determined by a function of only ht . We only
represent the conditional probability mass P (Dt−1 = 1 | Ht = ht ) with a function of ht without
specifying the exact functional form. In fact, as we shall see in the later part of this proof, the exact
functional form of d(·) does not affect the validity of the result.


                                                   21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Since Yt(obs) is in fact Yt(ori) masked by Dt−1 , i.e., Yt(obs) is observable only when Dt−1 = 1 and is
undefined when Dt−1 = 0, we have:
          P (Dt−1 = 0, Yt(obs) = 0 | Ht = ht ) = P (Dt−1 = 0, Yt(obs) = 1 | Ht = ht ) = 0.
This indicates that among the population where Yt(obs) is not undefined (the population itself may
change at different time step), ∀y ∈ {0, 1}:
                 P (Yt(obs) = y | Ht = ht )
            = P (Dt−1 = 0, Yt(obs) = y | Ht = ht ) + P (Dt−1 = 1, Yt(obs) = y | Ht = ht )
            = P (Dt−1 = 1, Yt(obs) = y | Ht = ht )
            = P (Dt−1 = 1, Yt(ori) = y | Ht = ht ).
Then, when d(ht ) ∈ (0, 1), we can calculate the following probability:
                 P (Yt(obs) = 1 | Ht = ht )
                               P (Yt(obs) = 1 | Ht = ht )
             =
                 P (Yt(obs) = 1 | Ht = ht ) + P (Yt(obs) = 0 | Ht = ht )
                                     P (Dt−1 = 1, Yt(ori) = 1 | Ht = ht )
             =
               P (Dt−1 = 1, Yt(ori) = 1 | Ht = ht ) + P (Dt−1 = 1, Yt(ori) = 0 | Ht = ht )
                        d(ht )ht
             =
               d(ht )ht + d(ht )(1 − ht )
             =ht
             =P (Yt(ori) = 1 | Ht = ht );
when d(ht ) = 1, this indicates that if Ht = ht , we know for sure that this individual received
a positive decision in the previous time step (when T = t − 1), and we have Yt(ori) = Yt(obs) by
definition; when d(ht ) = 0, this indicates that if Ht = ht , we know for sure that this individual did
not receive a positive decision in the previous time step (when T = t − 1), and in this case Yt(obs) is
undefined.
Therefore, among the population where ground truth is actually observable, i.e., Yt(obs) is not undefined,
we have:
                                    Yt(obs) ∼ Bernoulli(ht ).


C.2    P ROOF FOR T HEOREM 4.1

Theorem. Let us consider the general situation where both Dt and Yt(ori) are dependent with At ,
         ̸ ⊥ At , Yt(ori) ⊥
i.e., Dt ⊥                ̸ ⊥ At . Then under Fact 3.2, Assumption 3.3, and Assumption 3.4, as well as the
specified dynamics, when Ht ⊥        ̸ ⊥ At , only if at least one of the following conditions holds true for all
et ∈ E can we possibly attain Ht+1 ⊥          ⊥ At+1 :

      (1) The ratio fftt (0,et)
                         (1,et ) has a specific domain of value:

                                              ft (0, et )   1 ± αD ± αY
                                                          =             ;
                                              ft (1, et )   1 ± αD ± αY

      (2) Positive (negative) labels only appear in the advantaged (disadvantaged) group, and the
          decision for everyone is positive (if αD > αY ):
                                    
                                                             1
                                     ft (0, et ) ∈ [ 1+αD −αY , 1],
                                    
                                    
                                     f (1, e ) ∈ [          1
                                          t        t    1+αD +αY , 1],
                                             (ori)               (ori)
                                     gt (0, et ) = 0, gtY (1, et ) = 1,
                                    
                                           Y
                                    
                                    
                                         gtD (0, et ) = gtD (1, et ) = 1;

                                                      22
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


     (3) Negative (positive) labels only appear in the advantaged (disadvantaged) group, and the
         decision for everyone is positive (if αD > αY ):
                                   
                                   
                                       ft (0, et ) ∈ [ 1+αD1+αY , 1],
                                   
                                    f (1, e ) ∈ [          1
                                         t        t     1+αD −αY , 1],
                                            (ori)               (ori)
                                   
                                   
                                       gtY (0, et ) = 1, gtY (1, et ) = 0,
                                   
                                        gtD (0, et ) = gtD (1, et ) = 1;

     (4) Everyone has a positive label, but the positive decision is exclusive to the advantaged group
         (if αD < αY ):
                                    
                                    
                                        ft (0, et ) ∈ [ 1−αD1+αY , 1],
                                    
                                     f (1, e ) ∈ [          1
                                          t        t     1+αD +αY , 1],
                                             (ori)             (ori)
                                          Y                 Y
                                    
                                        gt (0, et ) = gt (1, et ) = 1,
                                    
                                         gtD (0, et ) = 0, gtD (1, et ) = 1;

     (5) Everyone has a positive label, but the positive decision is exclusive to the disadvantaged
         group (if αD < αY ):
                                   
                                   
                                       ft (0, et ) ∈ [ 1+αD1+αY , 1],
                                   
                                    f (1, e ) ∈ [          1
                                         t        t     1−αD +αY , 1],
                                            (ori)             (ori)
                                         Y                 Y
                                   
                                       gt (0, et ) = gt (1, et ) = 1,
                                   
                                        gtD (0, et ) = 1, gtD (1, et ) = 0.


Proof (sketch). In order to see the exact condition under which it is possible to achieve Ht+1 ⊥
                                                                                               ⊥ At+1 ,
we consider the necessary and sufficient condition such that Ht+1 = ft+1 (At+1 , Et+1 ) is not a
function of At+1 . This, together with Fact 3.2, Assumption 3.3, and Assumption     3.4, indicates that
we need to consider the condition under which Ht+1 = min 1, ft (At , Et ) 1 + αD (2Dt − 1) +

αY (2Yt(ori) − 1) is not a function of At .
Since both Dt and Yt(ori) are binary, we can exhaustively consider all value combinations of Dt and
Yt(ori) , and list every possible value Ht+1 can take in each case in Table 1 (if αD > αY ), Table 2
(if αD < αY ), or Table 3 (if αD = αY ). By exhaustively going through possible cases, we can
have a full picture of the update of Ht+1 based on (Ht , Yt(ori) , Dt ), and then derive conditions under
which Ht+1 is not a function of At , i.e., we have the conditions under which it is possible to attain
Ht+1 ⊥    ⊥ At+1 .


Proof (full). In order to see the exact condition under which it is possible to achieve Ht+1 ⊥
                                                                                             ⊥At+1 , we
consider the necessary and sufficient condition such that Ht+1 = ft+1 (At+1 , Et+1 ) is not a function
of At+1 . By Fact 3.2, Assumption 3.3, and    Assumption  3.4, it is necessary and sufficient to consider

the condition under which Ht+1 = min 1, ft (At , Et ) 1 + αD (2Dt − 1) + αY (2Yt(ori) − 1) is
not a function of At .
Considering the fact that both Dt and Yt(ori) are binary, we can compare the values of Ht+1 when
At = 0 and At = 1 for all possible combinations of Dt and Yt(ori) . For any fixed et ∈ E, we can list
all the cases in Table 1 (if αD > αY ), Table 2 (if αD < αY ), or Table 3 (if αD = αY ), and see if for
all et ∈ E, there is no difference in the value of Ht+1 between the cases when At = 0 and At = 1.
From Table 1, Table 2, and Table 3, we can see that if and only the following hold true can we achieve
                                                                                            (ori)
Ht+1 ⊥  ⊥ At+1 : for every et ∈ E, whenever the joint probability P gtD (0, et ) = d, gtY (0, et ) =
                          (ori)
y, gtD (1, et ) = d′ , gtY (1, et ) = y ′ is nonzero, the last two columns of the corresponding row(s)
in the table, i.e., the exact values of Ht+1 , need to match. For example, when αD > αY , if we
                                (ori)                             (ori)
know P gtD (0, et ) = 0, gtY (0, et ) = 0, gtD (1, et ) = 0, gtY (1, et ) = 0 ̸= 0, we need the last
two columns of Case (i) of Table 1 to equal to each other, i.e., we need ft (0, et ) = ft (1, et ) to hold
true.


                                                   23
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Without further assumptions on the joint distribution of the data, we do not know which combination
of (d, y, d′ , y ′ ) will result in a nonzero joint probability:
                                        (ori)                                           (ori)
             P gtD (0, et ) = d, gtY            (0, et ) = y, gtD (1, et ) = d′ , gtY           (1, et ) = y ′ ≠ 0.
                                       P                                    (ori)
However, considering the fact that d,d′ ∈D,y,y′ ∈Y P gtD (0, et ) = d, gtY (0, et ) = y, gtD (1, et ) =
        (ori)
d′ , gtY (1, et ) = y ′ = 1 holds for all et ∈ E, we do know that for any fixed et ∈ E, there is at least
one possible instantiation of (d∗ , y ∗ , d′∗ , y ′∗ ) such that:
                                      (ori)                                               (ori)
          P gtD (0, et ) = d∗ , gtY           (0, et ) = y ∗ , gtD (1, et ) = d′∗ , gtY           (1, et ) = y ′∗ ≠ 0.   (C.1)

Let us first consider situations where αD > αY and focus on Table 1. The analysis on situations
where αD < αY (i.e., Table 2) or αD = αY (i.e, Table 3), is of the same flavor and therefore we
omit the detail in the proof.
To begin with, we can observe that not every entry of the last two columns explicitly keeps the
min{·, 1} operator. On the one hand, since αD > αY (αD , αY ∈ [0, 12 ), as of Assumption 3.3), we
have (1 − αD ± αY ) ∈ (0, 1) and ft (at , et )(1 − αD ± αY ) ∈ (0, 1) (since Ht = ft (at , et ) ∈ (0, 1]);
therefore, we do not need to keep the min{·, 1} operator explicit, for instance, in the second to last
column of Case (v - viii). On the other hand, when the coefficients (1 + αD ± αY ) > 1 we are not
sure if ft (at , et )(1 + αD ± αY ) exceed 1; therefore, we need to keep the min{·, 1} operator explicit,
for instance, in the last column of Case (v - viii).
Besides, if only one entry of the last two columns explicitly has the min{·, 1} operator, it is equivalent
to require that the terms themselves (before applying the operator) are equal (since the one without
the min{·, 1} operator is known to be within the (0, 1) interval). For instance, Case (ix) requires
that min{ft (0, et )(1 + αD − αY ), 1} = ft (1, et )(1 − αD − αY ), which is equivalent to requiring
ft (0, et )(1 + αD − αY ) = ft (1, et )(1 − αD − αY ).
Furthermore, if both entries of the last two columns explicitly has the min{·, 1} operator, the exact
condition of matching the last two columns depends on the actual value of ft (0, et ) and ft (1, et ). For
instance, Case (xv) requires that min{ft (0, et )(1+αD +αY ), 1} = min{ft (1, et )(1+αD −αY ), 1},
which could be equivalent to one of the following conditions (recall that 1 + αD ± αY > 1):
       • if we have ft (0, et ) ∈ [ 1+αD1+αY , 1] and ft (1, et ) ∈ [ 1+αD1−αY , 1], we require 1 = 1,
         which trivially holds true;

       • if we have ft (0, et ) ∈ (0, 1+αD1+αY ) and ft (1, et ) ∈ [ 1+αD1−αY , 1], we require
         ft (0, et )(1 + αD + αY ) = 1, which cannot hold true;

       • if we have ft (0, et ) ∈ [ 1+αD1+αY , 1] and ft (1, et ) ∈ (0, 1+αD1−αY ), we require 1 =
         ft (1, et )(1 + αD − αY ) which cannot hold true;

       • if we have ft (0, et ) ∈ (0, 1+αD1+αY ) and ft (1, et ) ∈ (0, 1+αD1−αY ), we require fftt (0,et)
                                                                                                   (1,et ) =
         1+αD −αY
         1+αD +αY .

Recall that without further assumptions on the data distribution, we do not know which row(s)
                                                                                (ori)
of the table correspond to a nonzero probability P gtD (0, et ) = d, gtY (0, et ) = y, gtD (1, et ) =
        (ori)
d′ , gtY (1, et ) = y ′ . As a result, in general, we do not know which set of requirements we should
enforce for each et ∈ E. Therefore, we cannot derive a necessary and sufficient condition for attaining
Ht+1 ⊥   ⊥ At+1 in general cases. Nevertheless, we can summarize the previous analysis and derive the
necessary condition of attaining Ht+1 ⊥     ⊥ At+1 , i.e., only if at least one of the following conditions
holds true for all et ∈ E can we possibly attain Ht+1 ⊥     ⊥ At+1 :


     (1) The ratio fftt (0,et)
                        (1,et ) has a specific domain of value:

                                                     ft (0, et )   1 ± αD ± αY
                                                                 =             ;
                                                     ft (1, et )   1 ± αD ± αY

                                                               24
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


      (2) Positive (negative) labels only appear in the advantaged (disadvantaged) group, and the
          decision for everyone is positive (if αD > αY ):
                                    
                                    
                                        ft (0, et ) ∈ [ 1+αD1−αY , 1],
                                    
                                     f (1, e ) ∈ [          1
                                          t        t     1+αD +αY , 1],
                                             (ori)               (ori)
                                    
                                    
                                    
                                           Y
                                         gt (0, et ) = 0, gtY (1, et ) = 1,
                                    
                                         gtD (0, et ) = gtD (1, et ) = 1;

      (3) Negative (positive) labels only appear in the advantaged (disadvantaged) group, and the
          decision for everyone is positive (if αD > αY ):
                                    
                                    
                                        ft (0, et ) ∈ [ 1+αD1+αY , 1],
                                    
                                     f (1, e ) ∈ [          1
                                          t        t     1+αD −αY , 1],
                                             (ori)               (ori)
                                    
                                    
                                        gt (0, et ) = 1, gtY (1, et ) = 0,
                                           Y
                                    
                                         gtD (0, et ) = gtD (1, et ) = 1;

      (4) Everyone has a positive label, but the positive decision is exclusive to the advantaged group
          (if αD < αY ):             
                                     
                                         ft (0, et ) ∈ [ 1−αD1+αY , 1],
                                     
                                      f (1, e ) ∈ [          1
                                           t        t     1+αD +αY , 1],
                                              (ori)             (ori)
                                     
                                     
                                         gtY (0, et ) = gtY (1, et ) = 1,
                                     
                                          gtD (0, et ) = 0, gtD (1, et ) = 1;
      (5) Everyone has a positive label, but the positive decision is exclusive to the disadvantaged
          group (if αD < αY ):      
                                    
                                        ft (0, et ) ∈ [ 1+αD1+αY , 1],
                                    
                                     f (1, e ) ∈ [          1
                                          t        t     1−αD +αY , 1],
                                             (ori)             (ori)
                                    
                                    
                                        gtY (0, et ) = gtY (1, et ) = 1,
                                    
                                         gtD (0, et ) = 1, gtD (1, et ) = 0.



C.3    P ROOF FOR T HEOREM 4.2

Theorem. Let us consider the general situation where both Dt and Yt(ori) are dependent with At , i.e.,
Dt ⊥̸ ⊥ At , Yt(ori) ⊥
                     ̸ ⊥ At . Under Fact 3.2, Assumption 3.3, Assumption 3.4, and Assumption 3.6, as well
as the specified dynamics, when Ht ⊥       ̸ ⊥ At , the perfect predictor does not have the potential to get
closer to the long-term fairness goal after one-step intervention, i.e.,
                                                       (Perfect Predictor) t+1
                                Dt = Yt(ori) =⇒ ∆STIR                      t
                                                                               > 0.

Proof (sketch). The goal is to calculate if it is possible for Single-step Tier Imbalance Reduction
∆STIR |t+1
        t    to be smaller than 0 when using perfect predictors. As defined in Equation 5, ∆STIR |t+1   t   is
a weighted aggregation (integration followed by summation) of |φ(et+1 )| − |φ(et )|. The quantitative
analysis involves three key components:          instantiations of φt+1 (et+1 ), the knowledge/assumptions on
qt ft (0, ϵ), ft (1, ϵ) | d, d′ , y, y ′ , and characteristics of Pt (d, d′ , y ′ , y ′ ).
For the first component, we can list all possible instantiations of φt+1 (et+1 ) in Table 4 (if αD > αY ),
Table 5 (if αD < αY ), and Table 6 (if αD = αY ), respectively. For the second component, we can
introduce a quantitative assumption on qt ft (0, ϵ), ft (1, ϵ) | d, d′ , y, y ′ (Assumption 3.6). For the
third component, we need to exploit the characteristic of the predictor of interest to gain further insight
into the joint distribution Pt (d, d′ , y, y ′ ). For perfect predictors, we have Pt (d, d′ , y, y ′ ) satisfies
Equation 8 (as we have discussed in Section 4.2.1).
For the purpose of calculating the value of ∆STIR |t+1        t    , the proof contains two steps: (1) exhaustively
derive the value of |φ(et+1 )| − |φ(et )| after one-step dynamics in all possible cases, and (2) aggre-
gate the difference |φ(et+1 )| −  |φ(et )| with the help of the additional knowledge/assumptions on
qt ft (0, ϵ), ft (1, ϵ) | d, d′ , y, y ′ and Pt (d, d′ , y, y ′ ).


                                                       25
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Proof (full). For the perfect predictor Dt = Yt(ori) , among all possible instantiations of φt+1 (et+1 )
as listed in Table 4, Table 5, and Table 6, not every case corresponds to a nonzero Pt (d, d′ , y, y ′ )
and therefore may not contribute to the computation of ∆STIR |t+1  t    as detailed in Equation 5. By
applying Equation 8 we only need to consider Case (i), Case (vi), Case (xi), and Case (xvi) in Table 4
(if αD > αY ), Table 5 (if αD < αY ), and Table 6 (if αD = αY ), respectively. We list all possible
values of |φ(et+1 )| − |φ(et )| for each of the aforementioned cases (the result applies to scenarios
where αD > αY , αD < αY , or αD = αY ).
When (d, d′ , y, y ′ ) = (0, 1, 0, 1), i.e., for Case (vi):

(vi.1.1) |φ(et+1 )| − |φ(et )| = −(αD + αY ) ft (0, et ) + ft (1, et ) < 0
                                   (
                                    ft (0, et ) ∈ (0, 1], ft (1, et ) ∈ (0, 1+αD1+αY )
                        if we have                                     1
                                                                                            ;
                                    ft (1, et ) ≤ tan arctan αD +α        Y
                                                                            − π4

(vi.1.2) |φ(et+1 )| − |φ(et )| = (αD + αY − 2)ft (0, et ) + (αD + αY + 2)ft (1, et ) < 0
                                   
                                                                                1
                                   ft (0, et ) ∈ (0, 1], ft (1, et ) ∈ (0, 1+αD +αY )
                                                                       2
                        if we have ft (1, et ) < tan arctan αD +α           − π4       ;
                                   
                                   f (1, e ) ≥ tan arctan             1
                                                                         Y
                                                                              π

                                      t     t                      αD +αY   −  4


(vi.1.3) |φ(et+1 )| − |φ(et )| = (αD + αY − 2)ft (0, et ) + (αD + αY + 2)ft (1, et ) > 0
                                   
                                                                               1
                                   ft (0, et ) ∈ (0, 1], ft (1, et ) ∈ (0, 1+αD +αY )
                        if we have ft (1, et ) < ft (0, et )                           ;
                                   
                                   f (1, e ) ≥ tan arctan             2      π

                                      t     t                      αD +αY   − 4


(vi.1.4) |φ(et+1 )| − |φ(et )| = (αD + αY ) ft (0, et ) + ft (1, et ) > 0
                                   (
                                     ft (0, et ) ∈ (0, 1], ft (1, et ) ∈ (0, 1+αD1+αY )
                        if we have                                                          ;
                                     ft (1, et ) ≥ ft (0, et )

(vi.2.1) |φ(et+1 )| − |φ(et )| = 1 − (2 − αD − αY )ft (0, et ) + ft (1, et ) > 0
                                    (
                                      ft (0, et ) ∈ (0, 1], ft (1, et ) ∈ [ 1+αD1+αY , 1]
                        if we have                                                          ;
                                      ft (1, et ) < ft (0, et )

(vi.2.2) |φ(et+1 )| − |φ(et )| = 1 + (αD + αY )ft (0, et ) − ft (1, et ) > 0
                                    (
                                      ft (0, et ) ∈ (0, 1], ft (1, et ) ∈ [ 1+αD1+αY , 1]
                        if we have                                                          .
                                      ft (1, et ) ≥ ft (0, et )

When (d, d′ , y, y ′ ) = (1, 0, 1, 0), i.e., for Case (xi):

(xi.1.1) |φ(et+1 )| − |φ(et )| = −(αD + αY ) ft (0, et ) + ft (1, et ) < 0
                                   (
                                    ft (0, et ) ∈ (0, 1+αD1+αY ), ft (1, et ) ∈ (0, 1]
                        if we have                                                          ;
                                    ft (1, et ) ≥ tan 3π4 − arctan αD +αY
                                                                          1



(xi.1.2) |φ(et+1 )| − |φ(et )| = (αD + αY + 2)ft (0, et ) + (αD + αY − 2)ft (1, et ) < 0
                                   
                                                         1
                                   ft (0, et ) ∈ (0, 1+αD +αY ), ft (1, et ) ∈ (0, 1]
                        if we have ft (1, et ) < tan 3π                   1
                                                        4 − arctan αD +αY              ;
                                   
                                   f (1, e ) ≥ tan 3π − arctan           2
                                      t     t           4             αD +αY


                                                        26
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023



                                                                                                                                                              $                $
                                                                                                                                                          # 1             # 1
                                                                                                                                                      1     ,                ,
                                                                                                                                                                     2
                                                                                                                                                       + αY             α Y  "
                                                                                                               ft (1, et )                  ctan α D         ctan α D
                                                                                                                                                                      +
  ft (1, et )                                                                                                                     " 3π − ar        " 3π − ar       1        ,1
                                                                                                                          !    −1     4 !
                                                                                                                            tan
                                                                                                                                                −1     4 !             + αY
                                                                                                                                             tan                  α D
                                                                                                                                                               1+


                                                                                                                                                                )
                                                                                                                                                               .1
                (vi.2.2)


                                                    )


                                                                                                                                                             i. 2
                                                   .1
                                                            !                      "


                                               i .2


                                                                                                                                                         (x
                                                                          1


                                              (v
                                                                1,


                                                                                                                         .1)
                                                                     1 + αD + αY


                                                                                                                                   )
                                                                                                                       (xi.1

                                                                                                                                . 1. 2
                                                            !                                  $
                                                                      "            2      π#
                (vi.1.4)                                                                −


                                                                                                                               ( xi
                                                                1, tan arctan
                                                                                αD + αY   4


                                                                                                                                               )
                                    .3)


                                                                                                                                              .3
                                i .1


                                                                                                                                          i. 1
                           (v                               !                                  $


                                                                                                                                         (x
                                                                      "            1      π#
                                                                1, tan arctan           −
                                   1.2    )                                     αD + αY   4
                            ( v i.
                                                                                                                                              (xi.1.4)       (xi.2.2)
                                 (vi.1.1)


                                                   ft (0, et )                                                                                                      ft (0, et )
                                          ′             ′                                                                                          ′     ′
          (a) Case (vi), (d, d , y, y ) = (0, 1, 0, 1)                                                        (b) Case (xi), (d, d , y, y ) = (1, 0, 1, 0)

Figure 7: Illustration of the sliced squares on the ft (0, et ), ft (1, et ) plane. Depending on the initial
          situation, i.e., the slice that the ft (0, et ), ft (1, et ) pair falls upon, the term |φ(et+1 )| −
          |φ(et )| takes different values. The shaded slices indicate that if the initial situation satisfies
          the corresponding condition, the calculated |φ(et+1 )| − |φ(et )| < 0.


(xi.1.3) |φ(et+1 )| − |φ(et )| = (αD + αY + 2)ft (0, et ) + (αD + αY − 2)ft (1, et ) > 0
                                   
                                                          1
                                   ft (0, et ) ∈ (0, 1+αD +αY ), ft (1, et ) ∈ (0, 1]
                        if we have ft (1, et ) < tan 3π 4 − arctan αD +αY
                                                                          2
                                                                                       ;
                                   
                                   f (1, e ) ≥ f (0, e )
                                      t     t      t     t


(xi.1.4) |φ(et+1 )| − |φ(et )| = (αD + αY ) ft (0, et ) + ft (1, et ) > 0
                                   (
                                     ft (0, et ) ∈ (0, 1+αD1+αY ), ft (1, et ) ∈ (0, 1]
                        if we have                                                                                                                                       ;
                                     ft (1, et ) < ft (0, et )


(xi.2.1) |φ(et+1 )| − |φ(et )| = 1 + ft (0, et ) − (2 − αD − αY )ft (1, et ) > 0
                                    (
                                      ft (0, et ) ∈ [ 1+αD1+αY , 1], ft (1, et ) ∈ (0, 1]
                        if we have                                                                                                                                       ;
                                      ft (1, et ) ≥ ft (0, et )

(xi.2.2) |φ(et+1 )| − |φ(et )| = 1 − ft (0, et ) + (αD + αY )ft (1, et ) > 0
                                    (
                                      ft (0, et ) ∈ [ 1+αD1+αY , 1], ft (1, et ) ∈ (0, 1]
                        if we have                                                                                                                                       .
                                      ft (1, et ) < ft (0, et )

When (d, d′ , y, y ′ ) = (0, 0, 0, 0), i.e., for Case (i), or (d, d′ , y, y ′ ) = (1, 1, 1, 1), i.e., for Case (xvi),
|φ(et+1 )| − |φ(et )| = 0.
Now we proceed to the second step and aggregate |φ(et+1 )| − |φ(et )| terms. According to Equation
5 and Equation B.5, for the perfect predictor we have:
                                                    Z Z
        (Perfect Predictor) t+1
       ∆STIR                t
                                = Pt (0, 1, 0, 1) ·     |φt+1 (ξ)| − |φt (ϵ)|
                                                                                           ϵ∈E          ξ∈E

                                                                       · 1{φt+1 (ξ) = G(ft , gtD , gtY
                                                                                                                           (ori)
                                                                                                   ; 0, 1, 0, 1, ϵ, αD , αY )}

                                                             · qt ft (0, ϵ), ft (1, ϵ) | 0, 1, 0, 1 dξdϵ
                                                                            Z     Z                                                                                                (C.2)

                                                        + Pt (1, 0, 1, 0) ·               |φt+1 (ξ)| − |φt (ϵ)|
                                                                                               ϵ∈E      ξ∈E

                                                                       · 1{φt+1 (ξ) = G(ft , gtD , gtY
                                                                                                                           (ori)
                                                                                                             ; 1, 0, 1, 0, ϵ, αD , αY )}

                                                                       · qt ft (0, ϵ), ft (1, ϵ) | 1, 0, 1, 0 dξdϵ.

                                                                                                   27
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


As we can see from          Equation C.2, we need to perform two-dimensional integrations on the
  ft (0, et ), ft (1, et ) plane, calculating the expectation
                                                                 of the term |φ(et+1 )| − |φ(e       t )| over the
conditional densities qt ft (0, ϵ), ft (1, ϵ) | 0, 1, 0, 1 and qt ft (0, ϵ), ft (1, ϵ) | 1, 0, 1, 0 . Since these
conditional joint densities could be convoluted in general cases, the calculation of conditional ex-
pectations in Equation C.2 could be rather complicated. Therefore, we propose to take advantage
of Assumption 3.6 to quantitatively simplify the calculation yet remain consistent with the rather
mild qualitative assumption (Assumption 3.5), and derive a result that is numerically clear and infor-
mative. For the purpose of better illustrating the       connection between (qualitative and quantitative)
assumptions on qt ft (0, ϵ), ft (1, ϵ) | d, d′ , y, y ′ and the computation of ∆STIR |t+1  t   , we also provide
illustrative figures as shown in Figure 7.
With the help of Assumption 3.6, we convert the conditional expectations in Equation C.2 into
calculations of multiple integrals on slices within a 1 × 1 square on the 2-D plane, where ϕ0 and ϕ1
axes correspond to the value of ft (0, Et ) and ft (1, Et ) respectively:

   Z     Z

                 |φt+1 (ξ)| − |φt (ϵ)| · 1{φt+1 (ξ) = G(ft , gtD , gtY ; 0, 1, 0, 1, ϵ, αD , αY )}
                                                                      (ori)


    ϵ∈E ξ∈E

         · qt ft (0, ϵ), ft (1, ϵ) | 0, 1, 0, 1 dξdϵ

               Z 1 Z tan arctan 1 − π ϕ0
                                      αD +αY     4
      (low)
  = γ0101 ·                                          −(αD + αY )(ϕ0 + ϕ1 ) dϕ1 dϕ0
                   0       0
             Z 1+α 1+α Z ϕ0
                       D       Y
         +                                                             (αD + αY − 2)ϕ0 + (αD + αY + 2)ϕ1 dϕ1 dϕ0
                                                            1
              0                      tan    arctan α            −π    ϕ0
                                                          D +αY  4
             Z 1                   Z 1+α 1+α
                                           D     Y
         +                                                            (αD + αY − 2)ϕ0 + (αD + αY + 2)ϕ1 dϕ1 dϕ0
                  1                                        1
               1+αD +αY             tan    arctan α            −π    ϕ0
                                                         D +αY  4
             Z 1                   Z ϕ0
         +                                           1 − (2 − αD − αY )ϕ0 + ϕ1 dϕ1 dϕ0
                  1                    1
               1+αD +αY             1+αD +αY
                Z         1                Z 1+α 1+α
                       1+αD +αY                      D     Y
      (up)
   + γ0101 ·                                                   (αD + αY )(ϕ0 + ϕ1 ) dϕ1 dϕ0
                   0                        ϕ0
             Z 1+α 1+α Z 1
                       D       Y
         +                                           1 + (αD + αY )ϕ0 − ϕ1 dϕ1 dϕ0
                                        1
              0                      1+αD +αY
             Z 1                   Z 1
         +                               1 + (αD + αY )ϕ0 − ϕ1 dϕ1 dϕ0 ,
                  1
               1+αD +αY             ϕ0


                                                                          28
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


 Z     Z

               |φt+1 (ξ)| − |φt (ϵ)| · 1{φt+1 (ξ) = G(ft , gtD , gtY ; 1, 0, 1, 0, ϵ, αD , αY )}
                                                                     (ori)


  ϵ∈E ξ∈E

       · qt ft (0, ϵ), ft (1, ϵ) | 1, 0, 1, 0 dξdϵ

             Z 1 Z tan−1 3π −arctan 1                ϕ1
                                4           αD +αY
    (up)
= γ1010 ·                                               −(αD + αY )(ϕ0 + ϕ1 ) dϕ0 dϕ1
                  0       0
           Z 1+α 1+α Z ϕ1
                      D       Y
       +                                                              (αD + αY + 2)ϕ0 + (αD + αY − 2)ϕ1 dϕ0 dϕ1
                                                3π            1
            0                       tan−1        4 −arctan αD +αY    ϕ1
           Z 1                    Z 1+α 1+α
                                         D      Y
       +                                                             (αD + αY + 2)ϕ0 + (αD + αY − 2)ϕ1 dϕ0 dϕ1
                  1                          3π            1
               1+αD +αY            tan−1      4 −arctan αD +αY      ϕ1
           Z 1                    Z ϕ1
       +                                            1 + ϕ0 − (2 − αD − αY )ϕ1 dϕ0 dϕ1
                  1                   1
               1+αD +αY            1+αD +αY
                Z         1              Z 1+α 1+α
                       1+αD +αY                     D   Y
     (low)
  + γ1010  ·                                                (αD + αY )(ϕ0 + ϕ1 ) dϕ0 dϕ1
                   0                       ϕ1
           Z 1+α 1+α Z 1
                      D       Y
       +                                            1 − ϕ0 + (αD + αY )ϕ1 dϕ0 dϕ1
                                       1
            0                       1+αD +αY
           Z 1                    Z 1
       +                                1 − ϕ0 + (αD + αY )ϕ1 dϕ0 dϕ1 .
                  1
               1+αD +αY            ϕ1


         (low)       (up)            (low)      (up)                                           (Perfect Predictor) t+1
Since γ0101     + γ0101   = 2 and γ1010    + γ1010    = 2, we can derive the form of ∆STIR                         t
                                                                                                                       :

  (Perfect Predictor) t+1                         (low)                        (up)
∆STIR                 t
                          =  P t (0, 1, 0, 1) · γ 0101  + P t (1, 0, 1, 0) · γ 1010   ·
                                          1 + αD + αY                         1      π
                                         −                 · tan2 arctan           −
                                                  3                        αD + αY   4
                                          2(1 − αD − αY )                       1      π
                                      +                        · tan arctan          −
                                                    3                       αD + αY    4
                                          1 − αD − αY            3 − αD − αY
                                      −                    +
                                                  6           2(1 + αD + αY )

                                          3(αD + αY )3 − 6(αD + αY )2 − 19(αD + αY ) − 10
                                      +
                                                               6(1 + αD + αY )3


                                   + Pt (0, 1, 0, 1) + Pt (1, 0, 1, 0) ·

                                         αD + αY − 2     αD + αY     3(αD + αY )2 + 5(αD + αY ) + 2
                                                     +             +                                 ,
                                              3        1 + αD + αY         3(1 + αD + αY )3

        (low)    (up)
where γ0101   , γ1010 ∈ (0, 1) (according to Assumption 3.6), and αD , αY ∈ [0, 12 ) (according to
Assumption 3.3).
                                               1

Let us denote β(αD , αY ) := tan arctan αD +α    Y
                                                   − π4 to simplify the notation. Without loss of
                                                 (low)                      (up)
generality let us assume that Pt (0, 1, 0, 1) · γ0101  + Pt (1, 0, 1, 0) · γ1010 > 0.


                                                                     29
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


We can further compute the partial derivatives and find out that:
                                                    (Perfect Predictor) t+1
                                               ∂∆STIR                   t
                                                       (low)                       (up)
                               ∂   Pt (0, 1, 0, 1) · γ0101    + Pt (1, 0, 1, 0) · γ1010
                            1 + αD + αY
                        =−                · β 2 (αD , αY )
                                  3
                             2(1 − αD − αY )
                          +                     · β(αD , αY )
                                      3
                             1 − αD − αY          3 − αD − αY
                          −                +
                                    6          2(1 + αD + αY )
                             3(αD + αY )3 − 6(αD + αY )2 − 19(αD + αY ) − 10
                          +
                                               6(1 + αD + αY )3
                                             1
                        < 0, ∀ αD , αY ∈ [0, ),
                                             2

and that:


     (Perfect Predictor) t+1
 ∂∆STIR        t
                                                                    1                  2
                               = Pt (0, 1, 0, 1) + Pt (1, 0, 1, 0) ·     +
   ∂(αD + αY )                                                         3 3(1 + αD + αY )3

                                                       (low)                      (up)
                                 + Pt (0, 1, 0, 1) · γ0101   + Pt (1, 0, 1, 0) · γ1010   ·

                                  2(1 + αD + αY )                          ∂β(αD , αY )
                                        −                · β(αD , αY ) ·
                                             3                             ∂(αD + αY )
                                  2(1 − αD − αY ) ∂β(αD , αY )
                               +                         ·
                                             3             ∂(αD + αY )

                                  1              2                15(αD + αY ) + 11
                               + −                            +
                                  6 (1 + αD + αY )2                6(1 + αD + αY )3

                                                                 1                   2
                        = Pt (0, 1, 0, 1) + Pt (1, 0, 1, 0) ·          +
                                                                     3 3(1 + αD + αY )3

                                                   (low)                        (up)
                            + Pt (0, 1, 0, 1) · γ0101      + Pt (1, 0, 1, 0) · γ1010   ·

                               2 1 + β 2 (αD , αY ) · (1 + αD + αY )β(αD , αY ) + αD + αY − 1
                                                             3(1 + αD + αY )3

                                  (αD + αY )3 + 3(αD + αY )2 + 6(αD + αY )
                               +
                                                  6(1 + αD + αY )3
                                  (low)    (up)                              1
                        > 0, ∀ γ0101    , γ1010 ∈ (0, 1), αD , αY ∈ [0, ),
                                                                             2
                               ∂β(αD ,αY )
where we utilize the fact that ∂(αD +αY ) = 1 + β (αD , αY ) · 1+(αD1+αY )2 .
                                                         2


                                                               30
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Therefore, we can conclude that

  (Perfect Predictor) t+1                                     (low)                      (up)
∆STIR                 t
                          >      lim       Pt (0, 1, 0, 1) · γ0101  + Pt (1, 0, 1, 0) · γ1010   ·
                                (low)
                               γ0101  →1
                                (up)
                               γ1010  →1
                              αD +αY →0
                                     1 + αD + αY                           1      π
                                   −                 · tan2 arctan              −
                                           3                            αD + αY   4
                                     2(1 − αD − αY )                         1      π
                                   +                     · tan arctan             −
                                             3                           αD + αY    4
                                     1 − αD − αY           3 − αD − αY
                                   −                 +
                                           6            2(1 + αD + αY )

                                     3(αD + αY ) − 6(αD + αY )2 − 19(αD + αY ) − 10
                                                   3
                                   +
                                                         6(1 + αD + αY )3


                                   + Pt (0, 1, 0, 1) + Pt (1, 0, 1, 0) ·

                                   αD + αY − 2     αD + αY     3(αD + αY )2 + 5(αD + αY ) + 2
                                               +             +
                                        3        1 + αD + αY         3(1 + αD + αY )3
                        = 0,
i.e., under the specified assumptions and dynamics, we have
                     (low)    (up)                        1     (Perfect Predictor) t+1
                  ∀ γ0101  , γ1010 ∈ (0, 1), αD , αY ∈ [0, ) : ∆STIR                t
                                                                                        > 0.            (C.3)
                                                          2



C.4    P ROOF FOR T HEOREM 4.3

Theorem. Let us consider the general situation where both Dt and Yt(ori) are dependent with At , i.e.,
Dt ⊥̸ ⊥ At , Yt(ori) ⊥
                     ̸ ⊥ At . Let us further assume that the data dynamics satisfies αD ∈ (0, 12 ), αY = 0.
Then under Fact 3.2, Assumption 3.3, and Assumption 3.4, and Assumption 3.6, as well as the
specified dynamics, when Ht ⊥       ̸ ⊥ At , it is possible for the Counterfactual Fair predictor to get closer
to the long-term fairness goal after one-step intervention, if certain properties of the data dynamics
and the predictor behavior are satisfied simultaneously, i.e.,
                                 
                                 
                                      gtD (0, Et ) = gtD (1, Et )
                                 
                                 
                                  Pt (1,1,0,1)+Pt (1,1,1,0) < 27
                                       Pt (0,0,0,1)+P
                                                       t (0,0,1,0)      8
                                                   Pt (1,1,0,1)+Pt (1,1,1,0)   3
                                                                               1
                                                                                     1
                                 
                                      α D  ∈      P  (0,0,0,1)+P    (0,0,1,0)   − 1, 2
                                 
                                 
                                                    t              t

                                       αY = 0
                                           (Counterfactual Fair) t+1
                                  =⇒ ∆STIR                       t
                                                                     < 0.

Proof (sketch). Similar to proving Theorem 4.2 (proof in Appendix C.3), the goal is to calculate if it
is possible for the Single-step Tier Imbalance Reduction ∆STIR |t+1
                                                                t   to be smaller than 0 when using
Counterfactual Fair predictors.
Since ∆STIR |t+1
               t   is a weighted aggregation of |φ(et+1 )| − |φ(et )| (as defined in Equation 5),
the quantitative analysis involves three key components:          instantiations of φt+1 (et+1 ), the knowl-
edge/assumptions on qt ft (0, ϵ), ft (1, ϵ) | d, d′ , y, y ′ , and characteristics of Pt (d, d′ , y ′ , y ′ ).
For the first component, since αY = 0 is a special case of scenarios where αD > αY , we can list
all possible instantiations of φt+1 (et+1 ) in Table 4 (when αD > αY ). For the  second component,
we can introduce a quantitative assumption on qt ft (0, ϵ), ft (1, ϵ) | d, d′ , y, y ′ (Assumption 3.6).
For the third component, we need to exploit the characteristic of the predictor of interest to gain
further insight into the joint distribution Pt (d, d′ , y, y ′ ). For Counterfactual Fair predictors, we have
Pt (d, d′ , y, y ′ ) satisfies Equation 10 (as we have discussed in Section 4.2.2).


                                                           31
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


For the purpose of calculating the value of ∆STIR |t+1
                                                   t   , the proof contains two steps: (1) exhaustively
derive the value of |φ(et+1 )| − |φ(et )| after one-step dynamics (finished in Appendix C.3 when
proving Theorem 4.2), and (2) aggregate the difference |φ(et+1 )| −  |φ(et )| with the help of the
additional knowledge/assumptions on qt ft (0, ϵ), ft (1, ϵ) | d, d′ , y, y ′ and Pt (d, d′ , y, y ′ ).

Proof (full). Based on the definition of ∆STIR |t+1
                                                  t   , the proof calculates the aggregation (integra-
tion followed by summation) of the difference |φ(et+1 )| −         |φ(et )| with the help of the additional
knowledge/assumptions on qt ft (0, ϵ), ft (1, ϵ) | d, d′ , y, y ′ and Pt (d, d′ , y, y ′ ).
Since we assume αD ∈ (0, 12 ), αY = 0, we focus on possible instantiations of φt+1 (et+1 ) as listed
in Table 4 (αD > αY ). For the Counterfactual Fair predictor that satisfies gtD (0, Et ) = gtD (1, Et ),
not every case in Table 4 corresponds to a nonzero Pt (d, d′ , y, y ′ ) and therefore may not contribute
to the computation of ∆STIR |tt+1 as detailed in Equation 5. By applying Equation 10 we need to
consider Case (i), Case (ii), Case (iii), Case (iv), Case (xiii), Case (xiv), Case (xv), and Case (xvi) in
Table 4.
When (d, d′ , y, y ′ ) satisfies y = y ′ , i.e, for Case (i), Case (iv), Case (xiii), and Case (xvi), we have
                                                                            (Counterfactual Fair) t+1
|φ(et+1 )| − |φ(et )| = 0. Therefore we only need to calculate ∆STIR                              t
                                                                                                      for Case (ii),
Case (iii), Case (xiv), and Case (xv) (although αY = 0, we explicitly keep the hyperparameter αY in
the proof for the purpose of notation consistency).
According to Equation 5 and Equation B.5, for the Counterfactual Fair predictor we have:
                                                     Z Z
       (Counterfactual Fair) t+1
     ∆STIR                   t
                                 = Pt (0, 0, 0, 1) ·     |φt+1 (ξ)| − |φt (ϵ)|
                                                       ϵ∈E    ξ∈E

                                        · 1{φt+1 (ξ) = G(ft , gtD , gtY
                                                                          (ori)
                                                                             ; 0, 0, 0, 1, ϵ, αD , αY )}

                                       · qt ft (0, ϵ), ft (1, ϵ) | 0, 0, 0, 1 dξdϵ
                                                      Z     Z

                                  + Pt (0, 0, 1, 0) ·               |φt+1 (ξ)| − |φt (ϵ)|
                                                        ϵ∈E   ξ∈E

                                        · 1{φt+1 (ξ) = G(ft , gtD , gtY
                                                                          (ori)
                                                                             ; 0, 0, 1, 0, ϵ, αD , αY )}

                                       · qt ft (0, ϵ), ft (1, ϵ) | 0, 0, 1, 0 dξdϵ
                                                      Z     Z                                                (C.4)

                                  + Pt (1, 1, 0, 1) ·               |φt+1 (ξ)| − |φt (ϵ)|
                                                        ϵ∈E   ξ∈E

                                        · 1{φt+1 (ξ) = G(ft , gtD , gtY
                                                                          (ori)
                                                                             ; 1, 1, 0, 1, ϵ, αD , αY )}

                                       · qt ft (0, ϵ), ft (1, ϵ) | 1, 1, 0, 1 dξdϵ
                                                      Z     Z

                                  + Pt (1, 1, 1, 0) ·               |φt+1 (ξ)| − |φt (ϵ)|
                                                        ϵ∈E   ξ∈E

                                        · 1{φt+1 (ξ) = G(ft , gtD , gtY
                                                                          (ori)
                                                                              ; 1, 1, 1, 0, ϵ, αD , αY )}

                                        · qt ft (0, ϵ), ft (1, ϵ) | 1, 1, 1, 0 dξdϵ.

Similar to the proof of the result for perfect predictors presented in Appendix C.3, with the help of
Assumption 3.6, we convert the conditional expectations in Equation C.4 into calculations of multiple
integrals on slices within a 1 × 1 square on the 2-D plane, where ϕ0 and ϕ1 axes correspond to the
value of ft (0, Et ) and ft (1, Et ) respectively:


                                                        32
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


      Z    Z

                    |φt+1 (ξ)| − |φt (ϵ)| · 1{φt+1 (ξ) = G(ft , gtD , gtY ; 0, 0, 0, 1, ϵ, αD , αY )}
                                                                         (ori)


       ϵ∈E ξ∈E

            · qt ft (0, ϵ), ft (1, ϵ) | 0, 0, 0, 1 dξdϵ
                  Z 1 Z 1−αD −αY ϕ0
                            1−αD +αY
         (low)
     = γ0001 ·                             −(αD + αY )ϕ0 + (αD − αY )ϕ1 dϕ1 dϕ0
                        0       0
               Z 1 Z ϕ0
           +                             −(2 − αD − αY )ϕ0 + (2 − αD + αY )ϕ1 dϕ1 dϕ0
                        1−αD −αY
                0       1−αD +αY ϕ0
                   Z 1 Z ϕ1
         (up)
      + γ0001 ·                     (αD + αY )ϕ0 − (αD − αY )ϕ1 dϕ0 dϕ1 ,
                    0       0


      Z    Z

                    |φt+1 (ξ)| − |φt (ϵ)| · 1{φt+1 (ξ) = G(ft , gtD , gtY ; 0, 0, 1, 0, ϵ, αD , αY )}
                                                                         (ori)


       ϵ∈E ξ∈E

            · qt ft (0, ϵ), ft (1, ϵ) | 0, 0, 1, 0 dξdϵ
                  Z 1 Z 1−αD −αY ϕ1
                            1−αD +αY
         (up)
     = γ0010 ·                            (αD − αY )ϕ0 − (αD + αY )ϕ1 dϕ0 dϕ1
                        0       0
               Z 1 Z ϕ1
           +                             (2 − αD + αY )ϕ0 − (2 − αD − αY )ϕ1 dϕ0 dϕ1
                        1−αD −αY
                0       1−αD +αY ϕ1
                   Z 1 Z ϕ0
         (low)
      + γ0010  ·                    −(αD − αY )ϕ0 + (αD + αY )ϕ1 dϕ1 dϕ0 ,
                    0       0


                                                        33
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


     Z    Z

                   |φt+1 (ξ)| − |φt (ϵ)| · 1{φt+1 (ξ) = G(ft , gtD , gtY ; 1, 1, 0, 1, ϵ, αD , αY )}
                                                                        (ori)


      ϵ∈E ξ∈E

           · qt ft (0, ϵ), ft (1, ϵ) | 1, 1, 0, 1 dξdϵ
                Z          1      Z 1+α
                                     1+αD +αY
                                                 ϕ1
                     1+αD +αY            D −αY
        (low)
    = γ1101 ·                                       −(2 + αD − αY )ϕ0 + (2 + αD + αY )ϕ1 dϕ0 dϕ1
                      0                           ϕ1
               Z 1+α 1−α Z 1+αD −αY
                           1+α +α ϕ0
                          D      Y                    D       Y
          +                                                            (αD − αY )ϕ0 − (αD + αY )ϕ1 dϕ1 dϕ0
                0                         0
               Z 1+α 1−α Z ϕ0
                          D      Y
          +                                                       1 − (2 + αD − αY )ϕ0 + ϕ1 dϕ1 dϕ0
                    1                        1
                 1+αD +αY                 1+αD +αY
                  Z             1                 Z ϕ1
                             1+αD +αY
        (up)
     + γ1101 ·                                                −(αD − αY )ϕ0 + (αD + αY )ϕ1 dϕ0 dϕ1
                         0                            0
               Z 1+α 1+α Z 1
                          D      Y
          +                                                       1 − (αD − αY )ϕ0 − ϕ1 dϕ1 dϕ0
                                             1
                0                         1+αD +αY
               Z 1+α 1−α Z 1
                          D      Y
          +                                       1 − (αD − αY )ϕ0 − ϕ1 dϕ1 dϕ0 ,
                    1
                 1+αD +αY                 ϕ0


      Z    Z

                    |φt+1 (ξ)| − |φt (ϵ)| · 1{φt+1 (ξ) = G(ft , gtD , gtY ; 1, 1, 1, 0, ϵ, αD , αY )}
                                                                          (ori)


       ϵ∈E ξ∈E

            · qt ft (0, ϵ), ft (1, ϵ) | 1, 1, 1, 0 dξdϵ
                 Z          1      Z 1+α
                                      1+αD +αY
                                                  ϕ0
                      1+αD +αY            D −αY
         (up)
     = γ1110 ·                                       (2 + αD + αY )ϕ0 − (2 + αD − αY )ϕ1 dϕ1 dϕ0
                         0                            ϕ0
               Z 1+α 1−α Z 1+α D −αY
                           1+α +α ϕ1
                             D       Y                    D       Y
           +                                                            −(αD + αY )ϕ0 + (αD − αY )ϕ1 dϕ0 dϕ1
                 0                            0
               Z 1                       Z 1+α 1+α
                                                      D       Y
           +                                                          1 − ϕ0 − (αD + αY )ϕ1 dϕ1 dϕ0
                        1
                    1+αD −αY              0
                    Z 1+α 1+α Z ϕ0
         (low)                   D       Y
      + γ1110  ·                                           (αD + αY )ϕ0 − (αD − αY )ϕ1 dϕ1 dϕ0 .
                     0                            0


                                                                              34
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


        (low)        (up)         (low)       (up)             (low)      (up)                 (low)    (up)
Since γ0001    + γ0001      = 2, γ0010  + γ0010     = 2, γ1101       + γ1101     = 2, and γ1110      + γ1110 = 2, we can
                                    (Counterfactual Fair)  t+1
derive the form of the term ∆STIR                          t
                                                                :

     (Counterfactual Fair) t+1                           (low)                          (up)
  ∆STIR                    t
                               =   P t (0, 0, 0, 1)  · γ 0001   +  P t (0, 0, 1, 0) · γ 0010   ·

        (αD − αY )(1 − αD − αY )2                 (αD + αY )(1 − αD − αY )
                                              −
              6(1 − αD + αY )2                          3(1 − αD + αY )

                    2αY                                          (2 − αD + αY )(1 − αD )           αD    αY
        +                           − (2 − αD − αY ) +                                           +    −
           3(1 − αD + αY )                                               1 − αD + αY                6     2

                          (low)
     + Pt (1, 1, 0, 1) · γ1101  ·

                          2αY                                                  (2 + αD − αY )(1 + αD )
                                                      (2 +  α  D  +   α Y ) −
        3(1 + αD − αY )(1 + αD + αY )3                                               1 + αD − αY

                                 1
        +
           3(1 + αD + αY )(1 + αD − αY )3

                                                    (αD + αY )(1 + αD − αY )2
            (αD − αY )(1 + αD − αY ) −
                                                           2(1 + αD + αY )
                     1              αD       αY
        −                                +
           (1 + αD + αY )3 6                   2

           2                                     1                          1
        − (1 + αD − αY ) ·                                    −
           3                          (1 + αD − αY )3             (1 + αD + αY )3

                  3 + 2αD               1 + αD − αY                         1                    1
        +                           +                        ·                        −
             2(1 + αD + αY )                     2               (1 + αD − αY )2          (1 + αD + αY )2

              3 + 2αD + 2αY               1               1                      1             (αD + αY )αY
        −                            +        ·                       −                     −
             2(1 + αD + αY )2             2       1 + αD − αY            1 + αD + αY          (1 + αD + αY )3

                          (up)
     + Pt (1, 1, 1, 0) · γ1110  ·

                          2αY                                                  (2 + αD − αY )(1 + αD )
                                                      (2 + αD + αY ) −
        3(1 + αD − αY )(1 + αD + αY )3                                               1 + αD − αY

                                 1
        +
           3(1 + αD + αY )(1 + αD − αY )3

                                                    (αD + αY )(1 + αD − αY )2
            (αD − αY )(1 + αD − αY ) −
                                                           2(1 + αD + αY )
                         αD − αY                                (αD + αY )(αD − αY )
        +                                             −
           (1 + αD + αY )(1 + αD − αY ) 2(1 + αD + αY )2 (1 + αD − αY )

                     1                              1                   αD       αY           1
        −                           1−                              −         +
           2(1 + αD + αY )                (1 + αD − αY )2                 6       2 (1 + αD + αY )3
                                                      αD
     + Pt (0, 0, 0, 1) + Pt (0, 0, 1, 0) · −                + αY
                                                       3
                                     1              αD
     + Pt (1, 1, 0, 1) ·                         3
                                                         + αY
                           (1 + αD + αY )            3
            2(αD + αY )αY                      1                      1
        +                       3
                                   +                     −
           (1 + αD + αY )             1 + αD − αY            1 + αD + αY

             1 2αD            2αY                   1                          1
        +      +          −           ·                           −
             3       3          3         (1 + αD − αY )3             (1 + αD + αY )3

                                               1                          1
        − (1 + αD − αY ) ·                                 −
                                    (1 + αD − αY )2            (1 + αD + αY )2
                          αD                        1
     + Pt (1, 1, 1, 0) ·        + αY                            ,
                            3             (1 + αD + αY )3

                                                          35
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


       (low)    (up)
where γ0101  , γ1010 ∈ (0, 1) (according to Assumption 3.6), and αD , αY ∈ [0, 12 ) (according to
Assumption 3.3).
                                                                                           (Counterfactual Fair) t+1
Now let us consider the data dynamics where αY = 0 and simplify the form of ∆STIR                                t
                                                                                                                     :
          (Counterfactual Fair) t+1
      ∆STIR             t
        αD                                           αD
     =−    · Pt (0, 0, 0, 1) + Pt (0, 0, 1, 0) +           3
                                                             · Pt (1, 1, 0, 1) + Pt (1, 1, 1, 0) .
         3                                       3(1 + αD )

As we can see, as long as we have P         t (1,1,0,1)+Pt (1,1,1,0)      27
                                         Pt (0,0,0,1)+Pt (0,0,1,0) < 8 and at the same time the parameter
                                               1
satisfies αD ∈ ( P t (1,1,0,1)+Pt (1,1,1,0) 3
                  Pt (0,0,0,1)+Pt (0,0,1,0)        − 1, 12 ), it is possible for the counterfactual fair predictor
                                              t+1
to achieve a negative value for ∆STIR |t after a one-step intervention:
            Pt (1,1,0,1)+Pt (1,1,1,0)          27
            Pt (0,0,0,1)+Pt (0,0,1,0) < 8
           
                                                       1                      (Counterfactual Fair) t+1
              αD ∈ ( P     t (1,1,0,1)+Pt (1,1,1,0) 3
                          Pt (0,0,0,1)+Pt (0,0,1,0)       − 1, 12 ) =⇒ ∆STIR                        t
                                                                                                        < 0.
           
               αY = 0


                                                       36
                                                                                                                                           Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023
                                   Table 1: When αD > αY , compare cases of Ht+1 with different values of At .

                          Dt                      Yt(ori)                                         Ht+1
     Case
              if At = 0        if At = 1   if At = 0   if At = 1   if At = 0                           if At = 1

     (i)         0                0           0             0      ft (0, et )                         ft (1, et )
     (ii)        0                0           0             1      ft (0, et )(1 − αD − αY )           ft (1, et )(1 − αD + αY )
     (iii)       0                0           1             0      ft (0, et )(1 − αD + αY )           ft (1, et )(1 − αD − αY )
     (iv)        0                0           1             1      ft (0, et )                         ft (1, et )
     (v)         0                1           0             0      ft (0, et )(1 − αD − αY )           min{ft (1, et )(1 + αD − αY ), 1}
     (vi)        0                1           0             1      ft (0, et )(1 − αD − αY )           min{ft (1, et )(1 + αD + αY ), 1}
     (vii)       0                1           1             0      ft (0, et )(1 − αD + αY )           min{ft (1, et )(1 + αD − αY ), 1}
     (viii)      0                1           1             1      ft (0, et )(1 − αD + αY )           min{ft (1, et )(1 + αD + αY ), 1}
37


     (ix)        1                0           0             0      min{ft (0, et )(1 + αD − αY ), 1}   ft (1, et )(1 − αD − αY )
     (x)         1                0           0             1      min{ft (0, et )(1 + αD − αY ), 1}   ft (1, et )(1 − αD + αY )
     (xi)        1                0           1             0      min{ft (0, et )(1 + αD + αY ), 1}   ft (1, et )(1 − αD − αY )
     (xii)       1                0           1             1      min{ft (0, et )(1 + αD + αY ), 1}   ft (1, et )(1 − αD + αY )
     (xiii)      1                1           0             0      ft (0, et )                         ft (1, et )
     (xiv)       1                1           0             1      min{ft (0, et )(1 + αD − αY ), 1}   min{ft (1, et )(1 + αD + αY ), 1}
     (xv)        1                1           1             0      min{ft (0, et )(1 + αD + αY ), 1}   min{ft (1, et )(1 + αD − αY ), 1}
     (xvi)       1                1           1             1      ft (0, et )                         ft (1, et )
                                                                                                                                           Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023
                                   Table 2: When αD < αY , compare cases of Ht+1 with different values of At .

                          Dt                      Yt(ori)                                         Ht+1
     Case
              if At = 0        if At = 1   if At = 0   if At = 1   if At = 0                           if At = 1

     (i)         0                0           0             0      ft (0, et )                         ft (1, et )
     (ii)        0                0           0             1      ft (0, et )(1 − αD − αY )           min{ft (1, et )(1 − αD + αY ), 1}
     (iii)       0                0           1             0      min{ft (0, et )(1 − αD + αY ), 1}   ft (1, et )(1 − αD − αY )
     (iv)        0                0           1             1      ft (0, et )                         ft (1, et )
     (v)         0                1           0             0      ft (0, et )(1 − αD − αY )           ft (1, et )(1 + αD − αY )
     (vi)        0                1           0             1      ft (0, et )(1 − αD − αY )           min{ft (1, et )(1 + αD + αY ), 1}
     (vii)       0                1           1             0      min{ft (0, et )(1 − αD + αY ), 1}   ft (1, et )(1 + αD − αY )
     (viii)      0                1           1             1      min{ft (0, et )(1 − αD + αY ), 1}   min{ft (1, et )(1 + αD + αY ), 1}
38


     (ix)        1                0           0             0      ft (0, et )(1 + αD − αY )           ft (1, et )(1 − αD − αY )
     (x)         1                0           0             1      ft (0, et )(1 + αD − αY )           min{ft (1, et )(1 − αD + αY ), 1}
     (xi)        1                0           1             0      min{ft (0, et )(1 + αD + αY ), 1}   ft (1, et )(1 − αD − αY )
     (xii)       1                0           1             1      min{ft (0, et )(1 + αD + αY ), 1}   min{ft (1, et )(1 − αD + αY ), 1}
     (xiii)      1                1           0             0      ft (0, et )                         ft (1, et )
     (xiv)       1                1           0             1      ft (0, et )(1 + αD − αY )           min{ft (1, et )(1 + αD + αY ), 1}
     (xv)        1                1           1             0      min{ft (0, et )(1 + αD + αY ), 1}   ft (1, et )(1 + αD − αY )
     (xvi)       1                1           1             1      ft (0, et )                         ft (1, et )
                                                                                                                               Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023
                     Table 3: When αD = αY = α, compare cases of Ht+1 with different values of At .

                          Dt                      Yt(ori)                                   Ht+1
     Case
              if At = 0        if At = 1   if At = 0   if At = 1   if At = 0                     if At = 1

     (i)         0                0           0             0      ft (0, et )                   ft (1, et )
     (ii)        0                0           0             1      ft (0, et )(1 − 2α)           ft (1, et )
     (iii)       0                0           1             0      ft (0, et )                   ft (1, et )(1 − 2α)
     (iv)        0                0           1             1      ft (0, et )                   ft (1, et )
     (v)         0                1           0             0      ft (0, et )(1 − 2α)           ft (1, et )
     (vi)        0                1           0             1      ft (0, et )(1 − 2α)           min{ft (1, et )(1 + 2α), 1}
     (vii)       0                1           1             0      ft (0, et )                   ft (1, et )
     (viii)      0                1           1             1      ft (0, et )                   min{ft (1, et )(1 + 2α), 1}
39


     (ix)        1                0           0             0      ft (0, et )                   ft (1, et )(1 − 2α)
     (x)         1                0           0             1      ft (0, et )                   ft (1, et )
     (xi)        1                0           1             0      min{ft (0, et )(1 + 2α), 1}   ft (1, et )(1 − 2α)
     (xii)       1                0           1             1      min{ft (0, et )(1 + 2α), 1}   ft (1, et )
     (xiii)      1                1           0             0      ft (0, et )                   ft (1, et )
     (xiv)       1                1           0             1      ft (0, et )                   min{ft (1, et )(1 + 2α), 1}
     (xv)        1                1           1             0      min{ft (0, et )(1 + 2α), 1}   ft (1, et )
     (xvi)       1                1           1             1      ft (0, et )                   ft (1, et )
                                                                                                                                                   Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023
                                                       Table 4: When αD > αY , list possible instantiations of φt+1 (et+1 ).

                          Dt                       Yt(ori)
     Case                                                                       φt+1 (et+1 ) = ft+1 (0, et+1 ) − ft+1 (1, et+1 )
              if At = 0        if At = 1   if At = 0    if At = 1
     (i)         0                0           0              0                  φt (et )
     (ii)        0                0           0              1                  φt (et )(1 − αD ) − αY ηt (et )
     (iii)       0                0           1              0                  φt (et )(1 − αD ) + αY ηt (et )
     (iv)        0                0           1              1                  φt (et )
     (v)         0                1           0              0       (v.1)      φt (et )(1 − αY ) − αD ηt (et ), if ft (1, et ) ∈ (0, 1+αD1−αY )
                  -                -           -             -       (v.2)      ft (0, et )(1 − αD − αY ) − 1, otherwise
     (vi)        0                1           0              1       (vi.1)     φt (et ) − (αD + αY )ηt (et ), if ft (1, et ) ∈ (0, 1+αD1+αY )
                  -                -           -             -       (vi.2)     ft (0, et )(1 − αD − αY ) − 1, otherwise
40


     (vii)       0                1           1              0       (vii.1)    φt (et ) − (αD − αY )ηt (et ), if ft (1, et ) ∈ (0, 1+αD1−αY )
                  -                -           -             -       (vii.2)    ft (0, et )(1 − αD + αY ) − 1, otherwise
     (viii)      0                1           1              1       (viii.1)   φt (et )(1 + αY ) − αD ηt (et ), if ft (1, et ) ∈ (0, 1+αD1+αY )
                  -                -           -             -       (viii.2)   ft (0, et )(1 − αD + αY ) − 1, otherwise
     (ix)        1                0           0              0       (ix.1)     φt (et )(1 − αY ) + αD ηt (et ), if ft (0, et ) ∈ (0, 1+αD1−αY )
                  -                -           -             -       (ix.2)     1 − ft (1, et )(1 − αD − αY ), otherwise
     (x)         1                0           0              1       (x.1)      φt (et ) + (αD − αY )ηt (et ), if ft (0, et ) ∈ (0, 1+αD1−αY )
                  -                -           -             -       (x.2)      1 − ft (1, et )(1 − αD + αY ), otherwise
     (xi)        1                0           1              0       (xi.1)     φt (et ) + (αD + αY )ηt (et ), if ft (0, et ) ∈ (0, 1+αD1+αY )
                  -                -           -             -       (xi.2)     1 − ft (1, et )(1 − αD − αY ), otherwise
     (xii)       1                0           1              1       (xii.1)    φt (et )(1 + αY ) + αD ηt (et ), if ft (0, et ) ∈ (0, 1+αD1+αY )
                                                                     (xii.2)    1 − ft (1, et )(1 − αD + αY ), otherwise
                                                                                                                                                                                   Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023
                                                                    Table 4 (continued from the previous page)
                          Dt                       Yt(ori)
     Case                                                                      φt+1 (et+1 ) = ft+1 (0, et+1 ) − ft+1 (1, et+1 )
              if At = 0        if At = 1   if At = 0    if At = 1
     (xiii)      1                1           0              0                 φt (et )
     (xiv)       1                1           0              1       (xiv.1)   φt (et )(1 + αD ) − αY ηt (et ), if ft (0, et ) ∈ (0, 1+αD1−αY ) and ft (1, et ) ∈ (0, 1+αD1+αY )
                  -                -           -             -       (xiv.2)   ft (0, et )(1 + αD − αY ) − 1, if ft (0, et ) ∈ (0, 1+αD1−αY ) and ft (1, et ) ∈ [ 1+αD1+αY , 1]
                  -                -           -             -       (xiv.3)   1 − ft (1, et )(1 + αD + αY ), if ft (0, et ) ∈ [ 1+αD1−αY , 1] and ft (1, et ) ∈ (0, 1+αD1+αY )
                  -                -           -             -       (xiv.4)   0, otherwise
     (xv)        1                1           1              0       (xv.1)    φt (et )(1 + αD ) + αY ηt (et ), if ft (0, et ) ∈ (0, 1+αD1+αY ) and ft (1, et ) ∈ (0, 1+αD1−αY )
                  -                -           -             -       (xv.2)    ft (0, et )(1 + αD + αY ) − 1, if ft (0, et ) ∈ (0, 1+αD1+αY ) and ft (1, et ) ∈ [ 1+αD1−αY , 1]
                  -                -           -             -       (xv.3)    1 − ft (1, et )(1 + αD − αY ), if ft (0, et ) ∈ [ 1+αD1+αY , 1] and ft (1, et ) ∈ (0, 1+αD1−αY )
                  -                -           -             -       (xv.4)    0, otherwise
41


     (xvi)       1                1           1              1                 φt (et )
                                                                                                                                                                                    Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023
                                                       Table 5: When αD < αY , list possible instantiations of φt+1 (et+1 ).

                          Dt                       Yt(ori)
     Case                                                                       φt+1 (et+1 ) = ft+1 (0, et+1 ) − ft+1 (1, et+1 )
              if At = 0        if At = 1   if At = 0    if At = 1
     (i)         0                0           0              0                  φt (et )
     (ii)        0                0           0              1       (ii.1)     φt (et )(1 − αD ) − αY ηt (et ), if ft (1, et ) ∈ (0, 1−αD1+αY )
                  -                -           -             -       (ii.2)     ft (0, et )(1 − αD − αY ) − 1, otherwise
     (iii)       0                0           1              0       (iii.1)    φt (et )(1 − αD ) + αY ηt (et ), if ft (0, et ) ∈ (0, 1−αD1+αY )
                  -                -           -             -       (iii.2)    1 − ft (1, et )(1 − αD − αY ), otherwise
     (iv)        0                0           1              1                  φt (et )
     (v)         0                1           0              0                  φt (et )(1 − αY ) − αD ηt (et )
     (vi)        0                1           0              1       (vi.1)     φt (et ) − (αD + αY )ηt (et ), if ft (1, et ) ∈ (0, 1+αD1+αY )
42


                  -                -           -             -       (vi.2)     ft (0, et )(1 − αD − αY ) − 1, otherwise
     (vii)       0                1           1              0       (vii.1)    φt (et ) − (αD − αY )ηt (et ), if ft (0, et ) ∈ (0, 1−αD1+αY )
                  -                -           -             -       (vii.2)    1 − ft (1, et )(1 + αD − αY ), otherwise
     (viii)      0                1           1              1       (viii.1)   φt (et )(1 + αY ) − αD ηt (et ), if ft (0, et ) ∈ (0, 1−αD1+αY ) and ft (1, et ) ∈ (0, 1+αD1+αY )
                  -                -           -             -       (viii.2)   ft (0, et )(1 − αD + αY ) − 1, if ft (0, et ) ∈ (0, 1−αD1+αY ) and ft (1, et ) ∈ [ 1+αD1+αY , 1]
                  -                -           -             -       (viii.3)   1 − ft (1, et )(1 + αD + αY ), if ft (0, et ) ∈ [ 1−αD1+αY , 1] and ft (1, et ) ∈ (0, 1+αD1+αY )
                  -                -           -             -       (viii.4)   0, otherwise
     (ix)        1                0           0              0                  φt (et )(1 − αY ) + αD ηt (et )
     (x)         1                0           0              1       (x.1)      φt (et ) + (αD − αY )ηt (et ), if ft (1, et ) ∈ (0, 1−αD1+αY )
                  -                -           -             -       (x.2)      ft (0, et )(1 + αD − αY ) − 1, otherwise
     (xi)        1                0           1              0       (xi.1)     φt (et ) + (αD + αY )ηt (et ), if ft (0, et ) ∈ (0, 1+αD1+αY )
                  -                -           -             -       (xi.2)     1 − ft (1, et )(1 − αD − αY ), otherwise
                                                                                                                                                                                   Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023
                                                                    Table 5 (continued from the previous page)
                          Dt                       Yt(ori)
     Case                                                                      φt+1 (et+1 ) = ft+1 (0, et+1 ) − ft+1 (1, et+1 )
              if At = 0        if At = 1   if At = 0    if At = 1
     (xii)       1                0           1              1       (xii.1)   φt (et )(1 + αY ) + αD ηt (et ), if ft (0, et ) ∈ (0, 1+αD1+αY ) and ft (1, et ) ∈ (0, 1−αD1+αY )
                  -                -           -             -       (xii.2)   ft (0, et )(1 + αD + αY ) − 1, if ft (0, et ) ∈ (0, 1+αD1+αY ) and ft (1, et ) ∈ [ 1−αD1+αY , 1]
                  -                -           -             -       (xii.3)   1 − ft (1, et )(1 − αD + αY ), if ft (0, et ) ∈ [ 1+αD1+αY , 1] and ft (1, et ) ∈ (0, 1−αD1+αY )
                  -                -           -             -       (xii.4)   0, otherwise
     (xiii)      1                1           0              0                 φt (et )
     (xiv)       1                1           0              1       (xiv.1)   φt (et )(1 + αD ) − αY ηt (et ), if ft (1, et ) ∈ (0, 1+αD1+αY )
                  -                -           -             -       (xiv.2)   ft (0, et )(1 + αD − αY ) − 1, otherwise
     (xv)        1                1           1              0       (xv.1)    φt (et )(1 + αD ) + αY ηt (et ), if ft (0, et ) ∈ (0, 1+αD1+αY )
                  -                -           -             -       (xv.2)    1 − ft (1, et )(1 + αD − αY ), otherwise
43


     (xvi)       1                1           1              1                 φt (et )
                                                                                                                                          Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023
                                Table 6: When αD = αY = α, list possible instantiations of φt+1 (et+1 ).

                          Dt                       Yt(ori)
     Case                                                                      φt+1 (et+1 ) = ft+1 (0, et+1 ) − ft+1 (1, et+1 )
              if At = 0        if At = 1   if At = 0    if At = 1
     (i)          0                0           0            0                  φt (et )
     (ii)         0                0           0            1                  φt (et )(1 − α) − αηt (et )
     (iii)        0                0           1            0                  φt (et )(1 − α) + αηt (et )
     (iv)         0                0           1            1                  φt (et )
     (v)          0                1           0            0                  φt (et )(1 − α) − αηt (et )
                                                                                                                             1
     (vi)         0                1           0            1       (vi.1)     φt (et ) − 2αηt (et ), if ft (1, et ) ∈ (0, 1+2α )
                  -                -           -            -       (vi.2)     ft (0, et )(1 − 2α) − 1, otherwise
     (vii)        0                1           1            0                  φt (et )
                                                                                                                                   1
     (viii)       0                1           1            1       (viii.1)   φt (et )(1 + α) − αηt (et ), if ft (1, et ) ∈ (0, 1+2α )
                  -                -           -            -       (viii.2)   ft (0, et ) − 1, otherwise
44


     (ix)         1                0           0            0                  φt (et )(1 − α) + αηt (et )
     (x)          1                0           0            1                  φt (et )
                                                                                                                             1
     (xi)         1                0           1            0       (xi.1)     φt (et ) + 2αηt (et ), if ft (0, et ) ∈ (0, 1+2α )
                  -                -           -            -       (xi.2)     1 − ft (1, et )(1 − 2α), otherwise
                                                                                                                                   1
     (xii)        1                0           1            1       (xii.1)    φt (et )(1 + α) + αηt (et ), if ft (0, et ) ∈ (0, 1+2α )
                  -                -           -            -       (xii.2)    1 − ft (1, et ), otherwise
     (xiii)       1                1           0            0                  φt (et )
                                                                                                                                   1
     (xiv)        1                1           0            1       (xiv.1)    φt (et )(1 + α) − αηt (et ), if ft (1, et ) ∈ (0, 1+2α )
                  -                -           -            -       (xiv.2)    ft (0, et ) − 1, otherwise
                                                                                                                                   1
     (xv)         1                1           1            0       (xv.1)     φt (et )(1 + α) + αηt (et ), if ft (0, et ) ∈ (0, 1+2α )
                  -                -           -            -       (xv.2)     1 − ft (1, et ), otherwise
     (xvi)        1                1           1            1                  φt (et )
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


R EFERENCES
Jeffrey Adams, Niels Hansen, and Kun Zhang. Identification of partially observed linear causal
  models: Graphical conditions for the non-gaussian and heterogeneous cases. Advances in Neural
  Information Processing Systems, 34, 2021.
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (US). Report to the congress on credit scoring
  and its effects on the availability and affordability of credit. Board of Governors of the Federal
  Reserve System, 2007.
Toon Calders, Faisal Kamiran, and Mykola Pechenizkiy. Building classifiers with independency
  constraints. In 2009 IEEE International Conference on Data Mining Workshops, pp. 13–18. IEEE,
  2009.
Silvia Chiappa. Path-specific counterfactual fairness. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on
  Artificial Intelligence, volume 33, pp. 7801–7808, 2019.
Amanda Coston, Alan Mishler, Edward H Kennedy, and Alexandra Chouldechova. Counterfactual
 risk assessments, evaluation, and fairness. In Proceedings of the 2020 Conference on Fairness,
 Accountability, and Transparency, pp. 582–593, 2020.
Alexander D’Amour, Hansa Srinivasan, James Atwood, Pallavi Baljekar, D Sculley, and Yoni Halpern.
  Fairness is not static: deeper understanding of long term fairness via simulation studies. In
  Proceedings of the 2020 Conference on Fairness, Accountability, and Transparency, pp. 525–534,
  2020.
Danielle Ensign, Sorelle A Friedler, Scott Neville, Carlos Scheidegger, and Suresh Venkatasubrama-
  nian. Runaway feedback loops in predictive policing. In Conference on Fairness, Accountability
  and Transparency, pp. 160–171. PMLR, 2018.
Yingqiang Ge, Shuchang Liu, Ruoyuan Gao, Yikun Xian, Yunqi Li, Xiangyu Zhao, Changhua
  Pei, Fei Sun, Junfeng Ge, Wenwu Ou, and Yongfeng Zhang. Towards long-term fairness in
  recommendation. In Proceedings of the 14th ACM International Conference on Web Search and
  Data Mining, pp. 445–453, 2021.
Moritz Hardt, Eric Price, and Nati Srebro. Equality of opportunity in supervised learning. In Advances
 in Neural Information Processing Systems, pp. 3315–3323, 2016.
Lily Hu and Yiling Chen. A short-term intervention for long-term fairness in the labor market. In
  Proceedings of the 2018 World Wide Web Conference, pp. 1389–1398, 2018.
Kosuke Imai and Zhichao Jiang. Principal fairness for human and algorithmic decision-making.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2005.10400, 2020.
Shahin Jabbari, Matthew Joseph, Michael Kearns, Jamie Morgenstern, and Aaron Roth. Fairness in
  reinforcement learning. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 1617–1626. PMLR,
  2017.
Faisal Kamiran, Indrė Žliobaitė, and Toon Calders. Quantifying explainable discrimination and
  removing illegal discrimination in automated decision making. Knowledge and Information
  Systems, 35(3):613–644, 2013.
Sampath Kannan, Aaron Roth, and Juba Ziani. Downstream effects of affirmative action. In
  Proceedings of the Conference on Fairness, Accountability, and Transparency, pp. 240–248, 2019.
Michael Kearns and Aaron Roth. The ethical algorithm: The science of socially aware algorithm
 design. Oxford University Press, 2019.
Niki Kilbertus, Mateo Rojas-Carulla, Giambattista Parascandolo, Moritz Hardt, Dominik Janzing,
  and Bernhard Schölkopf. Avoiding discrimination through causal reasoning. In Proceedings of the
  31st International Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems, pp. 656–666, 2017.
Bohdan Kivva, Goutham Rajendran, Pradeep Ravikumar, and Bryon Aragam. Learning latent causal
  graphs via mixture oracles. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 34, 2021.


                                                 45
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Matt J Kusner, Joshua Loftus, Chris Russell, and Ricardo Silva. Counterfactual fairness. In Advances
 in Neural Information Processing Systems, pp. 4066–4076, 2017.
Lydia T Liu, Sarah Dean, Esther Rolf, Max Simchowitz, and Moritz Hardt. Delayed impact of fair
  machine learning. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 3150–3158. PMLR,
  2018.
Vishwali Mhasawade and Rumi Chunara. Causal multi-level fairness. In Proceedings of the 2021
  AAAI/ACM Conference on AI, Ethics, and Society, pp. 784–794, 2021.
Alan Mishler, Edward H Kennedy, and Alexandra Chouldechova. Fairness in risk assessment
  instruments: Post-processing to achieve counterfactual equalized odds. In Proceedings of the 2021
  ACM Conference on Fairness, Accountability, and Transparency, pp. 386–400, 2021.
Hussein Mouzannar, Mesrob I Ohannessian, and Nathan Srebro. From fair decision making to social
  equality. In Proceedings of the Conference on Fairness, Accountability, and Transparency, pp.
  359–368, 2019.
Hamed Nilforoshan, Johann D Gaebler, Ravi Shroff, and Sharad Goel. Causal conceptions of fairness
  and their consequences. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 16848–16887.
  PMLR, 2022.
Judea Pearl. Causality. Cambridge University Press, 2009.
Shohei Shimizu, Patrik O Hoyer, Aapo Hyvärinen, Antti Kerminen, and Michael Jordan. A linear
  non-gaussian acyclic model for causal discovery. Journal of Machine Learning Research, 7(10),
  2006.
Umer Siddique, Paul Weng, and Matthieu Zimmer. Learning fair policies in multi-objective (deep)
 reinforcement learning with average and discounted rewards. In International Conference on
 Machine Learning, pp. 8905–8915. PMLR, 2020.
Peter Spirtes, Clark N Glymour, and Richard Scheines. Causation, prediction, and search. Springer
  New York, 1993.
Min Wen, Osbert Bastani, and Ufuk Topcu. Algorithms for fairness in sequential decision making.
 In International Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Statistics, pp. 1144–1152. PMLR, 2021.
Yongkai Wu, Lu Zhang, Xintao Wu, and Hanghang Tong. Pc-fairness: A unified framework for
  measuring causality-based fairness. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, pp.
  3399–3409, 2019.
Feng Xie, Ruichu Cai, Biwei Huang, Clark Glymour, Zhifeng Hao, and Kun Zhang. Generalized
  independent noise condition for estimating latent variable causal graphs. Advances in Neural
  Information Processing Systems, 33:14891–14902, 2020.
Feng Xie, Biwei Huang, Zhengming Chen, Yangbo He, Zhi Geng, and Kun Zhang. Identification of
  linear non-gaussian latent hierarchical structure. In International Conference on Machine Learning,
  pp. 24370–24387. PMLR, 2022.
Kun Zhang and Aapo Hyvärinen. On the identifiability of the post-nonlinear causal model. In 25th
  Conference on Uncertainty in Artificial Intelligence (UAI 2009), pp. 647–655. AUAI Press, 2009.
Kun Zhang, Jonas Peters, Dominik Janzing, and Bernhard Schölkopf. Kernel-based conditional
  independence test and application in causal discovery. In 27th Conference on Uncertainty in
 Artificial Intelligence (UAI 2011), pp. 804–813. AUAI Press, 2011.
Lu Zhang, Yongkai Wu, and Xintao Wu. A causal framework for discovering and removing direct
  and indirect discrimination. In Proceedings of the 26th International Joint Conference on Artificial
  Intelligence, pp. 3929–3935, 2017.
Xueru Zhang, Mohammadmahdi Khaliligarekani, Cem Tekin, and Mingyan Liu. Group retention
 when using machine learning in sequential decision making: the interplay between user dynamics
  and fairness. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 32:15269–15278, 2019.


                                                 46
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Xueru Zhang, Ruibo Tu, Yang Liu, Mingyan Liu, Hedvig Kjellstrom, Kun Zhang, and Cheng Zhang.
  How do fair decisions fare in long-term qualification? Advances in Neural Information Processing
  Systems, 33:18457–18469, 2020.
Matthieu Zimmer, Claire Glanois, Umer Siddique, and Paul Weng. Learning fair policies in decen-
 tralized cooperative multi-agent reinforcement learning. In International Conference on Machine
 Learning, pp. 12967–12978. PMLR, 2021.


                                               47
