Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


U NDERSAMPLING IS A M INIMAX O PTIMAL ROBUST-
NESS I NTERVENTION IN N ONPARAMETRIC C LASSIFI -
CATION

 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                             A BSTRACT

         While a broad range of techniques have been proposed to tackle distribution shift,
         the simple baseline of training on an undersampled balanced dataset often achieves
         close to state-of-the-art-accuracy across several popular benchmarks. This is rather
         surprising, since undersampling algorithms discard excess majority group data.
         To understand this phenomenon, we ask if learning is fundamentally constrained
         by a lack of minority group samples. We prove that this is indeed the case in
         the setting of nonparametric binary classification. Our results show that in the
         worst case, an algorithm cannot outperform undersampling unless there is a high
         degree of overlap between the train and test distributions (which is unlikely to be
         the case in real-world datasets), or if the algorithm leverages additional structure
         about the distribution shift. In particular, in the case of label shift we show that
         there is always an undersampling algorithm that is minimax optimal. In the case
         of group-covariate shift we show that there is an undersampling algorithm that is
         minimax optimal when the overlap between the group distributions is small. We
         also perform an experimental case study on a label shift dataset and find that in line
         with our theory, the test accuracy of robust neural network classifiers is constrained
         by the number of minority samples.


1    I NTRODUCTION

A key challenge facing the machine learning community is to design models that are robust to
distribution shift. When there is a mismatch between the train and test distributions, current models
are often brittle and perform poorly on rare examples (Hovy & Søgaard, 2015; Blodgett et al., 2016;
Tatman, 2017; Hashimoto et al., 2018; Alcorn et al., 2019). In this paper, our focus is on group-
structured distribution shifts. In the training set, we have many samples from a majority group and
relatively few samples from the minority group, while during test time we are equally likely to get a
sample from either group.
To tackle such distribution shifts, a naı̈ve algorithm is one that first undersamples the training data
by discarding excess majority group samples (Kubat & Matwin, 1997; Wallace et al., 2011) and
then trains a model on this resulting dataset (see Figure 1 for an illustration of this algorithm). The
samples that remain in this undersampled dataset constitute i.i.d. draws from the test distribution.
Therefore, while a classifier trained on this pruned dataset cannot suffer biases due to distribution
shift, this algorithm is clearly wasteful, as it discards training samples. This perceived inefficiency of
undersampling has led to the design of several algorithms to combat such distribution shift (Chawla
et al., 2002; Lipton et al., 2018; Sagawa et al., 2020; Cao et al., 2019; Menon et al., 2020; Ye et al.,
2020; Kini et al., 2021; Wang et al., 2022). In spite of this algorithmic progress, the simple baseline
of training models on an undersampled dataset remains competitive. In the case of label shift, where
one class label is overrepresented in the training data, this has been observed by Cui et al. (2019); Cao
et al. (2019), and Yang & Xu (2020). While in the case of group-covariate shift, a study by Idrissi
et al. (2022) showed that the empirical effectiveness of these more complicated algorithms is limited.
For example, Idrissi et al. (2022) showed that on the group-covariate shift CelebA dataset the worst-
group accuracy of a ResNet-50 model on the undersampled CelebA dataset which discards 97% of
the available training data is as good as methods that use all of available data such as importance-


                                                    1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                          No Undersampling                      Undersampling


               Learned Boundary      Predicted Minority   Minority Samples      Dropped Samples
               Predicted Majority    Majority Samples     True Boundary


Figure 1: Example with linear models and linearly separable data. On the left we have the maximum
margin classifier over the entire dataset, and on the right we have the maximum margin classifier over
the undersampled dataset. The undersampled classifier is less biased and aligns more closely with the
true boundary.


weighted ERM (Shimodaira, 2000), Group-DRO (Sagawa et al., 2020) and Just-Train-Twice (Liu
et al., 2021). In Table 1, we report the performance of the undersampled classifier compared to the
state-of-the-art-methods in the literature across several label shift and group-covariate shift datasets.
We find that, although undersampling isn’t always the optimal robustness algorithm, it is typically a
very competitive baseline and within 1–4% the performance of the best method.

Table 1: Performance of undersampled classifier compared to the best classifier across several popular
label shift and group-covariate shift datasets. When reporting worst-group accuracy we denote it by a
?
  . When available, we report the 95% confidence interval. We find that the undersampled classifier is
always within 1–4% of the best performing robustness algorithm, except on the MultiNLI dataset.

                                                                       Test/Worst-Group? Accuracy
    Shift Type                       Dataset/Paper
                                                                             Best         Undersampled
                     Imb. CIFAR10 (step 10) (Cao et al., 2019)               87.81            84.59
       Label
                     Imb. CIFAR100 (step 10) (Cao et al., 2019)              58.71            55.06
                              CelebA (Idrissi et al., 2022)             86.9 ± 1.1   ?
                                                                                           85.6 ± 2.3?
                            Waterbirds (Idrissi et al., 2022)           87.6 ± 1.6?        89.1 ± 1.1?
 Group-Covariate
                            MultiNLI (Idrissi et al., 2022)             78.0 ± 0.7   ?
                                                                                           68.9 ± 0.8?
                         CivilComments (Idrissi et al., 2022)           72.0 ± 1.9?        71.8 ± 1.4?


Inspired by the strong performance of undersampling in these experiments, we ask:

                 Is the performance of a model under distribution shift fundamentally
                          constrained by the lack of minority group samples?

To answer this question we analyze the minimax excess risk. We lower bound the minimax excess risk
to prove that the performance of any algorithm is lower bounded only as a function of the minority
samples (nmin ). This shows that even if a robust algorithm optimally trades off between the bias and
the variance, it is fundamentally constrained by the variance on the minority group which decreases
only with nmin .

Our Contributions. In our paper, we consider the well-studied setting of nonparametric binary
classification (Tsybakov, 2010). By operating in this nonparametric regime we are able to study the
properties of undersampling in rich data distributions, but are able to circumvent the complications
that arise due to the optimization and implicit bias of parametric models.


                                                      2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


We provide insights into this question in the label shift scenario, where one of the labels is overrep-
resented in the training data, Ptrain (y = 1) ≥ Ptrain (y = −1), whereas the test samples are equally
likely to come from either class. Here the class-conditional distribution P(x | y) is Lipschitz in x.
We show that in the label shift setting there is a fundamental constraint, and that the minimax excess
risk of any robust learning method is lower bounded by 1/nmin 1/3 . That is, minority group samples
fundamentally constrain performance under distribution shift. Furthermore, by leveraging previous
results about nonparametric density estimation (Freedman & Diaconis, 1981) we show a matching
upper bound on the excess risk of a standard binning estimator trained on an undersampled dataset to
demonstrate that undersampling is optimal.
Further, we experimentally show in a label shift dataset (Imbalanced Binary CIFAR10) that the
accuracy of popular classifiers generally follow the trends predicted by our theory. When the minority
samples are increased, the accuracy of these classifiers increases drastically, whereas when the number
of majority samples are increased the gains in the accuracy are marginal at best.
We also study the covariate shift case. In this setting, there has been extensive work studying the
effectiveness of transfer (Kpotufe & Martinet, 2018; Hanneke & Kpotufe, 2019) from train to test
distributions, often focusing on deriving specific conditions under which this transfer is possible. In
this work, we demonstrate that when the overlap (defined in terms of total variation distance) between
the group distributions Pa and Pb is small, transfer is difficult, and that the minimax excess risk of
any robust learning algorithm is lower bounded by 1/nmin 1/3 . While this prior work also shows
the impossibility of using majority group samples in the extreme case with no overlap, our results
provide a simple lower bound that shows that the amount of overlap needed to make transfer feasible
is unrealistic. We also show that this lower bound is tight, by proving an upper bound on the excess
risk of the binning estimator acting on the undersampled dataset.
Taken together, our results underline the need to move beyond designing “general-purpose” robustness
algorithms (like importance-weighting (Cao et al., 2019; Menon et al., 2020; Kini et al., 2021; Wang
et al., 2022), g-DRO (Sagawa et al., 2020), JTT (Liu et al., 2021), SMOTE (Chawla et al., 2002), etc.)
that are agnostic to the structure in the distribution shift. Our worst case analysis highlights that to
successfully beat undersampling, an algorithm must leverage additional structure in the distribution
shift.

2    R ELATED W ORK
On several group-covariate shift benchmarks (CelebA, CivilComments, Waterbirds), Idrissi et al.
(2022) showed that training ResNet classifiers on an undersampled dataset either outperforms or
performs as well as other popular reweighting methods like Group-DRO (Sagawa et al., 2020),
reweighted ERM, and Just-Train-Twice (Liu et al., 2021). They find Group-DRO performs compara-
bly to undersampling, while both tend to outperform methods that don’t utilize group information.
One classic method to tackle distribution shift is importance weighting (Shimodaira, 2000), which
reweights the loss of the minority group samples to yield an unbiased estimate of the loss. However,
recent work (Byrd & Lipton, 2019; Xu et al., 2020) has demonstrated the ineffectiveness of such
methods when applied to overparameterized neural networks. Many followup papers (Cao et al.,
2019; Ye et al., 2020; Menon et al., 2020; Kini et al., 2021; Wang et al., 2022) have introduced
methods that modify the loss function in various ways to address this. However, despite this progress
undersampling remains a competitive alternative to these importance weighted classifiers.
Our theory draws from the rich literature on non-parametric classification (Tsybakov, 2010). Apart
from borrowing this setting of nonparametric classification, we also utilize upper bounds on the
estimation error of the simple histogram estimator (Freedman & Diaconis, 1981; Devroye & Györfi,
1985) to prove our upper bounds in the label shift case. Finally, we note that to prove our minimax
lower bounds we proceed by using the general recipe of reducing from estimation to testing (Wain-
wright, 2019, Chapter 15). One difference from this standard framework is that our training samples
shall be drawn from a different distribution than the test samples used to define the risk.
There is rich literature that studies domain adaptation and transfer learning under label shift (Maity
et al., 2020) and covariate shift (Ben-David et al., 2006; David et al., 2010; Ben-David et al., 2010;
Ben-David & Urner, 2012; 2014; Berlind & Urner, 2015; Kpotufe & Martinet, 2018; Hanneke &
Kpotufe, 2019). The principal focus of this line of work was to understand the value of unlabeled data


                                                   3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


from the target domain, rather than to characterize the relative value of the number of labeled samples
from the majority and minority groups. Among these papers, most closely related to our work are
those in the covariate shift setting (Kpotufe & Martinet, 2018; Hanneke & Kpotufe, 2019). Their
lower bound results can be reinterpreted to show that under covariate shift in the absence of overlap,
the minimax excess risk is lower bounded by 1/nmin 1/3 . We provide a more detailed comparison
with their results after presenting our lower bounds in Section 4.2.
Finally, we note that Arjovsky et al. (2022) recently showed that undersampling can improve the
worst-class accuracy of linear SVMs in the presence of label shift. In comparison, our results hold
for arbitrary classifiers with the rich nonparametric data distributions.

3     S ETTING
In this section, we shall introduce our problem setup and define the types of distribution shift that we
consider.

3.1     P ROBLEM S ETUP

The setting for our study is nonparametric binary classification with Lipschitz data distributions.
We are given n training datapoints S := {(x1 , y1 ), . . . , (xn , yn )} ∈ ([0, 1] × {−1, 1})n that are all
drawn from a train distribution Ptrain . During test time, the data shall be drawn from a different
distribution Ptest . To present a clean analysis, we study the case where the features x are bounded
scalars, however, it is easy to extend our results to the high-dimensional setting.
Given a classifier f : R → {−1, 1}, we shall be interested in the test error (risk) of this classifier
under the test distribution Ptest :
                              R(f ; Ptest ) := E(x,y)∼Ptest [1(f (x) 6= y)] .

3.2     T YPES OF D ISTRIBUTION S HIFT

We assume that Ptrain consists of a mixture of two groups of unequal size, and Ptest contains equal
numbers of samples from both groups. Given a majority group distribution Pmaj and a minority group
distribution Pmin , the learner has access to nmaj majority group samples and nmin minority group
samples:
                                           nmaj
                                  Smaj ∼ Pmaj   and Smin ∼ Pnmin min
                                                                     .
Here nmaj > n/2 and nmin < n/2 with nmaj + nmin = n. The full training dataset is S =
Smaj ∪ Smin = {(x1 , y1 ), . . . , (xn , yn )}. We assume that the learner has access to the knowledge
whether a particular sample (xi , yi ) comes from the majority or minority group.
The test samples will be drawn from Ptest = 12 Pmaj + 12 Pmin , a uniform mixture over Pmaj and Pmin .
Thus, the training dataset is an imbalanced draw from the distributions Pmaj and Pmin , whereas the
test samples are balanced draws. We let ρ := nmaj /nmin > 1 denote the imbalance ratio in the
training data.
We focus on two-types of distribution shifts: label shift and group-covariate shift that we describe
below.

3.2.1    L ABEL S HIFT
In this setting, the imbalance in the training data comes from there being more samples from one
class over another. Without loss of generality, we shall assume that the class y = 1 is the majority
class. Then, we define the majority and the minority class distributions as
                   Pmaj (x, y) = P1 (x)1(y = 1) and Pmin = P−1 (x)1(y = −1),
where P1 , P−1 are class-conditional distributions over the interval [0, 1]. We assume that class-
conditional distributions Pi have densities on [0, 1] and that they are 1-Lipschitz: for any x, x0 ∈ [0, 1],
                                      |Pi (x) − Pi (x0 )| ≤ |x − x0 |.
We denote the class of pairs of distributions (Pmaj , Pmin ) that satisfy these conditions by PLS . We
note that such Lipschitzness assumptions are common in the literature (see Tsybakov, 2010).


                                                     4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


3.2.2    G ROUP -C OVARIATE S HIFT
In this setting, we have two groups {a, b}, and corresponding to each of these groups is a distribution
(with densities) over the features Pa (x) and Pb (x). We let a correspond to the majority group and b
correspond to the minority group. Then, we define
                  Pmaj (x, y) = Pa (x)P(y | x) and               Pmin (x, y) = Pb (x)P(y | x).
We assume that for y ∈ {−1, 1}, for all x, x0 ∈ [0, 1]:
                                    P(y | x) − P(y | x0 ) ≤ |x − x0 |,
that is, the distribution of the label given the feature is 1-Lipschitz, and it varies slowly over the
domain.
To quantify the shift between the train and test distribution, we define a notion of overlap between the
group distributions Pa and Pb as follows:
                                  Overlap(Pa , Pb ) := 1 − TV(Pa , Pb )
where TV(Pa , Pb ) := supE⊆[0,1] |Pa (E) − Pb (E)|, denotes the total variation distance between
Pa and Pb . Notice that when Pa and Pb have disjoint supports, TV(Pa , Pb ) = 1 and therefore
Overlap(Pa , Pb ) = 0. On the other hand when Pa = Pb , TV(Pa , Pb ) = 0 and Overlap(Pa , Pb ) = 1.
When the overlap is 1, the majority and minority distributions are identical and hence we have no
shift between train and test. Observe that Overlap(Pa , Pb ) = Overlap(Pmaj , Pmin ) since P(y | x) is
shared across Pmaj and Pmin .
Given a level of overlap τ ∈ [0, 1] we denote the class of pairs of distributions (Pmaj , Pmin ) with
overlap at least τ by PGS (τ ). It is easy to check that, PGS (τ ) ⊆ PGS (0) at any overlap level τ ∈ [0, 1].

4     L OWER B OUNDS ON THE M INIMAX E XCESS R ISK
In this section, we shall prove our lower bounds that show that the performance of any algorithm is
constrained by the number of minority samples nmin . Before we state our lower bounds, we need to
introduce the notion of excess risk and minimax excess risk.

Excess Risk and Minimax Excess Risk. We measure the performance of an algorithm A through
its excess risk defined in the following way. Given an algorithm A that takes as input a dataset S
and returns a classifier AS , and a pair of distributions (Pmaj , Pmin ) with Ptest = 12 Pmaj + 12 Pmin , the
expected excess risk is given by
       Excess Risk[A; (Pmaj , Pmin )] := ES∼Pnmaj ×Pnmin R(AS ; Ptest )) − R(f ? (Ptest ); Ptest ) , (1)

                                                 maj       min


where f (Ptest ) is the Bayes classifier that minimizes the risk R(·; Ptest ). The first term corresponds
         ?

to the expected risk for the algorithm when given nmaj samples from Pmaj and nmin samples from
Pmin , whereas the second term corresponds to the Bayes error for the problem.
Excess risk does not let us characterize the inherent difficulty of a problem, since for any particular
data distribution (Pmaj , Pmin ) the best possible algorithm A to minimize the excess risk would be the
trivial mapping AS = f ? (Ptest ). Therefore, to prove meaningful lower bounds on the performance of
algorithms we need to define the notion of minimax excess risk (see Wainwright, 2019, Chapter 15).
Given a class of pairs of distributions P define
             Minimax Excess Risk(P) := inf             sup          Excess Risk[A; (Pmaj , Pmin )],      (2)
                                              A (Pmaj ,Pmin )∈P

where the infimum is over all measurable estimators A. The minimax excess risk is the excess risk of
the “best” algorithm in the worst case over the class of problems defined by P.

4.1     L ABEL S HIFT L OWER B OUNDS

We demonstrate the hardness of the label shift problem in general by establishing a lower bound on
the minimax excess risk.


                                                       5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Theorem 4.1. Consider the label shift setting described in Section 3.2.1. Recall that PLS is the class
of pairs of distributions (Pmaj , Pmin ) that satisfy the assumptions in that section. The minimax excess
risk over this class is lower bounded as follows:
                                                                                             1     1
 Minimax Excess Risk(PLS ) = inf           sup           Excess Risk[A; (Pmaj , Pmin )] ≥                . (3)
                                   A (Pmaj ,Pmin )∈PLS                                      600 nmin 1/3

We establish this result in Appendix B. We show that rather surprisingly, the lower bound on the
minimax excess risk scales only with the number of minority class samples nmin 1/3 , and does
not depend on nmaj . Intuitively, this is because any learner must predict which class-conditional
distribution (P(x | 1) or P(x | −1)) assigns higher likelihood at that x. To interpret this result,
consider the extreme scenario where nmaj → ∞ but nmin is finite. In this case, the learner has
full information about the majority class distribution. However, the learning task continues to be
challenging since any learner would be uncertain about whether the minority class distribution assigns
higher or lower likelihood at any given x. This uncertainty underlies the reason why the minimax
rate of classification is constrained by the number of minority samples nmin .
We also note that the theorem can be trivially extended to higher dimensions. In this case the
exponents degrade to 1/3d rather than 1/3 as is to be expected in nonparametric classification.
We briefly note that, applying minimax lower bounds from the transfer learning literature (Maity
et al., 2020, Theorem 3.1 with α = 1, β = 0 and d = 1) to our problem leads to a more optimistic
lower bound of 1/n1/3 . Our lower bounds that scale as 1/nmin 1/3 , uncover the fact that only adding
minority class samples helps reduce the risk.

4.2   G ROUP -C OVARIATE S HIFT L OWER B OUNDS

Next, we shall state our lower bound on the minimax excess risk that demonstrates the hardness of the
group-covariate shift problem. In the theorem below c > 0 shall be an absolute constant independent
of nmaj , nmin and τ .
Theorem 4.2. Consider the group shift setting described in Section 3.2.2. Given any overlap
τ ∈ [0, 1] recall that PGS (τ ) is the class of distributions such that Overlap(Pmaj , Pmin ) ≥ τ . The
minimax excess risk in this setting is lower bounded as follows:
   Minimax Excess Risk(PGS (τ )) = inf             sup             Excess Risk[A; (Pmaj , Pmin )]
                                        A (Pmaj ,Pmin )∈PGS (τ )

                                                1                                  1
                            ≥                                       ≥                            ,         (4)
                                200(nmin · (2 − τ ) + nmaj · τ )1/3   200nmin 1/3 (ρ · τ + 2)1/3
where ρ = nmaj /nmin > 1.

We prove this theorem in Appendix C.
We see that in the low overlap setting (τ   1/ρ), the minimax excess risk is lower bounded by
1/nmin 1/3 , and we are fundamentally constrained by the number of samples in minority group. To
see why this is the case, consider the extreme example with τ = 0 where Pa has support [0, 0.5]
and Pb has support [0.5, 1]. The nmaj majority group samples from Pa provide information about
the correct label predict in the interval [0, 0.5] (the support of Pa ). However, since the distribution
P(y | x) is 1-Lipschitz in the worst case these samples provide very limited information about the
correct predictions in [0.5, 1] (the support of Pb ). Thus, predicting on the support of Pb requires
samples from the minority group and this results in the nmin dependent rate. In fact, in this extreme
case (τ = 0) even if nmaj → ∞, the minimax excess risk is still bounded away from zero. This
intuition also carries over to the case when the overlap is small but non-zero and our lower bound
shows that minority samples are much more valuable than majority samples at reducing the risk.
On the other hand, when the overlap is high (τ   1/ρ) the minimax excess risk is lower bounded
by 1/(nmin (2 − τ ) + nmaj τ )1/3 and the extra majority samples are quite beneficial. This is roughly
because the supports of Pa and Pb have large overlap and hence samples from the majority group
are useful in helping make predictions even in regions where Pb is large. In the extreme case when
τ = 1, we have that Pa = Pb and therefore recover the classic i.i.d. setting with no distribution shift.
Here, the lower bound scales with 1/n1/3 , as one might expect.


                                                         6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Identical to the label shift case, the theorem can be extended to hold in higher dimensions with the
exponents being 1/3d rather than 1/3.
Previous work on transfer learning with covariate shift has considered other more elaborate notions
of transferability (Kpotufe & Martinet, 2018; Hanneke & Kpotufe, 2019) than overlap between
group distributions considered here. In the case of no overlap (τ = 0), previous results (Kpotufe &
Martinet, 2018, Theorem 1 with α = 1, β = 0 and γ = ∞) yield the same lower bound of 1/nmin 1/3 .
Beyond the case of no overlap (τ = 0), our lower bound is key to drawing the simple conclusion that
even when overlap is small between group distributions, minority samples alone dictate the rate of
convergence. On the other hand, when the overlap is large our bound tells us that all samples can
help reduce the risk.

5     U PPER B OUNDS ON THE E XCESS R ISK FOR THE U NDERSAMPLED B INNING
      E STIMATOR

We will show that an undersampled estimator matches the rates in the previous section showing
that undersampling is an optimal robustness intervention. We start by defining the undersampling
procedure and the undersampling binning estimator.

Undersampling Procedure. Given training data S := {(x1 , y1 ), . . . , (xn , yn )}, generate a new
undersampled dataset SUS by

       • including all nmin samples from Smin and,
       • including nmin samples from Smaj by sampling uniformly at random without replacement.

This procedure ensures that in the undersampled dataset SUS , the groups are balanced, and that
|SUS | = 2nmin .
The undersampling binning estimator defined next will first run this undersampling procedure to
obtain SUS and just uses these samples to output a classifier.

Undersampled Binning Estimator The undersampled binning estimator AUSB takes as input a
dataset S and a positive integer K corresponding to the number of bins, and returns a classifier
AS,K
  USB : [0, 1] → {−1, 1}. This estimator is defined as follows:

      1. First, we compute the undersampled dataset SUS .
      2. Given this dataset SUS , let n1,j be the number of points with label +1 that lie in the interval
         Ij = [ j−1  j
                 K , K ]. Also, define n−1,j analogously. Then set

                                                       if n1,j > n−1,j ,

                                                  1
                                          Aj =
                                                  −1 otherwise.

      3. Define the classifier AS,K
                                USB such that if x ∈ Ij then

                                                AS,K
                                                 USB (x) = Aj .                                      (5)
         Essentially in each bin Ij , we set the prediction to be the majority label among the samples
         that fall in this bin.

Whenever the number of bins K is clear from the context we shall denote AS,K
                                                                         USB by AUSB . Below we
                                                                                 S

establish upper bounds on the excess risk of this simple estimator.

5.1   L ABEL S HIFT U PPER B OUNDS

We now establish an upper bound on the excess risk of AUSB in the label shift setting (see Sec-
tion 3.2.1). Below we let c, C > 0 be absolute constants independent of problem parameters like
nmaj and nmin .


                                                   7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Theorem 5.1. Consider the label shift setting described in Section 3.2.1. For any (Pmaj , Pmin ) ∈ PLS
the expected excess risk of the Undersampling Binning Estimator (Eq. (5)) with number of bins with
K = cdnmin 1/3 e is upper bounded by
                                                                                               C
  Excess Risk[AUSB ; (Pmaj , Pmin )] = ES∼Pnmaj ×Pnmin R(ASUSB ; Ptest ) − R(f ? ; Ptest ) ≤

                                                                                                      .
                                            maj   min                                        nmin 1/3

We prove this result in Appendix B. This upper bound combined with the lower bound in Theorem 4.1
shows that an undersampling approach is minimax optimal up to constants in the presence of label
shift.
Our analysis leaves open the possibility of better algorithms when the learner has additional infor-
mation about the structure of the label shift beyond Lipschitz continuity. We also note that it is
straightforward to generalize the upper bound to higher dimensions with the exponent being 1/3d
instead of 1/3.

5.2   G ROUP -C OVARIATE S HIFT U PPER B OUNDS

Next, we present our upper bounds on the excess risk of the undersampled binning estimator in the
group-covariate shift setting (see Section 3.2.2). In the theorem below, C > 0 is an absolute constant
independent of the problem parameters nmaj , nmin and τ .
Theorem 5.2. Consider the group shift setting described in Section 3.2.2. For any overlap τ ∈ [0, 1]
and for any (Pmaj , Pmin ) ∈ PGS (τ ) the expected excess risk of the Undersampling Binning Estimator
(Eq. (5)) with number of bins with K = dnmin 1/3 e is
                                                                                               C
 Excess Risk[AUSB ; (Pmaj , Pmin )] = ES∼Pnmaj ×Pnmin R(ASUSB ; Ptest )) − R(f ? ; Ptest ) ≤

                                                                                                      .
                                             maj    min                                      nmin 1/3

We provide a proof for this theorem in Appendix C. Compared to the lower bound established in
                                                         1/3
Theorem 4.2 which scales as 1/ ((2 − τ )nmin + nmaj τ ) , the upper bound for the undersampled
binning estimator always scales with 1/nmin 1/3
                                                since it operates on the undersampled dataset (SUS ).
Thus, we have shown that in the absence of overlap (τ   1/ρ = nmin /nmaj ) there is an under-
sampling algorithm that is minimax optimal up to constants. However when there is high overlap
(τ   1/ρ) there is a non-trivial gap between the upper and lower bounds:
                                Upper Bound
                                               = c(ρ · τ + 2)1/3 .
                                Lower Bound
Again this upper bound can be generalized to higher dimensions.

6     M INORITY S AMPLE D EPENDENCE IN P RACTICE
Inspired by our worst-case theoretical predictions in nonparametric classification, we ask: how does
the accuracy of neural network classifiers trained using robust algorithms evolve as a function of the
majority and minority samples?
To explore this question, we conduct a small case study using the imbalanced binary CIFAR10
dataset (Byrd & Lipton, 2019; Wang et al., 2022) that is constructed using the “cat” and “dog” classes.
The test set consists of all of the 1000 cat and 1000 dog test examples. To form our initial train and
validation sets, we take 2500 cat examples but only 500 dog examples from the official train set,
corresponding to a 5:1 label imbalance. We then use 80% of those examples for training and the rest
for validation. In our experiment, we either (a) add only minority samples; (b) add only majority
samples; (c) add both majority and minority samples in a 5:1 ratio. We consider competitive robust
classifiers proposed in the literature that are convolutional neural networks trained either by using
(i) the importance weighted cross entropy loss, or (ii) the importance weighted VS loss (Kini et al.,
2021). We early stop using the importance weighted validation loss in both cases. The additional
experimental details are presented in Appendix E.
Our results in Figure 2 are generally consistent with our theoretical predictions. By adding only
minority class samples the test accuracy of both classifiers increases by a great extent (6%), while by


                                                  8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Figure 2: Convolutional neural network classifiers trained on the Imbalanced Binary CIFAR10 dataset
with a 5:1 label imbalance. (Top) Models trained using the importance weighted cross entropy loss
with early stopping. (Bottom) Models trained using the importance weighted VS loss (Kini et al.,
2021) with early stopping. We report the average test accuracy calculated on a balanced test set over
5 random seeds. We start off with 2500 cat examples and 500 dog examples in the training dataset.
We find that in accordance with our theory, for both of the classifiers adding only minority class
samples (red) leads to large gain in accuracy (∼ 6%), while adding majority class samples (blue)
leads to little or no gain. In fact, adding majority samples sometimes hurts test accuracy due to the
added bias. When we add majority and minority samples in a 5:1 ratio (green), the gain is largely due
to the addition of minority samples and is only marginally higher (< 2%) than adding only minority
samples. The green curves correspond to the same classifiers in both the left and right panels.


adding only majority class samples the test accuracy remains constant or in some cases even decreases
owing to the added bias of the classifiers. When we add samples to both groups proportionately, the
increase in the test accuracy appears to largely to be due to the increase in the number of minority
class samples and on the left panels, we see that the difference between adding only extra minority
group samples (red) and both minority and majority group samples (green) is small. Thus, we find
that the accuracy for these neural network classifiers is also constrained by the number of minority
class samples. Similar conclusions hold for classifiers trained using the tilted loss (Li et al., 2020)
and group-DRO objective (Sagawa et al., 2020) (see Appendix D).


7    D ISCUSSION

We showed that undersampling is an optimal robustness intervention in nonparametric classification
in the absence of significant overlap between group distributions or without additional structure
beyond Lipschitz continuity. At a high level our results highlight the need to reason about the specific
structure in the distribution shift and design algorithms that are tailored to take advantage of this
structure. This would require us to step away from the common practice in robust machine learning
where the focus is to design “universal” robustness interventions that are agnostic to the structure
in the shift. Alongside this, our results also dictate the need for datasets and benchmarks with the
propensity for transfer from train to test time.


                                                   9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


R EFERENCES
Michael Alcorn, Qi Li, Zhitao Gong, Chengfei Wang, Long Mai, Wei-Shinn Ku, and Anh Nguyen.
 Strike (with) a pose: Neural networks are easily fooled by strange poses of familiar objects. In
 Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), 2019.
Martin Arjovsky, Kamalika Chaudhuri, and David Lopez-Paz. Throwing away data improves
 worst-class error in imbalanced classification. arXiv preprint arXiv:2205.11672, 2022.
Shai Ben-David and Ruth Urner. On the hardness of domain adaptation and the utility of unlabeled
  target samples. In Algorithmic Learning Theory (ALT), 2012.
Shai Ben-David and Ruth Urner. Domain adaptation–can quantity compensate for quality? Annals of
  Mathematics and Artificial Intelligence, 2014.
Shai Ben-David, John Blitzer, Koby Crammer, and Fernando Pereira. Analysis of representations for
  domain adaptation. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS), 2006.
Shai Ben-David, John Blitzer, Koby Crammer, Alex Kulesza, Fernando Pereira, and Jennifer Wortman
  Vaughan. A theory of learning from different domains. Machine learning, 2010.
Christopher Berlind and Ruth Urner. Active nearest neighbors in changing environments. In
  International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML), 2015.
Su Lin Blodgett, Lisa Green, and Brendan O’Connor. Demographic dialectal variation in social
  media: A case study of african-american english. In Empirical Methods in Natural Language
  Processing (EMNLP), 2016.
Jonathon Byrd and Zachary Lipton. What is the effect of importance weighting in deep learning? In
  International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML), 2019.
Clément Canonne. A short note on an inequality between KL and TV.                  arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2202.07198, 2022.
Kaidi Cao, Colin Wei, Adrien Gaidon, Nikos Arechiga, and Tengyu Ma. Learning imbalanced
  datasets with label-distribution-aware margin loss. In Advances in Neural Information Processing
  Systems (NeurIPS), 2019.
Nitesh Chawla, Kevin Bowyer, Lawrence Hall, and Philip Kegelmeyer. Smote: Synthetic minority
  over-sampling technique. Journal of Artificial Intelligence Research, 2002.
Yin Cui, Menglin Jia, Tsung-Yi Lin, Yang Song, and Serge Belongie. Class-balanced loss based on
  effective number of samples. In Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), 2019.
Shai Ben David, Tyler Lu, Teresa Luu, and Dávid Pál. Impossibility theorems for domain adaptation.
  In International Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Statistics (AISTATS), 2010.
Luc Devroye and László Györfi. Nonparametric density estimation: the L1 view. Wiley Series in
  Probability and Mathematical Statistics, 1985.
David Freedman and Persi Diaconis. On the histogram as a density estimator: L2 theory. Zeitschrift
  für Wahrscheinlichkeitstheorie und verwandte Gebiete, 1981.
Steve Hanneke and Samory Kpotufe. On the value of target data in transfer learning. In Advances in
  Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS), 2019.
Tatsunori Hashimoto, Megha Srivastava, Hongseok Namkoong, and Percy Liang. Fairness without
  demographics in repeated loss minimization. In International Conference on Machine Learning
  (ICML), 2018.
Dirk Hovy and Anders Søgaard. Tagging performance correlates with author age. In Association for
  Computational Linguistics (ACL), 2015.
Badr Youbi Idrissi, Martı́n Arjovsky, Mohammad Pezeshki, and David Lopez-Paz. Simple data
  balancing achieves competitive worst-group-accuracy. In Causal Learning and Reasoning, 2022.


                                                10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Ganesh Ramachandra Kini, Orestis Paraskevas, Samet Oymak, and Christos Thrampoulidis. Label-
  imbalanced and group-sensitive classification under overparameterization. In Advances in Neural
  Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS), 2021.
Samory Kpotufe and Guillaume Martinet. Marginal singularity, and the benefits of labels in covariate-
  shift. In Conference On Learning Theory (COLT), 2018.
Miroslav Kubat and Stan Matwin. Addressing the curse of imbalanced training sets: one-sided
 selection. In International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML), 1997.
Tian Li, Ahmad Beirami, Maziar Sanjabi, and Virginia Smith. Tilted empirical risk minimization. In
  International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR), 2020.
Zachary Lipton, Yu-Xiang Wang, and Alexander Smola. Detecting and correcting for label shift with
  black box predictors. In International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML), 2018.
Evan Liu, Behzad Haghgoo, Annie Chen, Aditi Raghunathan, Pang Wei Koh, Shiori Sagawa, Percy
  Liang, and Chelsea Finn. Just train twice: Improving group robustness without training group
  information. In International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML), 2021.
Subha Maity, Yuekai Sun, and Moulinath Banerjee. Minimax optimal approaches to the label shift
  problem. arXiv preprint arXiv:2003.10443, 2020.
Aditya Krishna Menon, Sadeep Jayasumana, Ankit Singh Rawat, Himanshu Jain, Andreas Veit, and
  Sanjiv Kumar. Long-tail learning via logit adjustment. In International Conference on Learning
  Representations (ICLR), 2020.
Shiori Sagawa, Pang Wei Koh, Tatsunori Hashimoto, and Percy Liang. Distributionally robust neural
  networks. In International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR), 2020.
Hidetoshi Shimodaira. Improving predictive inference under covariate shift by weighting the log-
  likelihood function. Journal of Statistical Planning and Inference, 2000.
Rachael Tatman. Gender and dialect bias in youtube’s automatic captions. In ACL Workshop on
  Ethics in Natural Language Processing, 2017.
Alexandre Tsybakov. Introduction to Nonparametric Estimation. Springer, 2010.
Martin Wainwright. High-dimensional statistics: A non-asymptotic viewpoint. Cambridge University
 Press, 2019.
Byron Wallace, Kevin Small, Carla Brodley, and Thomas Trikalinos. Class imbalance, redux. In
  International Conference on Data Mining (ICDM), 2011.
Ke Alexander Wang, Niladri Chatterji, Saminul Haque, and Tatsunori Hashimoto. Is importance
  weighting incompatible with interpolating classifiers? In International Conference on Learning
  Representations (ICLR), 2022.
Larry Wasserman. Lecture notes in nonparametric classification, 2019. URL https://www.stat.
  cmu.edu/˜larry/=sml/nonparclass.pdf. [Online; accessed 12-May-2022].
Wikipedia contributors. Poisson binomial distribution — Wikipedia, the free encyclope-
 dia, 2022. URL https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Poisson_
 binomial_distribution&oldid=1071847908. [Online; accessed 5-May-2022].
Da Xu, Yuting Ye, and Chuanwei Ruan. Understanding the role of importance weighting for deep
  learning. In International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR), 2020.
Yuzhe Yang and Zhi Xu. Rethinking the value of labels for improving class-imbalanced learning.
  Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS), 2020.
Han-Jia Ye, Hong-You Chen, De-Chuan Zhan, and Wei-Lun Chao. Identifying and compensating for
  feature deviation in imbalanced deep learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2001.01385, 2020.


                                                11
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


A       T ECHNICAL T OOLS
In this section we avail ourselves of some technical tools that shall be used in all of the proofs below.

A.1     R EDUCTION TO LOWER BOUNDS OVER A FINITE CLASS

The lower bound on the minimax excess risk will be established via the usual route of first identifying
a “hard” finite set of problem instances and then establishing the lower bound over this finite class.
One difference from the usual setup in proving such lower bounds (see Wainwright, 2019, Chapter 15)
is that the training samples are drawn from an imbalanced distribution, whereas the test samples are
drawn from a balanced one.
Let P be a class of pairs of distributions, where each element (Pmaj , Pmin ) ∈ P is a pair of dis-
tributions over [0, 1] × {−1, 1}. As before, we let Ptest denote the uniform mixture over Pmaj
and Pmin . We let V denote a finite index set. Corresponding to each element v ∈ V there is a
Pv = (Pv,maj , Pv,min ) ∈ P with Pv,test = (Pv,maj + Pv,min )/2. Finally, also define a pair of random
variables (V, S) as follows:
        1. V is a uniform random variable over the set V.
                            nmaj
        2. (S | V = v) ∼ Pv,maj  × Pnv,min
                                      min
                                           , is an independent draw of nmaj samples from Pv,maj and
           nmin samples from Pv,min .
We shall let Q denote the joint distribution of the random variables (V, S), and let QS denote the
marginal distribution of S.
With this notation in place, we now present a lemma that lower bounds the minimax excess risk in
terms of quantities defined over the finite class of “hard” instances Pv .
Lemma A.1. Let the random variables (V, S) be as defined above. The minimax excess risk is lower
bounded as follows:
                                                ES∼Pnmaj ×Pnmin R(AS ; Ptest ) − R(f ? (Ptest ); Ptest )

 Minimax Excess Risk(P) = inf          sup
                                     A (Pmaj ,Pmin )∈P                maj    min


                                 ≥ RV − BV ,
where RV and Bayes-error BV are defined as
                           RV := ES∼QS [inf P(x,y)∼Pv∈V Q(v|S)Pv,test (h(x) 6= y)],
                                              h
                           BV := EV [R(f ? (PV,test ); PV,test ))].

Proof. By the definition of Minimax Excess Risk,
Minimax Excess Risk = inf              sup         ES∼Pnmaj ×Pnmin [R(AS ; Ptest )] − R(f ? (Ptest ); Ptest )
                               A (Pmaj ,Pmin )∈P           maj         min


                           ≥ inf sup ES|v∼Pnmaj ×Pnmin [R(AS ; Pv,test )] − R(f ? (Pv,test ); Pv,test )
                              A v∈V        v,maj  v,min
                                    h                                                                   i
                           ≥ inf EV ES|V ∼Pnmaj ×Pnmin [R(AS ; PV,test )] − R(f ? (PV,test ); PV,test ))
                               A                   V,maj     V,min

                           = inf EV [ES|V ∼Pnmaj ×Pnmin [R(AS ; PV,test )]] − EV [R(f ? (PV,test ); PV,test ))] .
                              A             V,maj  V,min                      |            {z                 }
                                                                                                  =BV

We continue lower bounding the first term as follows
  inf EV [ES|V ∼Pnmaj ×Pnmin [R(AS ; PV,test )]] = inf E(V,S)∼Q [P(x,y)∼PV,test (AS (x) 6= y)]
    A              V,maj     V,min                               A
                                                           = inf ES∼QS EV ∼Q(·|S) [P(x,y)∼PV,test (AS (x) 6= y)]
                                                                 A
                                                           (i)
                                                           ≥ ES∼QS [inf EV ∼Q(·|S) [P(x,y)∼PV,test (h(x) 6= y)]]
                                                                             h
                                                           = ES∼QS [inf P(x,y)∼Pv∈V Q(v|S)Pv,test (h(x) 6= y)]
                                                                             h
                                                           = RV ,


                                                                 12
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


where (i) follows since AS is a fixed classifier given the sample set S. This, combined with the
previous equation block completes the proof.

A.2      T HE H AT F UNCTION AND ITS P ROPERTIES

In this section, we define the hat function and establish some of its properties. This function will be
useful in defining “hard” problem instances to prove our lower bounds. Given a positive integer K
the hat function is defined as
                                      x + 4K − 4K for x ∈  − 2K , 0 ,
                                             1       1
                                                                  1

                          φK (x) = 4K   1
                                           − x − 4K 1
                                                          for x ∈ 0, 2K1
                                                                          ,                         (6)
                                                          otherwise.
                                     
                                       0
When K is clear from context, we omit the subscript.


                                           Hat Function (φ4)
                        0.05


                        0.00


                      −0.05


                               −0.2      −0.1      0.0        0.1         0.2



                                 Figure 3: The hat function with K = 4.


We first notice that this function is 1-Lipschitz and odd, so
                                         Z 2K1

                                                φK (x) dx = 0.
                                              1
                                           − 2K


We also compute some other key quantities for φ.
Lemma A.2. For any positive integer K,
                                 Z 2K1
                                                            1
                                        |φK (x)| dx =           .
                                           1
                                        − 2K               8K 2

Proof. We suppress K in the notation. We have that,
             1
          Z 2K                Z 0                             Z 2K 1
                                        1          1                         1       1
                |φ(x)| dx =                 − x+        dx +           x−        −       dx.
              1
           − 2K                    1
                                − 2K   4K         4K            0           4K      4K

The integrand 4K  1           1
                                    over x ∈ − 2K , 0 defines a triangle with base 2K  and height 4K ,
                                               1                                    1              1
                      − x + 4K
thus it has area 16K 2 . Therefore,
                    1

                                Z 0
                                          1          1              1
                                             − x+         dx =        2
                                                                        .
                                 − 2K1  4K          4K           16K
                                                                                     1
The same holds for the second term. Thus, by adding them up we get that
                                                                                  R 2K
                                                                                      1
                                                                                   − 2K
                                                                                          |φ(x)| dx =
8K 2 .
 1



                                                  13
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Lemma A.3. For any positive integer K,
                    Z K1                          1
                                     1 + φK (x − 2K

                                                    )                   1          1
                           log                    1         1 + φK x −       dx ≤
                     0               1 − φK (x − 2K )                  2K         3K 3

and
                    Z K1                          1
                                     1 − φK (x − 2K

                                                    )                   1          1
                           log                    1         1 − φK x −       dx ≤      .
                     0               1 + φK (x − 2K )                  2K         3K 3


Proof. Let us suppress K in the notation. We prove the first bound below and the second bound
follows by an identical argument. We have that
      Z K1                      1
                   1 + φ(x − 2K

                                  )                 1
             log                1      1+φ x−              dx
       0           1 − φ(x − 2K   )                2K
                   1
                             1 + φ(x)
                Z 2K
             =         log              (1 + φ(x)) dx
                    1
                 − 2K        1 − φ(x)
                   1                                   Z 0
                            1 + φ(x)                                   1 + φ(x)
                Z 2K
             =        log              (1 + φ(x)) dx +           log              (1 + φ(x)) dx
                 0          1 − φ(x)                    − 2K 1         1 − φ(x)
                   1                                   Z 0
                            1 + φ(x)                                 1 + φ(−x)
                Z 2K
             =        log              (1 + φ(x)) dx −         log                (1 + φ(−x)) dx
                 0          1 − φ(x)                    2K
                                                          1          1 − φ(−x)
                   1                                        1
                                                                      1 − φ(x)

                            1 + φ(x)
                Z 2K                                   Z 2K
             =        log              (1 + φ(x)) dx +          log              (1 − φ(x)) dx,
                 0          1 − φ(x)                    0             1 + φ(x)
where the last equality follows since φ is an odd function. Now, we may collect the integrands to get
that,
                       Z K1                     1
                                   1 + φ(x − 2K

                                                  )                  1
                             log                1      1 +  φ   x −       dx
                         0         1 − φ(x − 2K   )                 2K
                                     1
                                              1 + φ(x)
                                 Z 2K
                             =2        log               φ(x) dx
                                   0          1 − φ(x)
                                 Z 2K1
                                                    2φ(x)
                             =2        log 1 +                φ(x) dx
                                   0              1 − φ(x)
                                     1
                                         2φ(x)2
                                 Z 2K
                             ≤2                   dx,
                                   0   1 − φ(x)

where the last inequality follows since log(1 + x) ≤ x for all x. Now we observe that φ(x) ≤ x ≤ 12
for x ∈ [0, 2K
             1
                ], and in particular, 1−φ(x)
                                        1
                                             ≤ 2. Thus,
                            Z K1                     1
                                          1 + φ(x − 2K

                                                       )               1
                                     log             1         1+φ x−       dx
                             0            1 − φ(x − 2K )              2K
                                            1
                                         Z 2K
                                     ≤8       φ(x)2 dx
                                             0
                                              1
                                           Z 2K
                                      ≤8          x2 dx
                                             0
                                         1
                                      =      .
                                        3K 3
This proves the first bound. The second bound follows analogously.


                                                             14
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


B     P ROOFS IN THE L ABEL S HIFT S ETTING

Throughout this section we operate in the label shift setting (Section 3.2.1).
First, in Appendix B.1 through a sequence of lemmas we prove the minimax lower bound Theorem 4.1.
Next, in Appendix B.2 we prove Theorem 5.1 which is an upper bound on the excess risk of the
undersampled binning estimator (see Eq. (5)) with dnmin e1/3 bins by invoking previous results on
nonparametric density estimation (Freedman & Diaconis, 1981; Devroye & Györfi, 1985).

B.1    P ROOF OF T HEOREM 4.1

In this section, we provide a proof of the minimax lower bound in the label shift setting.
We will proceed by constructing a class of distributions where the separation between any two
distributions in the class is small enough such that it is hard to distinguish between them with finite
minority class samples. In particular, we split the interval [0, 1] into sub-intervals and each class
distribution on each sub-interval either has slightly more probability mass on the left side of the
sub-interval, on the right, or completely uniform. Since the minority class sample size is limited, no
classifier will be able to tell which distribution the minority class is generated from, and hence will
suffer high excess risk.
We construct the “hard” set of distributions as follows. Fix K to be an integer that will be specified
                                                                             K                K
in the sequel as a function of nmin . Let the index set be V = {−1, 0, 1} × {−1, 0, 1} . For
                                    K                                                 K
v ∈ V, we will let v1 ∈ {−1, 0, 1} be the first K coordinates and v−1 ∈ {−1, 0, 1} be the last K
coordinates. That is, v = (v1 , v−1 ).
For every v ∈ P we shall define pair of class-conditional distributions Pv,1 and Pv,−1 as follows: for
x ∈ Ij = [ j−1  j
            K , K ],

                                                           j + 1/2
                              Pv,1 (x) = 1 + v1,j φ x −
                                                               K

                                                             j + 1/2
                            Pv,−1 (x) = 1 + v−1,j φ x −                 ,
                                                                 K
where φ is defined in Eq. 6. Notice that Pv,1 only depends on v1 while Pv,−1 only depends on v−1 .
We continue to define
                                     Pv,maj (x, y) = Pv,1 (x)1(y = 1)
                                     Pv,min (x, y) = Pv,−1 (x)1(y = −1),
and
                         Pv,maj (x, y) + Pv,min (x, y)   Pv,1 (x)1(y = 1) + Pv,−1 (x)1(y = −1)
      Pv,test (x, y) =                                 =                                       .
                                       2                                   2
Observe that in the test distribution it is equally likely for the label to be +1 or −1.
Recall that as described in Section A.1, V shall be a uniform random variable over V and S | V ∼
 nmaj
Pv,maj × Pnv,min
            min
                 . We shall let Q denote the joint distribution of (V, S) and let QS denote the marginal
over S.
With this construction in place, we first show that the minimax excess risk is lower bounded by
Lemma B.1. For any positive integers K, nmaj , nmin , the minimax excess risk is lower bounded as
follows:
            Minimax Excess Risk(PLS )
                                               ES∼Pnmaj ×Pnmin R(AS ; Ptest ) − R(f ? ; Ptest )

                  = inf          sup
                         A (Pmaj ,Pmin )∈PLS         maj     min

                                               "                                                        !#
                     1   1                                 X                      X
                  ≥     − ES∼QS TV                               Q(v | S)Pv,1 ,         Q(v | S)Pv,−1        .   (7)
                    36K  2
                                                           v∈V                    v∈V


                                                             15
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Proof. By invoking Lemma A.1 we get that
     Minimax Excess Risk(PLS )
          ≥ ES∼QS [inf P(x,y)∼Pv∈V Q(v|S)Pv,test (h(x) 6= y)] − EV [R(f ? (PV,test ); PV,test ))] .
                    h
            |                    {z                         } |              {z
                                                                            =:B
                                                                                                }
                                                                                               V
                                       =:RV

We proceed by calculating alternate expressions for RV and BV to get our desired lower bound on
the minimax excess risk.
Calculation of RV : Immediately by Le Cam’s lemma (Wainwright, 2019, Eq. 15.13), we get that

             RV = ES∼QS inf P(x,y)∼Pv∈V Q(v|S)Pv,test (h(x) 6= y)
                             h
                            "                                              !#
                     1                  X                 X
                 = ES∼QS 1 − TV            Q(v | S)Pv,1 ,    Q(v | S)Pv,−1    .           (8)
                     2
                                              v∈V                   v∈V


Calculation of BV : Again by invoking Le Cam’s lemma (Wainwright, 2019, Eq. 15.13), we get that
for any class conditional distributions P1 , P−1 ,
                                                    1 1
                                R(f ? ; Ptest ) =    − TV(P1 , P−1 ).
                                                    2 2
So by taking expectations, we get that

                                                                1 1
                               ?
               BV = EV [R(f (PV,test ); PV,test )] = EV          − TV(PV,1 , PV,−1 ) .                 (9)
                                                                2 2

We now compute EV [TV(PV,1 , PV,−1 )] as follows:
                                     Z 1
                               1
      EV [TV(PV,1 , PV,−1 )] = EV           |PV,1 (x) − PV,−1 (x)| dx
                               2
                                     x=0                                           
                                       K Z j
                               1      X       K                         j + 1/2
                             = EV               |V1,j − V−1,j | φ x −            dx
                               2      j=1
                                             j−1
                                              K
                                                                           K
                                  K
                                         "Z j                                        #
                               1X             K                         j + 1/2
                             =       EV          |V1,j − V−1,j | φ x −            dx
                               2 j=1         j−1
                                              K
                                                                           K
                                             K
                                (i)     1 X
                                =               EV [|V1,j − V−1,j |],
                                      16K 2 j=1

where (i) follows by Lemma A.2. Observe that V1,j , V−1,j are independent uniform random variables
on {−1, 0, 1}, it is therefore straightforward to compute that
                                                                  8
                                         EV [|V1,j − V−1,j |] =     .
                                                                  9
This yields that
                                                                   1
                                      EV [TV(PV,1 , PV,−1 )] =        .
                                                                  18K
Plugging this into Eq. (9) allows us to conclude that

                                                                  1               1
                       BV = EV [R(f ? (PV,test ); PV,test )] =              1−             .          (10)
                                                                  2              18K

Combining Eqs. (8) and (10) establishes the claimed result.



                                                    16
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


In light of this previous lemma we now aim to upper bound the expected total variation distance in
Eq. (7).
Lemma B.2. Suppose that v is drawn uniformly from the set {−1, 1}K , and that S | v is drawn from
 nmaj
Pv,maj × Pnv,min
            min
                 then,
          "                                                         !#
                                                                              1      1       n
                                                                                               min
                    X                         X
      ES TV               Q(v | S)Pv,1 ,            Q(v | S)Pv,−1        ≤       −      exp −      .
                                                                             18K   144K       3K 3
                    v∈V                       v∈V



Proof. Let ψ := ES TV                      v∈V Q(v | S)Pv,−1 . Then,
                      P                   P
                       v∈V Q(v | S)Pv,1 ,
                 "                                      !#
                      X                X
         ψ = ES TV      Q(v | S)Pv,1 ,    Q(v | S)Pv,−1
                                v∈V                     v∈V
                       "Z                                                         #
                          1
               1                  X
              = ES                      Q(v | S) (Pv,1 (x) − Pv,−1 (x)) dx
               2            x=0 v∈V
                                                                       
                      K Z j
               1    X      K     X
              = ES                  Q(v | S) (Pv,1 (x) − Pv,−1 (x)) dx
               2     j=1  x= j−1
                              K  v∈V
                                                                               
                      K    j
                                                                    j
                         Z
               1    X      K     X                                    + 1/2
              = ES                  Q(v | S)(v1,j − v−1,j )φ x −             dx ,
               2     j=1  x= j−1                                       K
                              K              v∈V


where the last equality is by the definition of Pv,1 and Pv,−1 . Continuing we get that,
                            j
                   K
                       "Z                         #     "                             #
           1X               K      j + 1/2                X
        ψ=                    φ x−             dx ES          Q(v | S)(v1,j − v−1,j )
           2 j=1       x= j−1         K
                           K                              v∈V
                                                       
                           K X
           (i)   1        X
           =         ES        Q(v | S)(v1,j − v−1,j ) 
               16K 2      j=1         v∈V
                       K Z
                 1     X          X
           =                            Q(v | S)(v1,j − v−1,j ) dQS (S)
               16K 2 j=1
                                  v∈V
                      K Z X
                 1 X
           =                Q(v, S)(v1,j − v−1,j ) dS
               16K 2 j=1
                                  v∈V
                            K Z
           (ii)      1      X           X
           =                                  Q(S | v)(v1,j − v−1,j ) dS,
                  16K 2 |V| j=1
                                        v∈V

where (i) follows by the calculation in Lemma A.2 and (ii) follows since v is a uniform random
variable over the set V.
The distributions Pv,1 and Pv,−1 are symmetrically defined over all intervals Ij = [ j−1  j
                                                                                      K , K ], and
hence all of the summands in the RHS above are equal. Thus,
                                               Z X
                                 1
                            ψ=                             Q(S | v)(v1,1 − v−1,1 ) dS.                 (11)
                               16K|V|
                                                     v∈V


Before we continue further, let us define

                                            V + = {v ∈ V | v1,1 > v−1,1 }.


                                                            17
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


For every v ∈ V + , let ṽ ∈ V be such that is the same as v on all coordinates, except ṽ1,1 = −v1,1
and ṽ−1,1 = −v−1,1 . Then continuing from Eq. (11) we find that,
                                        Z
                     (i)      1              X
                  ψ=                                (v1,1 − v−1,1 )(Q(S | v) − Q(S | ṽ)) dS
                            16K|V|
                                            v∈V +
                     (ii)
                                         Z X
                         1
                     ≤                              (v1,1 − v−1,1 ) |Q(S | v) − Q(S | ṽ)| dS
                       16K|V|
                                            v∈V +
                                                    Z
                          1     X
                     =               (v1,1 − v−1,1 ) |Q(S | v) − Q(S | ṽ)| dS
                       16K|V|
                               v∈V +
                         1    X
                     =             (v1,1 − v−1,1 )TV(Q(S | v), Q(S | ṽ)),                            (12)
                       8K|V|     +
                             v∈V
                             |                      {z                  }
                                                               =:Ξ


where (i) we use the definition of V + and ṽ, (ii) follows since v1,1 > v−1,1 for v ∈ V + .
Now we further partition V + into 3 sets V (1,0) , V (0,−1) , V (1,−1) as follows

                                    V (1,0) = {v ∈ V | v1,1 = 1, v−1,1 = 0},
                                    V (0,−1) = {v ∈ V | v1,1 = 0, v−1,1 = −1},
                                    V (1,−1) = {v ∈ V | v1,1 = 1, v−1,1 = −1}.

                            n
Note that Q(S | v) = Pv,maj
                       maj
                            × Pnv,min
                                 min
                                      , and therefore

                                                       nmaj               nmaj
                            X
                   Ξ=               (v1,1 − v−1,1 )TV Pv,maj × Pnv,min
                                                                  min
                                                                       , Pṽ,maj × Pnṽ,min
                                                                                       min


                            v∈V +
                     (i)

                                            nmaj               nmaj
                                X
                      =                 TV Pv,maj × Pnv,min
                                                       min
                                                            , Pṽ,maj × Pnṽ,min
                                                                            min


                            v∈V (1,0)

                                                     nmaj               nmaj
                                       X
                                +                TV Pv,maj × Pnv,min
                                                                min
                                                                     , Pṽ,maj × Pnṽ,min
                                                                                     min


                                    v∈V (0,−1)

                                                      nmaj               nmaj
                                        X
                                +2                TV Pv,maj × Pnv,min
                                                                 min
                                                                      , Pṽ,maj × Pnṽ,min
                                                                                      min
                                                                                             ,        (13)
                                     v∈V (1,−1)


where (i) follows since v1 , v−1 ∈ {−1, 0, 1}K and by the definition of the sets V (1,0) , V (0,1) and
V (1,−1) .
Now by the Bretagnolle–Huber inequality (see Canonne, 2022, Corollary 4),

    nmaj               nmaj                       nmaj                 nmaj
TV Pv,maj × Pnv,min
               min
                    , Pṽ,maj × Pnṽ,min
                                    min
                                           = TV Pṽ,maj  × Pnṽ,min
                                                               min
                                                                    , Pv,maj × Pnv,min
                                                                                    min



                                                1
                                                                    nmaj                nmaj

                                           ≤ 1 − exp −KL Pṽ,maj          × Pnṽ,min
                                                                                min
                                                                                     kPv,maj × Pnv,min
                                                                                                  min
                                                                                                          ,
                                                2
where we flip the arguments in the first step for simplicity later.
Next, by the chain rule for KL-divergence, we have that
          n                     n
         maj
   KL(Pṽ,maj × Pnṽ,min
                    min     maj
                         kPv,maj × Pnv,min
                                      min
                                           ) = nmaj KL(Pṽ,maj kPv,maj ) + nmin KL(Pṽ,min kPv,min ).


Using these, let us upper bound the first term in Eq. (13) corresponding to v ∈ V (0,−1) . For
v ∈ V (0,−1) , notice that KL(Pṽ,maj kPv,maj ) = 0 since v1,j = ṽ1,j for all j ∈ {1, . . . , K}. For the


                                                             18
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


second term, KL(Pṽ,min kPv,min ), only v1,1 and ṽ1,1 differ, so
                                 Z 1
                                                       Pv,−1 (x)
         KL(Pṽ,min kPv,min ) =       Pv,−1 (x) log                 dx
                                   0                   Pṽ,−1 (x)
                                 Z K1                        1
                                              1 + φK (x − 2K

                                                                )                   1
                               =       log                   1       1 + φ K   x −       dx
                                   0          1 − φK (x − 2K    )                  2K
                                    1
                               ≤       ,
                                  3K 3
where the last inequality is a result of the calculation in Lemma A.3.
Therefore, we get
                                                                            n
          X
                      nmaj     nmin     nmaj      nmin

                                                             K−1      1       min
                  TV Pv,maj × Pv,min , Pṽ,maj × Pṽ,min ≤ 9       1 − exp −    3
                                                                                  .
           (0,−1)
                                                                      2      3K
        v∈V


For the terms in Eq. (13) corresponding to V (0,−1) , V (1,−1) , we simply take the trivial bound to get

                                     nmaj                nmaj
                       X
                              TV Pv,maj   × Pnv,min
                                                min
                                                     , Pṽ,maj × Pnṽ,min
                                                                     min
                                                                            ≤ 9K−1 ,
                      v∈V (0,−1)

                                       nmaj               nmaj
                         X
                                   TV Pv,maj × Pnv,min
                                                  min
                                                       , Pṽ,maj × Pnṽ,min
                                                                       min
                                                                              ≤ 9K−1 .
                      v∈V (1,−1)

Plugging these bounds into Eq. (13) we get that,
                                                     9K−1      n
                                                                 min
                                   Ξ ≤ 4 · 9K−1 −         exp −      .
                                                       2        3K 3

Now using this bound on Ξ in Eq. (12) and observing that |V| = 9K , we get that,
                            "                                            !#
                                   X                   X
                   ψ = ES TV            Q(v | S)Pv,1 ,     Q(v | S)Pv,−1
                                          v∈V                 v∈V
                                                 9K−1
                                                           n
                               1           K−1               min
                         ≤             4·9     −      exp −
                           8 · 9K K                2        3K 3
                             1        1         n
                                                  min
                         =       −        exp −       ,
                           18K      144K         3K 3
completing the proof.

Finally, we combine Lemma B.1 and Lemma B.2 to establish the minimax lower bound in this label
shift setting. We recall the statement of the theorem here.
Theorem 4.1. Consider the label shift setting described in Section 3.2.1. Recall that PLS is the class
of pairs of distributions (Pmaj , Pmin ) that satisfy the assumptions in that section. The minimax excess
risk over this class is lower bounded as follows:
                                                                                          1     1
  Minimax Excess Risk(PLS ) = inf            sup        Excess Risk[A; (Pmaj , Pmin )] ≥              . (3)
                                    A (Pmaj ,Pmin )∈PLS                                  600 nmin 1/3

Proof. By Lemma B.1 we know that,
                                       "                                                                    !#
                             1   1                             X                      X
Minimax Excess Risk(PLS ) ≥     − ES∼QS TV                           Q(v | S)Pv,1 ,         Q(v | S)Pv,−1        .
                            36K  2
                                                               v∈V                    v∈V

Next by the calculation in Lemma B.2 we have that
                                                                    n
                                           1    1   1       1         min
              Minimax Excess Risk(PLS ) ≥     −         −      exp −
                                          36K   2 18K     144K       3K 3
                                            1       n
                                                      min
                                        =      exp −      .
                                          288K       3K 3


                                                      19
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Setting K = dnmin 1/3 e yields the following

                                                   1                        nmin
               Minimax Excess Risk(PLS ) ≥                   exp −
                                             288dnmin 1/3 e            3dnmin 1/3 e3

                                                        nmin
                                             exp − 3dnmin   1/3 e3    nmin 1/3     1
                                         ≥
                                                     288             dnmin e nmin 1/3
                                                                           1/3
                                                         1

                                         (i) 0.7 exp −            1
                                                         3
                                         ≥
                                                  288        nmin 1/3
                                              1      1
                                         ≥                ,
                                             600 nmin 1/3
where (i) follows since nmin 1/3 /dnmin 1/3 e ≥ 0.7 for nmin ≥ 1.

B.2   P ROOF OF T HEOREM 5.1

In this section, we derive an upper bound on the excess risk of the undersampled binning estimator
AUSB (Eq. (5)) in the label shift setting. Recall that given a dataset S this estimator first calculates
the undersampled dataset SUS , where the number of points from the minority group (nmin ) is equal to
the number of points from the majority group (nmin ), and the size of the dataset is 2nmin . Throughout
this section, (Pmaj , Pmin ) shall be an arbitrary element of PLS .
To bound the excess risk of the undersampling algorithm, we will relate it to density estimation.
Recall that n1,j denotes the number of points in SUS with label +1 that lie in Ij , and n−1,j is defined
analogously.
Given a positive integer K, for x ∈ Ij = [ j−1  j
                                            K , K ], by the definition of the undersampled binning
estimator (Eq. (5))

                                                   if n1,j > n−1,j ,

                                              1
                               ASUSB (x) =
                                              −1 otherwise.

Recall that since we have undersampled, j n1,j = j n−1,j = nmin . Therefore, define the simple
                                        P            P

histogram estimators for P1 (x) = P(x | y = 1) and P−1 (x) = P(x | y = −1) as follows: for
x ∈ Ij ,

                            b S (x) := n1,j
                            P                       and       b S (x) := n−1,j .
                                                              P
                              1                                 −1
                                      Knmin                              Knmin
With this histogram estimator in place, we may define an estimator for η(x) := Ptest (y = 1|x) as
follows,
                                                       b S (x)
                                                       P
                                     ηbS (x) :=          1
                                                                    .
                                                     S
                                                   P (x) + P
                                                   b        b S (x)
                                                    1            −1

Observe that, for x ∈ Ij

                       ηbS (x) > 1/2 ⇐⇒ n1,j > n−1,j ⇐⇒ ASUSB (x) = 1.

Defining an estimator ηbS for the Ptest (y = 1 | x) in this way will allow us to relate the excess risk of
AUSB to the estimation error in Pb S and P
                                   1
                                          bS .
                                            −1

Before proving the theorem we restate it here.
Theorem 5.1. Consider the label shift setting described in Section 3.2.1. For any (Pmaj , Pmin ) ∈ PLS
the expected excess risk of the Undersampling Binning Estimator (Eq. (5)) with number of bins with
K = cdnmin 1/3 e is upper bounded by
                                                                                                 C
 Excess Risk[AUSB ; (Pmaj , Pmin )] = ES∼Pnmaj ×Pnmin R(ASUSB ; Ptest ) − R(f ? ; Ptest ) ≤

                                                                                                         .
                                             maj        min                                   nmin 1/3

                                                     20
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Proof. By the definition of the excess risk
      Excess Risk[AUSB ; (Pmaj , Pmin )] := ES∼Pnmaj ×Pnmin R(ASUSB ; Ptest )) − R(f ? ; Ptest ) .

                                                    maj   min

By invoking (Wasserman, 2019, Theorem 1) we may upper bound the excess risk given a draw of S
by
                                                       Z
              R(ASUSB ; Ptest )) − R(f ? ; Ptest ) ≤ 2   ηbS (x) − η(x) Ptest (x) dx.

Continuing using the definition of ηbS above and because η = P1 /(P1 + P−1 ) we have that,
R(ASUSB ; Ptest )) − R(f ? ; Ptest )
       Z 1          b S (x)
                    P 1                    P1 (x)          P1 (x) + P−1 (x)
  =2                               −                                           dx
         0   b S (x) + P
             P           b S (x) P1 (x) + P−1 (x)                  2
                1          −1
      Z 1                         !
              P1 (x) + P−1 (x) b S
  =                                  P1 (x) − P1 (x) dx
       0      b S (x) + P
              P          b S (x)
                1          −1
  (i)
      Z 1                             Z 1
           b S (x) − P1 (x) dx +            P1 (x) + P−1 (x)        b S (x) dx
  ≤        P 1                                                 −1 P   1
                                            P S (x) + P S (x)
       0                                0   b
                                              1
                                                      b
                                                        −1
      Z 1                             Z 1                                               b S (x)
             S                             b S (x) + P
                                                     b S (x) − P1 (x) − P−1 (x)         P 1
  =        P1 (x) − P1 (x) dx +
           b                               P 1         −1                                            dx
                                                                                      S
                                                                                    P (x) + Pb S (x)
         0                             0                                            b
                                                                                     1        −1
         Z 1                           Z 1
    ≤2         b S (x) − P1 (x) dx +
               P                    b S (x) − P−1 (x) dx
                                    P
                 1                    −1
         0                        0
         s                           s
    (ii)
           Z 1                  2      Z 1                    2
     ≤ 2          S
                P1 (x) − P1 (x) dx +
                b                           b S (x) − P−1 (x) dx,
                                            P −1
               0                                0
where (i) follows by the triangle inequality, (ii) is by the Cauchy–Schwarz inequality.
Taking expectation over the samples S and by invoking Jensen’s inequality we find that,
      Excess Risk(AS ; (Pmaj , Pmin ))
           = ES R(ASUSB ; Ptest )) − R(f ? ; Ptest )

               s  Z                                  s  Z
                                            2                                       2
           ≤ 2 ES             S
                            P1 (x) − P1 (x) dx + ES
                            b                                     S
                                                                P−1 (x) − P−1 (x) dx .
                                                                b

We note that Pb S only depends on nmin i.i.d. draws from class j. Thus by (Freedman & Diaconis,
                j
1981, Theorem 1.7), if K = cdnmin e1/3 then
                                Z
                                       S
                                                       2              C
                            ES       Pj (x) − Pj (x) dx ≤
                                     b                                    .
                                                                 nmin 2/3
Plugging this into the previous inequality yields the desired result.

C    P ROOF IN THE G ROUP -C OVARIATE S HIFT S ETTING
Throughout this section we operate in the group-covariate shift setting (Section 3.2.2).
We will proceed similarly to Section B. We shall construct a family of class-conditional distributions
such that it will be necessary for adequate samples in each sub-interval of [0, 1] to be able to learn the
maximally likely label in that sub-interval. On the other hand, we will construct the group-covariate
distributions to be separated from one another. As a consequence, sub-intervals with high probability
mass under the minority group distribution will have low probability mass under the majority group
distribution. Hence, these sub-intervals will not have enough training sample points for any classifier
to be able to learn the maximally likely label and as a result shall suffer high excess risk.
First in Appendix C.1, we prove Theorem 4.2, the minimax lower bound through a sequence of
lemmas. Second in Appendix C.2, we prove Theorem 5.2 that upper bound on the excess risk of the
undersampled binning estimator with dnmin e1/3 bins.


                                                    21
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


C.1   P ROOF OF T HEOREM 4.2

In this section, we provide a proof of the minimax lower bound in the group shift setting.
We construct the “hard” set of distributions as follows. Let the index set be V = {−1, 1}K . For every
v ∈ V define a distribution as follows: for x ∈ Ij = [ j−1    j
                                                         K , K ],

                                              1                   j + 1/2
                          Pv (y = 1 | x) :=      1 + vj φ x −                 ,
                                              2                      K
where φ is defined in Eq. 6. Given a τ ∈ [0, 1] we also construct the group distributions as follows:
                                                        if x ∈ [0, 0.5)

                                          2−τ
                              Pa (x) =
                                          τ             if x ∈ [0.5, 1],
and let
                                           Pb (x) = 2 − Pa (x).
We can verify that
                                                                    Z 1
                                                      1
           Overlap(Pa , Pb ) = 1 − TV(Pa , Pb ) = 1 −                       |Pa (x) − Pb (x)| dx = τ.
                                                      2              x=0

We continue to define
                                     Pv,maj (x, y) = Pv (y | x)Pa (x)
                                     Pv,min (x, y) = Pv (y | x)Pb (x),
and

                                                                 Pa (x) + Pb (x)
                           Pv,test (x, y) = Pv (y | x)                                   .
                                                                        2
Observe that (Pa (x) + Pb (x))/2 = 1, the uniform distribution over [0, 1].
Recall that as described in Section A.1, V shall be a uniform random variable over V and S | V ∼
 nmaj
Pv,maj × Pnv,min
            min
                 . We shall let Q denote the joint distribution of (V, S) and let QS denote the marginal
over S.
With this construction in place, we present the following lemma that lower bounds the minimax
excess risk by a sum of exp(−KL(Q(S | vj = 1)kQ(S | vj = −1)) over the intervals. Intuitively,
KL(Q(S | vj = 1)kQ(S | vj = −1) is a measure of how difficult it is to identify whether vj = 1 or
vj = −1 from the samples.
Lemma C.1. For any positive integers K, nmaj , nmin and τ ∈ [0, 1], the minimax excess risk is lower
bounded as follows:
                                                     ES∼Pnmaj ×Pnmin R(AS ; Ptest ) − R(f ? ; Ptest )

Minimax Excess Risk(PGS (τ )) = inf        sup
                                      A (Pmaj ,Pmin )∈PGS (τ )        maj      min


                                            K
                                       1 X
                                 ≥             exp(−KL(Q(S | vj = 1)kQ(S | vj = −1))).
                                     32K 2 j=1

Proof. By invoking Lemma A.1, we know that the minimax excess risk is lower bounded by
      Minimax Excess Risk(PGS (τ ))
           ≥ ES∼QS [inf P(x,y)∼Pv∈V Q(v|S)Pv,test (h(x) 6= y)] − EV [R(f ? (PV,test ); PV,test )],
                     h
             |                      {z                       } |             {z
                                                                            =B
                                                                                                }
                                                                                             V
                                       =RV
                                                                                             n
where V is a uniform random variable over the set V, S | V = v is a draw from Pv,maj
                                                                                maj
                                                                                     × Pnv,min
                                                                                          min
                                                                                               , and
Q denotes the joint distribution over (V, S).
We shall lower bound this minimax risk in parts. First, we shall establish a lower bound on RV , and
then an upper bound on the Bayes risk BV .


                                                       22
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Lower bound on RV . Unpacking RV using its definition we get that,

    RV = ES∼QS [inf P(x,y)∼Pv∈V Q(v|S)Pv,test (h(x) 6= y)]
                 h
                  Z 1
       = ES∼QS inf       Ptest (x)Py∼Pv∈V Q(v|S)Pv (·|x) [h(x) 6= y] dx
                  h
                "Z 0                (                                                 )   #
                    1
       (i)                            X                       X
       = ES∼QS        Ptest (x) min     Q(v | S)Pv (1 | x),        Q(v | S)Pv (−1 | x) dx
                       0                 v∈V                      v∈V
                           "Z                                           #
                                1
         (ii) 1                           1    X
          = − ES∼QS             Ptest (x) −       Q(v | S)Pv (1 | x) dx
              2               0           2
                                              v∈V
                   Z 1                  "                            #
         (iii) 1                          1 X
          =      −     Ptest (x)ES∼QS       −     Q(v | S)Pv (1 | x) dx,                           (14)
               2    0                     2
                                               v∈V


where (i) follows by taking h to be the pointwise minimizer over x, (ii) follows since Pv (−1 | x) =
1 − Pv (1 | x) and min{s, 1 − s} = (1 − |1 − 2s|)/2 for all s ∈ [0, 1], and (iii) follows by Fubini’s
theorem which allows us to switch the order of the integrals.
If x ∈ Ij = [ j−1   j
               K , K ] for some j ∈ {1, . . . , K} we let jx denote the value of this index j. With this
notation in place let us continue to upper bound integrand in the second term in the RHS above as
follows:
        "                            #
          1 X
ES∼QS       −     Q(v | S)Pv (1 | x)
          2
              v∈V

(i)                  jx + 1/2
 = ES∼QS φ x −                   |Q(vjx = 1 | S) − Q(vjx = −1 | S)|
                        K

            jx + 1/2
= φ x−                  ES∼QS [|Q(vjx = 1 | S) − Q(vjx = −1 | S)|]
               K
                                   Q(S | vjx = 1)QV (vjx = 1) Q(S | vjx = −1)QV (vjx = −1)

(ii)         jx + 1/2
 = φ x−                  ES∼QS                               −
                K                            QS (S)                       QS (S)

(iii) 1         jx + 1/2
 =       φ x−              TV(Q(S | vjx = 1), Q(S | vjx = −1)),                      (15)
      2            K

where (i) follows since Pv (1 | x) = (1 + vjx φ(x − (jx + 1/2)/K))/2 and by marginalizing Q(v | S)
over the indices j 6= jx , (ii) follows by using Bayes’ rule and (iii) follows since the total-variation
distance is half the `1 distance. Now by the Bretagnolle–Huber inequality (see Canonne, 2022,
Corollary 4) we get that,

       TV(Q(S | vjx = 1), Q(S | vjx = −1))
                                      exp(−KL(Q(S | vjx = 1)kQ(S | vjx = −1)))
                                ≤1−                                            .                   (16)
                                                         2

Combining Eqs. (14)-(16) we get that

  RV
    1 1 1

                                  jx + 1/2
           Z
  ≥ −            Ptest (x) φ x −              dx
    2 2 0                            K
      Z 1
    1                        jx + 1/2
  +       Ptest (x) φ x −                exp(−KL(Q(S | vjx = 1)kQ(S | vjx = −1))) dx. (17)
    4 0                         K

                                                     23
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Upper bound on BV : The Bayes error is
              BV = EV [R(f ? (PV ); PV )]

                 = EV inf E(x,y)∼Pv,test 1(f (x) 6= y)
                         f
                                                                               
                           Z 1       X
                 = EV inf                 Ptest (x)PV,test (y | x)1(f (x) = −y)
                           f     x=0 y∈{−1,1}
                          Z 1
                  = EV           Ptest (x)     min      PV,test (y | x)
                           x=0               y∈{−1,1}
                                 Z 1
                  (i)     1
                  = EV        1−        Ptest (x)|PV,test (1 | x) − PV,test (−1 | x)| dx
                          2       x=0
                                  Z 1
                  (ii)     1                                  jx + 1/2
                   = EV        1−       Ptest (x) φ x −                     dx
                           2       x=0                           K
                            Z 1
                      1 1                           jx + 1/2
                  = −           Ptest (x) φ x −                    dx,                         (18)
                      2 2 x=0                           K
where (i) follows since Pv (1 | x) = 1 − Pv (−1 | x) and min{s, 1 − s} = (1 − |1 − 2s|)/2 for all
s ∈ [0, 1], and (ii) follows by our construction of Pv above along with the fact that Pv (1 | x) =
1 − Pv (−1 | x).

Putting things together: Combining Eqs. (17) and (18) allows us to conclude that
Minimax Excess Risk(PGS (τ ))
     1 1

                              jx + 1/2
       Z
  ≥        Ptest (x) φ x −               exp(−KL(Q(S | vjx = 1)kQ(S | vjx = −1))) dx
     4 0                         K
        K Z j
     1X K                          j + 1/2
  =               Ptest (x) φ x −            exp(−KL(Q(S | vj = 1)kQ(S | vj = −1))) dx
     4 j=1 j−1
             K
                                      K
        K
                                                     "Z j                                #
     1X                                                  K                  j + 1/2
  =        exp(−KL(Q(S | vj = 1)kQ(S | vj = −1)))           Ptest (x) φ x −           dx
     4 j=1                                              j−1
                                                         K
                                                                               K
                K
   (i)     1 X
   =               exp(−KL(Q(S | vj = 1)kQ(S | vj = −1))),
         32K 2 j=1

where (i) follows by using Lemma A.2 along with the fact that Ptest (x) = 1 in our construction to
show that the integral in the square brackets is equal to 1/8K 2 . This proves the result.

The next lemma upper bounds the KL divergence between Q(S | vj = 1) and Q(S | vj = −1) for
each j ∈ {1, . . . , K}. It shows that the KL divergence between these two posteriors is larger when
the expected number of samples in that bin is larger.
Lemma C.2. Suppose that v is drawn uniformly from the set {−1, 1}K , and that S | v is drawn
      nmaj
from Pv,maj × Pnv,min
                 min
                      . Then for any j ∈ {1, . . . , K/2} and any τ ∈ [0, 1],
                                                                    nmaj (2 − τ ) + nmin τ
                   KL(Q(S | vj = 1)kQ(S | vj = −1)) ≤                                      ,
                                                                            3K 3
and for any j ∈ {K/2 + 1, . . . , K}
                                                                    nmaj τ + nmin (2 − τ )
                   KL(Q(S | vj = 1)kQ(S | vj = −1)) ≤                                      .
                                                                            3K 3

Proof. Let us consider the case when j = 1. The bound for all other j ∈ {2, . . . , K} shall follow
analogously.


                                                        24
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Given samples S, let S = (S1 , S̄1 ) be a partition where S1 are the samples that fall in the interval I1 ,
and S̄1 be the other samples. Similarly, given a vector v ∈ {−1, 1}, let v = (v1 , v̄1 ), where v1 is the
first component and v̄1 denotes the other components (2, . . . , K) of v.
First, we will show that
                                     Q(S | v1 ) = Q(S1 | v1 )Q(S̄1 ).
To see this, observe that
                     Q(S | v1 ) = Q((S1 , S̄1 ) | v1 ) = Q(S1 | v1 )Q(S̄1 | v1 , S1 ).
Further, if v is chosen uniformly over the hypercube {−1, 1}K , then
                                            X
                        Q(S̄1 | v1 , S1 ) =   Q(S̄1 , v̄1 | v1 , S1 )
                                                 v̄1
                                              X
                                          =             Q(S̄1 | v1 , v̄1 , S1 )Q(v̄1 | v1 , S1 )
                                                 v̄1
                                          (i) X
                                          =             Q(S̄1 | v1 , v̄1 , S1 )Q(v̄1 )
                                                 v̄1
                                          (ii) X
                                          =              Q(S̄1 | v1 , v̄1 )Q(v̄1 )
                                                  v̄1
                                          (iii) X
                                           =              Q(S̄1 | v̄1 )Q(v̄1 )
                                                   v̄1

                                          = Q(S¯1 ),
where (i) follows since by Bayes’ rule
                       Q(v̄1 | v1 )Q(S1 | v1 , v̄1 )
     Q(v̄1 | v1 , S1 ) =
                               Q(S1 | v1 )
                       Q(v̄1 )Q(S1 | v1 , v̄1 )
                     =                                               (since v̄1 is independent of v1 )
                            Q(S1 | v1 )
                       Q(v̄1 )Q(S1 | v1 )
                     =                     = Q(v̄1 )                 (the samples in S1 depend only on v1 ).
                         Q(S1 | v1 )
Inequality (ii) follows since the samples are drawn independently given v = (v1 , v̄1 ). Finally, (iii)
follows since S̄1 (the samples that lie outside the interval I1 ) only depend on v̄1 since the marginal
distribution of x is independent of v and the distribution of y | x depends only on the value of v
corresponding to the interval in which x lies.
Thus since, Q(S | v1 ) = Q(S1 | v1 )Q(S̄1 ) we have that
         KL(Q(S | v1 = 1)kQ(S | v1 = −1)) = KL(Q(S1 | v1 = 1)kQ(S1 | v1 = −1)).                                (19)

To bound this KL divergence, let us condition of the number of samples in S1 from group a, (the
majority group) n1,a and the number of samples from group b (the minority group), n1,b . Now since
n1,a and n1,b are independent of v1 (which only affects the labels) we have that,
                                   X
                   Q(S1 | v1 ) =         Q(n1,a , n1,b | v1 )Q(S1 | v1 , n1,a , n1,b )
                                    n1,a ,n1,b
                                      X
                                =                Q(n1,a , n1,b )Q(S1 | v1 , n1,a , n1,b )
                                    n1,a ,n1,b

                                = En1,a ,n1,b [Q(S1 | v1 , n1,a , n1,b )] .
Therefore, by the joint convexity of the KL-divergence and by Jensen’s inequality we have that,
         KL(Q(S1 | v1 = 1)kQ(S1 | v1 = −1))
             ≤ En1,a ,n1,b [KL(Q(S1 | v1 = 1, n1,a , n1,b )kQ(S1 | v1 = −1, n1,a , n1,b ))] .                  (20)


                                                            25
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Now conditioned on v1 , n1,a and n1,b , samples in S1 are composed of 2 groups of samples (S1,a , S1,b ).
The samples in each group (S1,a , S1,b ) are drawn independently from the distributions Pa (x | x ∈
I1 )Pv (y | x) and Pb (x | x ∈ I1 )Pv (y | x) respectively. Therefore,


   KL(Q(S1 | v1 = 1, n1,a , n1,b )kQ(S1 | v1 = −1, n1,a , n1,b ))
    (i)
    = n1,a KL(Pa (x | x ∈ I1 )Pv1 =1 (y | x)kPa (x | x ∈ I1 )Pv1 =−1 (y | x))
                    + n1,b KL(Pb (x | x ∈ I1 )Pv1 =1 (y | x)kPb (x | x ∈ I1 )Pv1 =−1 (y | x))
    (ii)
     = (n1,a + n1,b )Ex∼Unif(I1 ) [KL(Pv1 =1 (y | x)kPv1 =−1 (y | x))]
                                                                                             !
                                                                                         1
                                      X                                    1 + yφ x − 2K

    (iii) n1,a + n1,b                                        1
     =                Ex∼Unif(I1 )            1 + yφ x −            log                 1
                                                                                              
               2                                           2K              1 + yφ x − 2K
                                    y∈{−1,1}
                                          "                                                  !#
                                                                                       1
                                                                         1 + yφ x − 2K

        n1,a + n1,b X                                      1
    =                        Ex∼Unif(I1 )    1 + yφ x −            log                 1

             2                                            2K             1 + yφ x − 2K
                    y∈{−1,1}
                             Z K1 "                                              1
                                                                                      !#
                                                                    1 + yφ x − 2K

        n1,a + n1,b X                                 1
    =                                  1 + yφ x −           log                  1
                                                                                           dx
            2K                 x=0                   2K             1 + yφ x − 2K
                       y∈{−1,1}
    (iv) n
             1,a + n1,b
    ≤                   ,                                                                               (21)
               3K 2
where in (i) we let Pv1 denote the conditional distribution of y for x ∈ I1 given v1 , (ii) follows since
both Pa and Pb are constant in the interval, (iii) follows by our construction of Pv above, and finally
(iv) follows by invoking Lemma A.3 that ensures that the integral is bounded by 1/3K 2 .
Using this bound in Eq. (20), along with Eq. (19) we get that
                                                           E [n1,a + n2,b ]
                            KL(Q(S | v1 = 1)kQ(S | v1 = −1)) ≤              .
                                                                3K 2
Now there are nmaj samples from group a in S and nmin samples from group b. Therefore,
                                                                nmaj (2 − τ )
                                  E [n1,a ] = nmaj Pa (x ∈ I1 ) =             ,
                                                                     K
                                                                       nmin τ
                                      E [n1,b ] = nmin Pb (x ∈ I1 ) =         .
                                                                        K
Plugging this bound into Eq. (21) completes the proof by the first interval. An identical argument
holds for j ∈ {2, . . . , K/2}. For j ∈ {K/2 + 1, . . . , K} the only change is that
                                                                      nmaj τ
                                     E [nj,a ] = nmaj Pa (x ∈ Ij ) =          ,
                                                                        K
                                                               nmin (2 − τ )
                               E [nj,b ] = nmin Pb (x ∈ Ij ) =                .
                                                                     K


Next, we combine the previous two lemmas to establish our stated lower bound. We first restate it
here.
Theorem 4.2. Consider the group shift setting described in Section 3.2.2. Given any overlap
τ ∈ [0, 1] recall that PGS (τ ) is the class of distributions such that Overlap(Pmaj , Pmin ) ≥ τ . The
minimax excess risk in this setting is lower bounded as follows:
   Minimax Excess Risk(PGS (τ )) = inf                 sup             Excess Risk[A; (Pmaj , Pmin )]
                                            A (Pmaj ,Pmin )∈PGS (τ )

                                                    1                                1
                                ≥                                       ≥                        ,       (4)
                                    200(nmin · (2 − τ ) + nmaj · τ )1/3   200nmin (ρ · τ + 2)1/3
                                                                                 1/3

where ρ = nmaj /nmin > 1.


                                                         26
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Proof. First, by Lemma C.1 we know that
                                                 K
                                            1 X
      Minimax Excess Risk(PGS (τ )) ≥               exp(−KL(Q(S | vj = 1)kQ(S | vj = −1))).
                                          32K 2 j=1

Next, by invoking the bound on the KL divergences in the equation above by Lemma C.2 we get that
         Minimax Excess Risk(PGS (τ ))
                              nmaj (2 − τ ) + nmin τ            nmin (2 − τ ) + nmaj τ

                 1
              ≥       exp −                            + exp  −
                64K                    3K 3                             3K 3
                              nmin (2 − τ ) + nmaj τ

                 1
              ≥       exp −
                64K                    3K 3

Setting K = d(nmin (2 − τ ) + nmaj τ )1/3 e and recalling that τ ≤ 1 we get that
         Minimax Excess Risk(PGS (τ ))
                                                             nmin (2 − τ ) + nmaj τ

                              1
              ≥                                    exp −
                64d(nmin (2 − τ ) + nmaj τ )1/3 e        3d(nmin (2 − τ ) + nmaj τ )1/3 e3
              (i) exp(−1/3)      (nmin (2 − τ ) + nmaj τ )1/3                1
              ≥
                      64        d(nmin (2 − τ ) + nmaj τ )1/3 e (nmin (2 − τ ) + nmaj τ )1/3
              (ii) 0.7 exp(−1/3)               1
              ≥
                           64    (nmin (2 − τ ) + nmaj τ )1/3
                 1               1
              ≥                                  ,
                200 (nmin (2 − τ ) + nmaj τ )1/3

where (i) follows since nmin (2 − τ ) + nmaj τ /d(nmin (2 − τ ) + nmaj τ )1/3 e3 ≤ 1, and (ii) follows
                                               (n   (2−τ )+n      τ )1/3
since 0 ≤ τ ≤ 1 and nmin ≥ 1 and hence d(nmin         maj
                                          min (2−τ )+nmaj τ )
                                                             1/3 e ≥ 0.7.


C.2     P ROOF OF T HEOREM 5.2

In this section, we derive an upper bound on the excess risk of the undersampled binning estimator
AUSB (Eq. (5)). Recall that given a dataset S this estimator first calculates the undersampled dataset
SUS , where the number of points from the minority group (nmin ) is equal to the number of points from
the majority group (nmin ), and the size of the dataset is 2nmin . Throughout this section, (Pmaj , Pmin )
shall be an arbitrary element of PGS (τ ) for any τ ∈ [0, 1]. In this section, whenever we shall often
denote Excess Risk(A; (Pmaj , Pmin )) by simply Excess Risk(A).
Before we proceed, we introduce some additional notation. For any j ∈ {1, . . . , K} and Ij =
[ j−1  j
   K , K ] let
                                                 Z
               qj,1 := Ptest (y = 1 | x ∈ Ij ) =   P(y = 1 | x)Ptest (x | x ∈ Ij ) dx,   (22a)
                                                    x∈Ij
                                                    Z
              qj,1 := Ptest (y = 1 | x ∈ Ij ) =              P(y = 1 | x)Ptest (x | x ∈ Ij ) dx.   (22b)
                                                    x∈Ij

For the undersampled binning estimator AUSB (defined above in Eq. (5)), define the excess risk in an
interval Ij as follows:

    Rj (ASUSB ) := p y = −ASj | x ∈ Ij − min {Ptest (y = 1 | x ∈ Ij ), Ptest (y = −1 | x ∈ Ij )}


               = qj,−ASj − min{qj,1 , qj,−1 }.

The proof of the upper bound shall proceed in steps. First, in Lemma C.3 we will show that the
excess risk is equal to sum the excess risk over the intervals up to a factor of 2/K on account of the
distribution being 1-Lipschitz. Next, in Lemma C.4 we upper bound the risk over each interval. We
put these two together and to upper bound the risk.


                                                        27
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Lemma C.3. The expected excess risk of undersampled binning estimator AUSB can be decomposed
as follows
                                                 K−1
                                                 X                                                2
                                                       ES∼Pnmaj ×Pnmin Rj (ASUSB ) · Ptest (Ij ) + ,

               Excess Risk(AUSB ) ≤
                                                   j=0
                                                           maj    min                             K
                       R
where Ptest (Ij ) :=   x∈Ij
                                Ptest (x) dx.

Proof. Recall that by definition, the expected excess risk is
                           ES∼Pnmaj ×Pnmin R(AS ; Ptest ) − R(f ? ; Ptest ) .

                                          maj       min

Let us first decompose the Bayes risk R(f ? ),
               R(f ? ) = inf E(x,y)∼Ptest [1(f (x) 6= y)]
                          f
                             Z 1    X
                       = inf                 1(f (x) 6= y)Ptest (y | x)Ptest (x) dx
                               f       x=0 y∈{−1,1}
                               Z 1                          X
                           =                 inf                   1(f (x) 6= y)Ptest (y | x)Ptest (x) dx
                                x=0 f (x)∈{−1,1} y∈{−1,1}
                               Z 1
                           =                 inf          Ptest (y = −f (x) | x)Ptest (x) dx
                                x=0 f (x)∈{−1,1}
                               Z 1
                           =           min {Ptest (y = 1 | x), Ptest (y = −1 | x)} Ptest (x) dx.            (23)
                                x=0
The risk of the undersampled binning algorithm AUSB is given by
                             Z 1    X
                 R(ASUSB ) =              1(ASUSB (x) 6= y)Ptest (y | x)Ptest (x) dx
                                        x=0 y∈{−1,1}
                                       Z 1
                                   =            Ptest (y = −ASUSB (x) | x)Ptest (x) dx.
                                        x=0
Next, recall that the undersampled binning estimator is constant over the intervals Ij for j ∈
{1, . . . , K} where it takes the value ASj (to ease notation let us simply denote it by Aj below), and
therefore
                                       K−1
                                       XZ
                               S
                          R(AUSB ) =              Ptest (y = −Aj |x)Ptest (x) dx.
                                                 j=0      x∈Ij

This combined with Eq. (23) tells us that
 R(ASUSB ) − R(f ? )
   K−1
   XZ
               Ptest (y = −Aj |x) − min {Ptest (y = 1 | x), Ptest (y = −1 | x)} Ptest (x) dx. (24)

 =
     j=0   x∈Ij

Recall the definition of qj,1 and qj,−1 from Eqs. (22a)-(22b) above. For any x ∈ Ij = [ j−1              j
                                                                                                    K , K ],
|Ptest (y | x)−qj,y | ≤ 1/K, since the distribution Ptest (y | x) is 1-Lipschitz and qj,y is its conditional
mean. Therefore,
      R(ASUSB ) − R(f ? )
               K−1
               XZ                                                            K−1 Z
                                                                           2 X
             ≤            qj,−Aj − min {qj,1 , qj,−1 } Ptest (x) dx +                    Ptest (x) dx
               j=0 x∈Ij
                                                                          K j=0 x∈Ij
               K−1
               XZ                                                  2
           =                   Rj (ASUSB )Ptest (x) dx +             .
               j=0     x∈Ij                                        K
Taking expectation over the training samples S (where nmin samples are drawn independently from
Pmin and nmaj samples are drawn independently from Pmaj ) concludes the proof.


                                                                 28
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Next we provide an upper bound on the expected excess risk is an interval Rj (ASUSB ).
Lemma C.4. For any j ∈ {1, . . . , K} with Ij = [ j−1    j
                                                     K , K ],
                                                                c          c
                      ES∼Pnmaj ×Pnmin Rj (ASUSB ) ≤ p

                                                                          + ,
                            maj   min                     nmin Ptest (Ij ) K
                                                   R
where c is an absolute constant, and Ptest (Ij ) := x∈Ij Ptest (x) dx.

Proof. Consider an arbitrary bucket j ∈ {1, . . . , K}.
Let us introduce some notation that shall be useful in the remainder of the proof. Analogous to qj,1
and qj,−1 defined above (see Eqs. (22a)-(22b)), define qj,1
                                                         a
                                                            and qj,1
                                                                 b
                                                                     as follows:
                                              Z
                a
               qj,1 := Pa (y = 1 | x ∈ Ij ) =        P(y = 1 | x)Pa (x | x ∈ Ij ) dx,         (25a)
                                                             x∈Ij
                                                         Z
                 b
                qj,1 := Pb (y = 1 | x ∈ Ij ) =                      P(y = 1 | x)Pb (x | x ∈ Ij ) dx.           (25b)
                                                          x∈Ij

Essentially, qj,1
              a
                  is the probability that a sample is from group a and has label 1, conditioned on the
event that the sample falls in the interval Ij . Since
                                                  1
                         Ptest (x | x ∈ Ij ) =      [Pa (x | x ∈ Ij ) + Pb (x | x ∈ Ij )] ,
                                                  2
therefore
                   Z                                                       Z
          a
 |qj,1 − qj,1 |=           P(y = 1 | x)Ptest (x | x ∈ Ij ) dx −                     P(y = 1 | x)Pa (x | x ∈ Ij ) dx
                    x∈Ij                                                     x∈Ij
                   1
              ≤      .                                                                                          (26)
                   K
This follows since P(y | x) is 1-Lipschitz and therefore can fluctuate by at most 1/K in the interval
Ij . Of course the same bound also holds for |qj,1 − qj,1
                                                      b
                                                          |.
With this notation in place let us present a bound on the expected value of Rj (ASUSB ). By definition
                                     Rj (ASUSB ) = qj,−ASj − min{qj,1 , qj,−1 }.

First, note that qj,1 := Ptest (y = 1 | x ∈ Ij ) = 1 − qj,−1 . Suppose that qj,1 < 1/2 and therefore
qj,−1 > 1/2 (the same bound shall hold in the other case). In this case, risk is incurred only when
ASj = 1. That is,

                       ES∼Pnmaj ×Pnmin Rj (ASUSB ) = |qj,−1 − qj,1 |PS [ASj = 1]

                               maj      min

                                                               = |1 − 2qj,1 |PS [ASj = 1].                      (27)

Now by the definition of the undersampled binning estimator (see Eq. (5)), ASj = 1 only when there
are more samples in the interval Ij with label 1 than −1. However, we can bound the probability of
this happening since qj,1 is smaller than qj,−1 .
Let nj be the number of samples in the undersampled sample set SUS in the interval Ij . Let n1,j be
the number of these samples with label 1, and n−1,j = nj − n1,j be the number of samples with
label −1. Further, let na,j be the number of samples in from group a such that they fall in the interval
Ij , and define mb,j analogously.
The probability of incurring risk is given by
                                               2n
                                               X  min

                             P[Aj = 1] =                P[Aj = 1 | nj = s]P[nj = s],                            (28)
                                               s=1

where the sum is up to 2nmin since the size of the undersample dataset |SUS | is equal to 2nmin .


                                                              29
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Conditioned on the event that nj = s the probability of incurring risk is
           P [Aj = 1 | nj = s] = P [m1,j > n−1,j | nj = s] = P [n1,j > nj /2 | nj = s]
                                                           = P [n1,j > s/2 | nj = s] .                        (29)
Now, note that nj = na,j + nb,j . Thus continuing, we have that
                                  X
      P [n1,j > s/2 | nj = s] =       P [n1,j > s/2 | nj = s, nb,j = s0 ] P[nb,j = s0 ]
                                         s0 ≤s
                                         X
                                     =           P [n1,j > s/2 | na,j = s − s0 , nb,j = s0 ] P[nb,j = s0 ].
                                         s0 ≤s

In light of this previous equation, we want to control the probability that the number of samples with
label 1 in the interval Ij conditioned on the event that the number of samples from group a in this
interval is s − s0 and the number of samples from group b in this interval is s0 . Recall that qj,1 a
                                                                                                       and
qj,1 the probabilities of the label of the sample being 1 conditioned the event that sample is in the
 b

interval Ij when it is group a and b respectively. So we define the random variables:

      za [s − s0 ] ∼ Bin(s − s0 , qj,1
                                   a
                                       ), zb [s0 ] ∼ Bin(s0 , qj,1
                                                               b
                                                                                         a b
                                                                   ), z[s] ∼ Bin(s, max qj,1 , qj,1 ).
Then,
         P [n1,j > s/2 | nj = s]
                  X
               =     P [n1,j > s/2 | nj,a = s − s0 , nj,b = s0 ] P[nj,b = s0 ]
                   s0 ≤s
                   X
               =           P [za [s − s0 ] + zb [s0 ]) > s/2 | na,j = s − s0 , nb,j = s0 ] P[nb,j = s0 ]
                   s0 ≤s
                   X
               ≤           P [z[s] > s/2 | na,j = s − s0 , nb,j = s0 ] P[nb,j = s0 ]
                   s0 ≤s
                   X
               =           P [z[s] > s/2] P[nb,j = s0 ]
                   s0 ≤s
               = P [z[s] > s/2]
               (i)      s
                                                                                                              (30)
                                   a b
               ≤ exp − (1 − 2 max qj,1 , qj,1 )2 ,
                          2
where (i) follows by invoking Hoeffding’s inequality(Wainwright, 2019, Proposition 2.5). Combining
this with Eqs. (28) and (29) we get that
                                    2n
                                    X min     s
                                                           a b
                 P[Aj = 1] ≤             exp − (1 − 2 max qj,1 , qj,1 )2 P[nj = s].
                                     s=1
                                              2

Now nj , which is the number of samples that lands in the interval Ij is equal to na,j + nb,j . Now each
of na,j and nb,j (the number of samples in this interval from each of the groups) Rare random variables
with distributions Bin(nmin , Pa (Ij )) and Bin(nmin , Pb (Ij )), where Pa (Ij ) = x∈Ij Pa (x) dx and
Pb (Ij ) = x∈Ij Pa (x) dx. Therefore, nj is distributed as a sum of two binomial distribution and is
          R

therefore Poisson binomially distributed (Wikipedia contributors, 2022). Using the formula for the
moment generating function (MGF) of a Poisson binomially distributed random variable we infer
that,
                                                                 a b           !!nmin
                                                 (1 − 2 max qj,1     , qj,1 )2
 P[Aj = 1] ≤ 1 − Pa (Ij ) + Pa (Ij ) exp −                                            ×
                                                                2
                                                                                   a b          !!nmin
                                                                    (1 − 2 max qj,1   , qj,1 )2
                                   1 − Pb (Ij ) + Pb (Ij ) exp −                                       .
                                                                                 2


                                                           30
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Plugging this into Eq. (28) we get that,

      ES∼Pnmaj ×Pnmin Rj (ASUSB )

            maj    min
                          "                                               a b            !#nmin
                                                             (1 − 2 max qj,1   , qj,1 )2
             ≤ |1 − 2qj,1 | 1 − Pa (Ij ) + Pa (Ij ) exp −                                        ×
                                                                        2
                            "                                              a b            !#nmin
                                                              (1 − 2 max qj,1   , qj,1 )2
                              1 − Pb (Ij ) + Pb (Ij ) exp −
                                                                         2
                           "                                           a b            !!#nmin
                                                         (1 − 2 max qj,1 , qj,1 )2
             = |1 − 2qj,1 | 1 − Pa (Ij ) 1 − exp −                                            ×
                                                                     2
                            "                                           a b           !!#nmin
                                                          (1 − 2 max qj,1  , qj,1 )2
                              1 − Pb (Ij ) 1 − exp −                                           .
                                                                      2

Since |1 − 2 max qj,1
                  a b
                      , qj,1 | ≤ 1,
                                      a b           !               a b
                          (1 − 2 max qj,1 , qj,1 )2     (1 − 2 max qj,1 , qj,1 )2
                1 − exp −                             ≥                           ,
                                    2                             4

and therefore
                                            "                            a b             #nmin
                                                                                       2
                                                          (1 −  2 max    qj,1 , qj,1  )
 ES∼Pnmaj ×Pnmin Rj (ASUSB ) ≤ |1 − 2qj,1 | 1 − Pa (Ij )

                                                                                               ×
     maj    min                                                        2
                                                "                             a b            #nmin
                                                               (1 − 2 max qj,1     , qj,1 )2
                                                  1 − Pb (Ij )
                                                                            2
                                                                                 n
                                                          (1 − 2qj,1 − 2γ)2 min
                              (i)

                              ≤ |1 − 2qj,1 | 1 − Pa (Ij )                              ×
                                                                   2
                                                                                      n
                                                               (1 − 2qj,1 − 2γ)2 min

                                                 1 − Pb (Ij )
                                                                       2
                                                                                  (1 − 2qj,1 − 2γ)2
                              (ii)

                               ≤ |1 − 2qj,1 | exp −nmin (Pa (Ij ) + Pb (Ij ))                         ,
                                                                                           2

where (i) follows since | max{qj,1     a    b
                                         , qj,1 }−qj,1 | ≤ 1/K by Eq. (26) and γ is such that |γ| ≤ 1/K, and
(ii) follows since (1 + z) ≤ exp(bz). Now the RHS above is maximized when (1 − 2qj,1 − 2γ)2 =
                                  b

 nmin (Pa (Ij )+Pb (Ij )) , for some constant c. Plugging this into the equation above we get that
            c


                                                           c0
                  ES∼Pnmaj ×Pnmin Rj (ASUSB ) ≤ p                           + c0 |γ|

                      maj    min                 nmin (Pa (Ij ) + Pb (Ij ))
                                                           c0                  c0
                                               ≤p                           + .
                                                 nmin (Pa (Ij ) + Pb (Ij )) K

Finally, noting that Ptest (Ij ) = (Pa (Ij ) + Pb (Ij ))/2 completes the proof.

By combining the previous two lemmas we can now prove our upper bound on the risk of the
undersampled binning estimator. We begin by restating it.
Theorem 5.2. Consider the group shift setting described in Section 3.2.2. For any overlap τ ∈ [0, 1]
and for any (Pmaj , Pmin ) ∈ PGS (τ ) the expected excess risk of the Undersampling Binning Estimator
(Eq. (5)) with number of bins with K = dnmin 1/3 e is
                                                                                                    C
 Excess Risk[AUSB ; (Pmaj , Pmin )] = ES∼Pnmaj ×Pnmin R(ASUSB ; Ptest )) − R(f ? ; Ptest ) ≤

                                                                                                            .
                                              maj    min                                         nmin 1/3

                                                    31
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Proof. First by Lemma C.3 we know that
                                     K−1
                                     X                                           2
                                      ES∼Pnmaj ×Pnmin Rj (ASUSB ) · Ptest (Ij ) + .

             Excess Risk[AUSB ] ≤
                                 j=0
                                            maj   min                            K

Next by using the bound on ES∼Pnmaj ×Pnmin Rj (ASUSB ) established in Lemma C.4 we get that,

                                   maj     min

                                                 K−1
                                                 X         1                       c
                    Excess Risk(AUSB ) ≤ c           p               Ptest (Ij ) +
                                                 j=0
                                                      n    P    (I
                                                        min test j )               K
                                                 K−1
                                            c    Xq                c
                                         =√          Ptest (Ij ) +
                                            nmin j=0               K
                                                     K−1
                                         (i)  c √ X                    c
                                       ≤ √         K     Ptest (Ij ) +
                                            nmin     j=0
                                                                       K
                                           r
                                                K    c
                                       =c          + .
                                              nmin   K
                                                       √
where (i) follows since for any vector z ∈ R , kzk1 ≤ Kkzk2 . Maximizing over K yields the
                                              K

choice K = dnmin 1/3 e, completing the proof.



D    A DDITIONAL S IMULATIONS


Figure 4: Convolutional neural network classifiers trained on the Imbalanced Binary CIFAR10 dataset
with a 5:1 label imbalance. (Top) Models trained using the tilted loss (Li et al., 2020) with early
stopping. (Bottom) Models trained using group-DRO (Sagawa et al., 2020) with early stopping. We
report the average test accuracy calculated on a balanced test set over 5 random seeds. We start off
with 2500 cat examples and 500 dog examples in the training dataset. We find similar trends to those
obtained in Figure 2 even with these losses that are designed to optimize for the worst group accuracy.


                                                       32
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


E    E XPERIMENTAL D ETAILS FOR F IGURES 2 AND 4
We construct our label shift dataset from the original CIFAR10 dataset. We create a binary classi-
fication task using the “cat” and “dog” classes. We use the official test examples as the balanced
test set with 1000 cats and 1000 dogs. To form the initial train and validation sets, we use 2500 cat
examples (half of the training set) and 500 dog examples, corresponding to a 5:1 label imbalance. We
use 80% of those examples for training and the rest for validation. We are left with 2500 additional
cat examples and 4500 dog examples from the original train set which we add into our training set to
generate Figure 2.
We use the same convolutional neural network architecture as (Byrd & Lipton, 2019; Wang et al.,
2022) with random initializations for this dataset. We train this model using SGD for 800 epochs
with batchsize 64, a constant learning rate 0.001 and momentum 0.9. The importance weights
used upweight the minority class samples in the training loss and validation loss is calculated to be
#Cat Train Examples
#Dog Train Examples . We note that all of the experiments were performed on an internal cluster on 8
GPUs.

VS Loss: Given a dataset {xi , yi }ni=1 , the VS loss (Kini et al., 2021) is defined as follows
                          n                                  γ
                         X                             ngi                   τ ngi
             LVS (f ) :=      log 1 + exp −                     yi f (xi ) −          ,
                         i=1
                                                      nmax                     n

where gi denotes the group label, ngi corresponds to the number of samples from the group, nmax
is the number of samples in the largest group and n is the total number of samples. We set τ = 3
and γ = 0.3, the best hyperparameters identified by Wang et al. (2022) on this dataset for this neural
network architecture.

Tilted Loss: The tilted loss (Li et al., 2020) is defined as
                                                " n                       #
                                          1      X
                          LTilted (f ) := log         exp (t`(yi f (xi ))) ,
                                          t       i=1

where we take ` to be the logistic loss. In our experiments we set t = 2.

Group-DRO: We run group-DRO (Sagawa et al., 2020, Algorithm 1) with the logistic loss. We set
adversarial step-size ηq = 0.05 which was the best hyperparameter identified by Wang et al. (2022).


                                                  33
