Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


CONVOLUTION AND POOLING OPERATION
MODULE WITH ADAPTIVE STRIDE PROCESS-
ING EFFECT
 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                            A BSTRACT
         Convolutional neural network is one of the representative models of deep learning,
         which has a wide range of applications. Convolution and pooling are two key op-
         erations in convolutional neural networks. They play an important role in extract-
         ing input features and mapping low-level semantic features to high-level semantic
         features. Stride is an important parameter involved in convolution and pooling
         operations, which refers to the distance of each slide of the convolution kernel
         (pooling kernel) during the convolution (pooling) operation. The stride has an
         impact on the granularity of feature extraction and the selection (filtering) of fea-
         tures, thus affecting the performance of convolutional neural networks. At present,
         in the training of convolutional neural networks, the content of convolution ker-
         nel and pooling kernel can be determined by the optimization algorithm based
         on gradient descent. However, the stride usually cannot be treated similarly, and
         can only be selected manually as a hyperparameter. Most of the existing related
         works choose a fixed stride, for example, the value is 1. In fact, different tasks
         or inputs may require different stride for better model processing. Therefore, this
         paper views the role of stride in convolution and pooling operation from the per-
         spective of sampling, and proposes a convolution and pooling operation module
         with adaptive stride processing effect. The feature of the proposed module is that
         the feature map finally obtained by convolution or pooling operation is no longer
         limited to equal interval downsampling (feature extraction) according to a fixed
         stride, but adaptively extracted according to the changes of input features. We ap-
         ply the proposed module on many convolutional neural network models, including
         VGG, Alexnet and MobileNet for image classification, YOLOX-S for object de-
         tection, Unet for image segmentation, and so on. Simulation results show that the
         proposed module can effectively improve the performance of existing models.


1   INTRODUCTION
The research on convolutional neural networks started from 1980s to 1990s. Time delay network and
LENET-5 were the earliest convolutional neural networks. After the 21st century, with the proposal
of deep learning theory and the improvement of computing equipment, convolutional neural net-
works have developed rapidly and been applied in computer vision(Krizhevsky et al., 2012), natural
language processing(Qiuqiang Kong, 2020) and other fields.
Operators in convolutional neural network include convolution operator and pooling operator. The
elements of the convolution operator include the size of the convolution kernel, the numerical size
of the convolution kernel, the stride of the convolution operation and so on. The elements of the
pooling operator include stride, padding, and so on. Convolution neural network in the stride is
to point to: convolution kernels or pooling operator acting on by convolution or by pooling area,
convolution kernels or pooling operator each sliding distance, convolution and pooling operation is
to extract the characteristics of the input and the lower sampling, stride for feature extraction of the
characteristics of grain size and trade-off (filtering), which influence the properties of convolution
neural network. In the current convolutional neural network, the stride of convolution or pooling
operator convolution or pooling operation is manually selected as a hyperparameter and is fixed.
The fixed stride means that the sliding distance of convolution kernel (pooling kernel) is the same


                                                   1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


each time, and the fixed stride is 1, which will cause redundancy in extracting features. Different
tasks may require different stride, for example, the pool operation stride is fixed to 2, and fixed to
2 is not fixed to 1, and may cause the loss of features. Moreover, the stride directly obtained by
learning added to the model can not be backpropagated in training to update.
Self-adaptation is the process of automatically adjusting the processing method, processing se-
quence, processing parameters, boundary conditions or constraint conditions according to the data
characteristics of the processed data in the process of processing and analysis, so that it can adapt
to the statistical distribution characteristics and structural characteristics of the processed data, so
as to achieve the best processing effect. The introduction of self-adaptation in convolutional neural
network can make the network more adaptable to input changes, so as to make the whole network
play a better effect, such as the improvement of processing speed, accuracy and recall. At present,
adaptation in convolutional neural networks includes adaptation in determining the depth of con-
volutional operators(Veit & Belongie, 2019), adaptation in determining the width of convolutional
operators(Jiaqi Ma, 2018), and adaptation in determining the parameters of convolutional neural
networks (Adam W. Harley, 2017), Adaptation in determining the receptive field of convolution
operator(Xizhou Zhu, 2019), pooling operator determination(Chen-Yu Lee, 2015), etc.
Since the stride obtained by direct learning cannot be backpropagated to update the stride when
added to the model, it cannot be determined by the optimization algorithm based on gradient descent,
and can only be selected manually as a hyperparameter. Therefore, the current academic research
on the stride adaptation in convolutional neural networks is basically blank.(Rachid Riad, 2022)
proposed an adaptive stride method for images in the frequency domain, and obtained the stride by
learning method to filter out high-frequency signals in the frequency domain. However, the learning
stride is different from the stride concept in traditional convolutional neural networks. In this paper, a
convolution and pooling operation module with adaptive stride for traditional convolution operation,
namely CAS(Convolution operation adaptive stride) and PAS(Pooling operation adaptive stride)
module, is proposed.
We find that in the traditional convolution or pooling operator (operation), a fixed convolution or
pooling stride S (S>1) The convolution or pooling operation results obtained can essentially be
regarded as those obtained by adopting convolution or pooling operation results with stride 1 and
then taking down-sampling at equal intervals (that is, discarding or suppressing part of the results).
Based on the insight, further promotion, in order to obtain more general convolution with adaptive
stride or pooling operation effect, can consider to use stride 1 convolution or pooling of input feature
maps are operation, obtain the preliminary convolution operation or pooling results (initial feature
maps), and then trying to based on the input features to generate a suitable mask characteristic figure,
The mask feature map is combined with the initial feature map, and some results are discarded or
suppressed (for example, insignificant results are set to 0), so as to obtain the final feature map with
adaptive stride convolution or pooling operation effect. The most important aspect of adaptation
is that the feature map finally obtained by convolution or pooling operation is no longer limited
to equal interval downsampling or feature extraction according to a fixed stride S, but adaptively
extracted according to the change of input features.


2    METHODS

In convolutional neural networks, convolution operation or pooling operation can extract features
and map the underlying semantic features to higher-level semantic features and the role of down-
sampling. Classification needs local features and localization needs global features. In convolutional
neural network, the convolution or pooling operation stride is fixed as 1, which can extract detailed
features, but will cause feature redundancy. Because the position of the object in each picture is
changed, the stride sliding distance is the same each time but not fixed to 1 may cause the loss of
features. Therefore, it is the correct way to use the stride in convolution or pooling operation to
adaptively determine the stride for each movement process of convolution kernel and pooling oper-
ator according to the input feature map. It is hoped that convolution or pooling operation can focus
on the key areas needed.
This is slightly different from the traditional concept of fixed stride, which means that the convolu-
tion kernel or pooling operator moves the same distance every time. As shown in Figure 1, the red
region is the convolved or pooled region.


                                                    2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                    (a) The stride is 1                  (b) The stride is fixed and the stride is larger
                                                         than 1


                                          (c) The adaptive stride

                    Figure 1: Convolution or pooling effect with different stride



2.1     CAS M ODULE

2.1.1    R ELATIONSHIP BETWEEN THE SAMPLING

The stride of the convolution operation refers to the distance that the convolution kernel slides each
convolution. Figure 2,3 illustrates the convolution operation with stride 1 and stride 2 and compares
the results.


                      (a)                                                         (b)

                                          Figure 2: Stride is 1


                                                     3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                       (a)                                                 (b)

                                         Figure 3: Stride is 2


Figure 4 shows the comparison of convolution results with stride 1 and stride 2. The left is the result
with stride 1, the right is the result with stride 2, and the middle shows the relationship between
them.


                         Figure 4: Comprision bwteen different stride result


It can be seen that the fixed convolution stride S (S>1), the convolution operation results obtained
can be essentially regarded as those obtained by taking equal interval downsampling on the basis of
convolution operation results with stride 1.



2.1.2   M ASK FEATURE MAP

In order to obtain the result of convolution operation with stride not 1, we can sample the result
feature map of convolution operation with stride 1. In order to realize sampling, we introduce
the concept of mask feature map. The size of the mask feature map is the same as that of the
convolution operation with stride 1. There are some zeros and some positive numbers in the mask
feature map, and the positions of the non-zero positive numbers are equally spaced. Then, the mask
feature map and the result feature map of convolution operation with stride 1 are used for the bitwise
multiplication processing, as shown in Figure 5.


                                                  4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                     Figure 5: Through the mask feature map sampling process


The mask feature map is processed by bitwise multiplication with the resulting feature map of con-
volution with stride 1. The position of the mask 0 corresponds to the volume of stride 1 and the
position of the feature map of the operation result. Set this parameter to 0. The position selection
corresponding to the positive number is retained, and the attention mechanism is added. The value
at the position of 0 will not continue to propagate forward and can be regarded as blank, which is
similar to the size change of the feature map resulting from the convolution operation whose stride
is not 1 in the traditional concept.

2.1.3   ADAPTIVE STRIDE

As shown in Figure 6, the positions of non-zero positive numbers in the mask feature map are not
equally spaced. The adaptive stride method proposed in this paper is no longer limited to fixed
convolution stride S (S>1), but adaptively sampling the convolution operation result with stride 1
according to the input feature map, which can make the convolution operation focus more on the
important information of the feature map. The position of 0 in the target feature map is regarded
as the convolution operation stride of this position plus one, and the position of the color box is the
actual convolution area, as shown in Figure 6.


                     Figure 6: Through the mask feature map sampling process


2.1.4   A DAPTIVITY GENERATED BY THE MASK
The generation of the mask feature map is obtained through the three-layer convolutional layer con-
volution processing of the feature map with the result of step 1 in the convolutional neural network.
In addition, the mask feature map is processed with activation transformation (such as Relu, etc.)


                                                  5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


to add selection effect and attention mechanism effect to the mask feature map. The reason for se-
lecting the three-layer convolutional layer is to generate the feature map with the same size as the
feature map resulting from the convolution operation with step stride of 1. At the same time, the
three-layer convolutional layer is regarded as a complex function(Jifeng Dai, 2017), and the mask
feature map is generated adaptively according to the input feature map. The reason for choosing
Relu is that the Relu function can set the position required by the mask feature map to 0, and can
carry out back propagation in the training.

2.1.5    T HE CAS OVERALL METHOD
The overall method of CAS is as follows: The input feature map is convolved by convolution layer
with fixed stride, and the initial feature map is generated. The input feature map is convolved by
three convolutional layers, and the mask feature map is generated. The mask feature map was
processed with activation transformation (such as Relu(Glorot X, 2010), etc.), and selection action
and attention mechanism were added to the mask feature map. The mask feature map is multiplied
by the initial feature map to generate the target feature map, and the convolution operation result
with adaptive stride effect is obtained, as shown in Figure 7.


                    Figure 7: Through the mask feature map sampling process


2.2     PAS M ODULE

The function of pooling layer is feature extraction and downsampling, and its stride is usually de-
termined by cross validation. The overall method of PAS is as follows: The input feature map is
pooled by pooling layer with fixed stride, and the initial feature map is generated. The input feature
map is convolved by three convolutional layers, and the mask feature map is generated. The mask
feature map was processed with activation transformation (such as Relu(Glorot X, 2010), etc.), and
the selection action and attention mechanism were added to the mask feature map. The target feature
map is generated by the bitwise multiplication of the mask feature map and the initial feature map,
and the pooling result with the effect of adaptive stide is obtained.


3     E XPERIMENT

We carried out the convolution operation in the classification network, object detection network,
segmentation network adaptive stride experiments. The adaptive stride experiment of pooling oper-
ation on classification network is also carried out. The classification accuracy has been improved,
and visual experiments have been done to verify the effectiveness and generality of our method.
Through experiments, we find that the adaptive stride plays a role in extracting local features. Clas-
sification task is the need for local characteristics, the more the farther the back-end network char-
acteristic figure network own extract local features, but there is interference and limited data set,
the partial feature of the network itself extraction is not so perfect, so our CAS module should be


                                                  6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


added in the network of the middle and front, it can better help the network to extract local features.
Moreover, we found that CAS module can be added to the middle and front of the object detection
model network or segmentation network, because the localization needs relatively global features,
and the adaptive stride helps extract local features to improve both classification and localization. It
can also be added to the front of the classification decoupled branch of the object detection model
with decoupled classification localization task, because the decoupled stem layer is a global feature.
Classification network we selected classic classification networks VGG, Alexnet and MobileNet, all
of which added CAS module in the middle and front of the network, Alexnet is shown in Figure
7. The accuracy has been improved, as shown in Table 1. For object detection network, YOLOX-S
network with decoupling of classification and positioning is selected, and CAS module is added to
the stem layer with decoupling of classification and positioning, as shown in Figure 8. The accuracy
has been improved, as shown in Table 2. We selected Unet for the segmentation network, and
added CAS module to the subsampling convolution layer at the second layer of the network. Both
accuracy and mIU have been improved, indicating that CAS module is helpful for classification and
positioning, as shown in Table 3. We selected VGG and Alexnet for PAS module, and the model
accuracy was improved, as shown in Table 4.

3.1     E XPERIMENT ON ADAPTIVE SRIDE OF CONVOLUTION OPERATION

3.1.1    C LASSIFICATION OF NETWORK
Because of the overlap of Trick effect, we chose the most original version of VGG network and
Alexnet network,the effect is shown in Table 1.


                                Figure 8: Alexnet adds adaptive stride


                                  Table 1: Classification of network

                       Model          Dataset    Acc         CAS module Acc

                       VGG            Cifar10    55.11%      55.83%
                       Alexnet        Cifar10    68%         70%
                       MobileNet      Cifar10    90.680%     91.840%


Through the experiment, it is found that adding CAS module to the classification network can help
the network to better extract local features and improve the classification accuracy.

3.1.2    O BJECT DETECTION
Localization needs global features while classification needs local features. The YoloX-S model
decouples the classification task from the localization task. Because the stem layer is used for both
classification and localization, it is a global feature. Our module is applicable to the classification
network and the front-end of the network, so on the YOLOX-S model, our CAS module is added


                                                   7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


to the stem layer and the first layer of the classification branch connection. This is shown in Figure
9,and the effect is shown in Table2.


                                    Figure 9: YOLOX with CAS



                                          Table 2: YOLOX-S

      Dataset   condition                                     YOLOX-S AP        CAS module AP

      COCO      Iou=0.50;0.95 area=all maxDets=100            40.4%             41.0%
      COCO      Iou=0.50 area=all maxDets=100                 59.2%             59.6%
      COCO      Iou=0.75 area=all maxDets=100                 43.6%             44.5%
      COCO      Iou=0.50;0.95 area=small maxDets=100          23.2%             22.6%
      COCO      Iou=0.50;0.95 area=medium maxDets=100         44.5%             45.3%
      COCO      Iou=0.50;0.95 area=largel maxDets=100         53.1%             54.3%



3.1.3    S EGMENTATION NETWORK

Positioning is a relatively global feature, and our CAS module is also helpful for the extraction of
relatively global features, so we add the CAS module in the middle and front of Unet. It was found
that both classfication and positioning were improved,as is shown in Table 3.

                                              Table 3: Unet

                            Model   Dataset    Acc       Acc cls   Mean iu     fwavacc

                original    Unet    Voc        74.40%    14.70%    10.75%      58.71%
                CAS         Unet    Voc        75.02%    18.74%    13.99%      59.58%



3.2     E XPERIMENT OF ADAPTIVE STRIDE OF POOLING OPERATION

In the experiment of the adaptive step size of pooling operation, we chose the original VGG, Alexnet
network and Alexnet network with many tricks added, and added the PAS module in the second
pooling layer. The original step size of pooling layer was selected as 2. The improvement obtained
is shown in Table 4, which verifies the effectiveness of the adaptive stride on the pooling layer.


                                                     8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                      Table 4: PAS experiment

                       Model                  Dataset    Acc         PAS

                       VGG                    Cifar10    55.11%      56.23%
                       Alexnet                Cifar10    68%         71%
                       Alexnet with tricks    Cifar10    74.140%     77.583%



3.3   V ISUALIZATION EXPERIMENT

In the visualization experiment, we output the original image and mask for comparison, as shown in
Figure 10. The left is the original image and the right is the mask. The experimental results show
that the position of non-zero positive number in the mask is exactly the position of the object, which
verifies our idea of extracting local features with adaptive stride.


                               (a)                                 (b)


                               (c)                                 (d)

                                 Figure 10: Visualization experiment



4     CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK

We design an adaptive stride module in convolutional neural network, which verifies the effective-
ness and generality of our method in many models. The adaptive stride module does play a role in
extracting local features, making the convolution operation or pooling operation more focused on
the required features. The effect of the adaptive stride is derived from the mask feature map and the
result feature map with stride 1 is selected. The mask is generated by three convolutional layers and
processed by activation transformation. In the future work, we will explore more mask generation
methods and find other modules with adaptive stride.


                                                  9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


R EFERENCES
Iasonas Kokkinos Adam W. Harley, Konstantinos G. Derpanis. Segmentation-aware convolutional
   networks using local attention masks. 2017 IEEE International Conference on Computer Vision
   (ICCV), pp. 2, 2017.
Zhuowen Tu Chen-Yu Lee, Patrick W. Gallagher. Generalizing pooling functions in convolutional
  neural networks:mixed, gated, and tree. arXiv:1509.08985v2 [stat.ML] 10 Oct, pp. 2, 2015.
Bengio Y Glorot X, Bordes A. Deep sparse rectifier networks. Learning/stats Optimisation, pp. 6,
  2010.
Xinyang Yi Jilin Chen Lichan Hong Ed H. Chi Jiaqi Ma, Zhe Zhao. Modeling task relationships in
  multi-task learning with multi-gate mixture-of-experts. Proceedings of the 24th ACM SIGKDD
  International Conference on Knowledge Discovery Data Mining - KDD, pp. 2, 2018.
Yuwen Xiong Yi Li Guodong Zhang Han Hu Yichen Wei Jifeng Dai, Haozhi Qi. Deformable
  convolutional networks. arXiv:1703.06211v3 [cs.CV] 5 Jun 2017, pp. 6, 2017.
Alex Krizhevsky, Ilya Sutskever, and Geoffrey E Hinton. Advances in neural information processing
  systems. Curran Associates, Inc., 25:1, 2012.
Turab Iqbal Yuxuan Wang Wenwu Wang Mark D Plumbley Qiuqiang Kong, Yin Cao. Advances in
  neural information processing systems. IEEE/ACM Transactions on Audio, Speech, and Language
  Processing, 28:1, 2020.
Grangier D et al Rachid Riad, Teboul O. Learning strides in convolutional neural networks. a, pp.
  2, 2022.
Andreas Veit and Serge Belongie. Convolutional networks with adaptive inference graphs. In Inter-
  national Journal of Computer Vision, pp. 2. 2019.
Stephen Lin ifeng Dai Xizhou Zhu, Han Hu. Deformable convnets v2: More deformable, better
  results. IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), pp. 2,
  2019.


                                               10
