Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


D ON ’ T FEAR THE UNLABELLED :
S AFE SEMI - SUPERVISED LEARNING VIA DEBIASING
 Hugo Schmutz ∗ †                         Olivier Humbert † ‡         Pierre-Alexandre Mattei ∗
 hugo.schmutz@inria.fr



                                             A BSTRACT

          Semi-supervised learning (SSL) provides an effective means of leveraging un-
          labelled data to improve a model’s performance. Even though the domain has
          received a considerable amount of attention in the past years, most methods present
          the common drawback of lacking theoretical guarantees. Our starting point is to
          notice that the estimate of the risk that most discriminative SSL methods minimise
          is biased, even asymptotically. This bias impedes the use of standard statistical
          learning theory and can hurt empirical performance. We propose a simple way of
          removing the bias. Our debiasing approach is straightforward to implement and
          applicable to most deep SSL methods. We provide simple theoretical guarantees
          on the trustworthiness of these modified methods, without having to rely on the
          strong assumptions on the data distribution that SSL theory usually requires. In
          particular, we provide generalisation error bounds for the proposed methods. We
          evaluate debiased versions of different existing SSL methods, such as the Pseudo-
          label method and Fixmatch, and show that debiasing can compete with classic
          deep SSL techniques in various settings by providing better calibrated models.
          Additionally, we provide a theoretical explanation of the intuition of the popular
          SSL methods. An implementation of a debiased version of Fixmatch is available at
          https://github.com/HugoSchmutz/DeFixmatch


1       I NTRODUCTION
The promise of semi-supervised learning (SSL) is to be able to learn powerful predictive models
using partially labelled data. In turn, this would allow machine learning to be less dependent on
the often costly and sometimes dangerously biased task of labelling data. Early SSL approaches—
e.g. Scudder’s (1965) untaught pattern recognition machine—simply replaced unknown labels with
predictions made by some estimate of the predictive model and used the obtained pseudo-labels to
refine their initial estimate. Other more complex branches of SSL have been explored since, notably
using generative models (from McLachlan, 1977, to Kingma et al., 2014) or graphs (notably following
Zhu et al., 2003). Deep neural networks, which are state-of-the-art supervised predictors, have been
trained successfully using SSL. Somewhat surprisingly, the main ingredient of their success is still the
notion of pseudo-labels (or one of its variants), combined with systematic use of data augmentation
(e.g. Xie et al., 2019; Sohn et al., 2020; Rizve et al., 2021).
An obvious SSL baseline is simply throwing away the unlabelled data. We will call such a baseline
the complete case, following the missing data literature (e.g. Tsiatis, 2006). As reported in van
Engelen & Hoos (2020), the main risk of SSL is the potential degradation caused by the introduction
of unlabelled data. Indeed, semi-supervised learning outperforms the complete case baseline only
in specific cases (Singh et al., 2008; Schölkopf et al., 2012; Li & Zhou, 2014). This degradation risk
for generative models has been analysed in Chapelle et al. (2006, Chapter 4). To overcome this issue,
previous works introduced the notion of safe semi-supervised learning for techniques which never
reduce predictive performance by introducing unlabelled data (Li & Zhou, 2014; Guo et al., 2020).
Our loose definition of safeness is as follows: an SSL algorithm is safe if it has theoretical guarantees
that are similar or stronger to the complete case baseline. The “theoretical” part of the definition
    ∗
      Université Côte d’Azur, Inria, Maasai, LJAD, CNRS, Nice, France
    †
      Université Côte d’Azur, TIRO-MATOs, UMR E 4320 CEA, Nice, France
    ‡
      Centre Antoine Lacassagne, Nice, France


                                                   1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                                             1.0
                                                                           True distribution
                                                             0.8           Complete case
                                                                           Pseudo-label
                                                             0.6           DePseudo-label


                                                    p(1|x)
                                                             0.4

                                                             0.2

                                                             0.0
                           0   2   4   6   8   10                  1       0      1      2     3   4   5
                                                                                         x


Figure 1: (Left) Data histogram. (Right) Posterior probabilities p(1|x) of the same model trained
following either complete case (only labelled data), Pseudo-label or our DePseudo-label.

is motivated by the fact that any empirical assessment of generalisation performances of an SSL
algorithm is jeopardised by the scarcity of labels. "Similar or stronger guarantees" can be understood
in a broad sense since there are many kinds of theoretical guarantees (e.g. the two methods may
be both consistent, have similar generalisation bounds, be both asymptotically normal with related
asymptotic variances). Unfortunately, popular deep SSL techniques generally do not benefit from
theoretical guarantees without strong and essentially untestable assumptions on the data distribution
(Mey & Loog, 2022) such as the smoothness assumption (small perturbations on the features x do not
cause large modification in the labels, p(y|pert(x)) ≈ p(y|x)) or the cluster assumption (data points
are distributed on discrete clusters and points in the same cluster are likely to share the same label).
Most semi-supervised methods rely on these distributional assumptions to ensure performance in
entropy minimisation, pseudo-labelling and consistency-based methods. However, no proof is given
that guarantees the effectiveness of state-of-the-art methods (Tarvainen & Valpola, 2017; Miyato
et al., 2018; Sohn et al., 2020; Pham et al., 2021). To illustrate that SSL requires specific assumptions,
we show in a toy example that pseudo-labelling can fail. To do so, we draw samples from two
uniform distributions with a small overlap. Both supervised and semi-supervised neural networks
are trained using the same labelled dataset. While the supervised algorithm learns perfectly the
true distribution of p(1|x), the semi-supervised learning methods (both entropy minimisation and
pseudo-label) underestimate p(1|x) for x ∈ [1, 3] (see Figure 1). We also test our proposed method
(DeSSL) on this dataset and show that the unbiased version of each SSL technique learns the true
distribution accurately. See Appendix A for the results with Entropy Minimisation. Beyond this toy
example, a recent benchmark (Wang et al., 2022) of the last SSL methods demonstrates that no one
method is empirically better than the others. Therefore, the scarcity of labels brings out the need for
competitive methods that benefit from theoretical guarantees. The main motivation of this work is to
show that these competitive methods can be easily modified to benefit from theoretical guarantees
without performance degradation.


1.1   C ONTRIBUTIONS

Rather than relying on the strong geometric assumptions usually used in SSL theory, we use the
missing completely at random (MCAR) assumption, a standard assumption from the missing data
literature (see e.g. Little & Rubin, 2019) and often implicitly made in most SSL works. With this
only assumption on the data distribution, we propose a new safe SSL method derived from simply
debiasing common SSL risk estimates. Our main contributions are:

       • We introduce debiased SSL (DeSSL), a safe method that can be applied to most deep SSL
         algorithms without assumptions on the data distribution;

       • We propose a theoretical explanation of the intuition of popular SSL methods. We provide
         theoretical guarantees on the safeness of using DeSSL both on consistency, calibration and
         asymptotic normality. We also provide a generalisation error bound;

       • We show how simple it is to apply DeSSL to the most popular methods such as Pseudo-label
         and Fixmatch, and show empirically that DeSSL leads to models that are never worse than
         their classical counterparts, generally better calibrated and sometimes much more accurate.


                                                                       2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


2     S EMI - SUPERVISED LEARNING
The ultimate objective of most of the learning frameworks is to minimise a risk R, defined as the
expectation of a particular loss function L over a data distribution p(x, y), on a set of models fθ (x),
parametrised by θ ∈ Θ. The distribution p(x, y) being unknown, we generally minimise a Monte
Carlo approximation of the risk, the empirical risk R̂(θ) computed on a sample of n i.i.d points
drawn from p(x, y). R̂(θ) is an unbiased and consistent estimate of R(θ) under mild assumptions. Its
unbiased nature is one of the basic properties that is used for the development of traditional learning
theory and asymptotic statistics (van der Vaart, 1998; Shalev-Shwartz & Ben-David, 2014).
Semi-supervised learning leverages both labelled and unlabelled data to improve the model’s per-
formance and generalisation. Further information on the distribution p(x) provides a better under-
standing of the distributions p(x, y) and also p(y|x). Indeed, p(x) may contain information on p(y|x)
(Schölkopf et al., 2012, Goodfellow et al., 2016, Chapter 7.6, van Engelen & Hoos, 2020).
In the following, we have access to n samples drawn from the distribution p(x, y) where some of
the labels are missing. We introduce a new binary random variable r ∼ B(π) that governs whether
or not a data point is labelled (r = 0 missing, r = 1 observed, and π ∈ (0, 1) is the probability
of being labelled). The labelled (respectively the unlabelled) datapoints are indexed by the set L
(respectively U), L ∪ U = {1, ..., n}. We note nl the number of labelled and nu the number of
unlabelled datapoints.
The MCAR assumption states that the missingness of a label y is independent of its features and
the value of the label: p(x, y, r) = p(x, y)p(r). This is the case when neither features nor labels
carry information about the potential missingness of the labels. This description of semi-supervised
learning as a missing data problem has already been done in multiple works (see e.g. Seeger, 2000;
Ahfock & McLachlan, 2019). Moreover, the MCAR assumption is implicitly made in most of the SSL
works to design the experiments, indeed, missing labels are drawn completely as random in datasets
such as MNIST, CIFAR or SVHN (Tarvainen & Valpola, 2017; Miyato et al., 2018; Xie et al., 2019;
Sohn et al., 2020). Moreover, the definition of safety in the introduction is not straightforward without
the MCAR assumption as the complete case is not an unbiased estimator of the risk in non-MCAR
settings (see e.g. Liu & Goldberg, 2020, Section 3.1).

2.1   C OMPLETE CASE : THROWING THE UNLABELLED DATA AWAY

In missing data theory, the complete case is the learning scheme that only uses fully observed
instances, namely labelled data. The natural estimator of the risk is then simply the empirical risk
computed on the labelled data. Fortunately, in the MCAR setting, the complete case risk estimate
keeps the same good properties of the traditional supervised one: it is unbiased and converges point
wisely to R(θ). Therefore, traditional learning theory holds for the complete case under MCAR.
While these observations are hardly new (see e.g. Liu & Goldberg, 2020), they can be seen as
particular cases of the theory that we develop below. The risk to minimise is
                                                1 X
                                    R̂CC (θ) =        L(θ; xi , yi ).                            (1)
                                               nl
                                                    i∈L


2.2   I NCORPORATING UNLABELLED DATA

A major drawback of the complete case framework is that a lot of data ends up not being exploited. A
class of SSL approaches, mainly inductive methods with respect to the taxonomy of van Engelen &
Hoos (2020), generally aim to minimise a modified estimator of the risk by including unlabelled data.
Therefore, the optimisation problem generally becomes finding θ̂ that minimises the SSL risk,
                                     1 X                   λ X
                        R̂SSL (θ) =        L(θ; xi , yi )+        H(θ; xi ).                      (2)
                                    nl                     nu
                                          i∈L                    i∈U

where H is a term that does not depend on the labels and λ is a scalar weight which balances the
labelled and unlabelled terms. In the literature, H can generally be seen as a surrogate of L. Indeed,
it looks like the intuitive choices of H are equal or equivalent to a form of expectation of L on a
distribution given by the model.


                                                   3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


2.3   S OME EXAMPLES OF SURROGATES

A recent overview of the recent SSL techniques has been proposed by van Engelen & Hoos (2020).
In this work, we focus on methods suited for a discriminative probabilistic model pθ (y|x) that
approximates the conditional p(y|x). We categorised methods into two distinct sections, entropy
and consistency-based.

Entropy-based methods Entropy-based methods aim to minimise a term of entropy of the predic-
tions computed on unlabelled data. Thus, they encourage the model to be confident on unlabelled
data, implicitly using the cluster assumption. Entropy-based methods can all be described as an
expectation of L under a distribution πx computed at the datapoint x:
                                       H(θ; x) = Eπx (x̃,ỹ) [L(θ; x̃, ỹ)].                                    (3)
For instance, Grandvalet & Bengio (2004) simply use the Shannon entropy as H(θ; x) which can
be rewritten as equation equation 3 with πx (x̃, ỹ) = δx (x̃)pθ (ỹ|x̃), where δx is the dirac distribution
in x. Also, pseudo-label methods, which consist in picking the class with the maximum predicted
probability as a pseudo-label for the unlabelled data (Scudder, 1965), can also be described as
Equation 3. See Appendix B for complete description of the entropy-based literature (Berthelot et al.,
2019; 2020; Xie et al., 2019; Sohn et al., 2020; Rizve et al., 2021) and further details.
Consistency-based methods Another range of SSL methods minimises a consistency objective
that encourages invariant prediction for perturbations either on the data or on the model in order
to enforce stability on model predictions. These methods rely on the smoothness assumption. In
this category, we cite Π-model (Sajjadi et al., 2016), temporal ensembling (Laine & Aila, 2017),
Mean-teacher (Tarvainen & Valpola, 2017), virtual adversarial training (VAT, Miyato et al., 2018) and
interpolation consistent training (ICT, Verma et al., 2019). These objectives H are equivalent to an
expectation of L (see Appendix B). The general form of the unsupervised objective can be written as
   C1 Eπx (x̃,ỹ) [L(θ; x̃, ỹ)] ≤ H(θ; x) = Div(fθ̂ (x, .), pert(fθ (x, .)) ≤ C2 Eπx (x̃,ỹ) [L(θ; x̃, ỹ)],   (4)
where fθ̂ is the predictions of the model, the Div is a non-negative function that measures the
divergence between two distributions, θ̂ is a fixed copy of the current parameter θ (the gradient is not
propagated through θ̂), pert is a perturbation applied to the model or the data and 0 ≤ C1 ≤ C2 .
Previous works also remarked that H is an expectation of L for entropy-minimisation and
pseudo-label (Zhu et al., 2022; Aminian et al., 2022). We describe a more general framework
covering further methods and provide with our theory an intuition on the choice of H.

2.4   S AFE SEMI - SUPERVISED LEARNING

The main risk of SSL is the potential degradation caused by the introduction of unlabelled data when
distributional assumptions are not satisfied (Singh et al., 2008; Schölkopf et al., 2012; Li & Zhou,
2014), specifically in settings where the MCAR assumption does not hold anymore (Oliver et al.,
2018; Guo et al., 2020). Additionally, in Zhu et al. (2022), the authors show disparate impacts of
pseudo-labelling on the different sub-classes of the population. As remarked by Oliver et al. (2018),
SSL performances are enabled by leveraging large validation sets which is not suited for real-world
applications. To mitigate these problems, previous works introduced the notion safe semi-supervised
learning for techniques which never reduce learning performance by introducing unlabelled data (Li
& Zhou, 2014; Kawakita & Takeuchi, 2014; Li et al., 2016; Gan et al., 2017; Trapp et al., 2017; Guo
et al., 2020). While the spirit of the definition of safe given by these works is the same, there are
different ways of formalising it. To be more precise, we listed in Appendix C.1 theoretical guarantees
given by these different works. In our work, we propose to call safe an SSL algorithm that has
theoretical guarantees that are similar to or stronger than those of the complete case baseline.
Even though the methods presented in Section 2.3 produce good performances in a variety of SSL
benchmarks, they generally do not benefit from theoretical guarantees, even elementary. Moreover,
Schölkopf et al. (2012) identify settings on the causal relationship between the features x and the
target y where SSL may systematically fail, even if classic SSL assumptions hold. Our example
of Figure 1 also shows that classic SSL may fail to generalise in a very benign setting with a large
number of labelled data. Presented methods minimise a biased version of the risk under the MCAR


                                                        4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


assumption and therefore classical learning theory cannot be applied anymore, as we argue more
precisely in Appendix C.2. Learning over a biased estimate of the risk is not necessarily unsafe but
it is difficult to provide theoretical guarantees on such methods even if some works try to do so with
strong assumptions on the data distribution (Mey & Loog 2022, Sections 4 and 5). Additionally, the
choice of H can be confusing as seen in the literature. For instance, Grandvalet & Bengio (2004) and
Corduneanu & Jaakkola (2003) perform respectively entropy and mutual information minimisation
whereas Pereyra et al. (2017) and Krause et al. (2010) perform maximisation of the same quantities.
Some other SSL methods have theoretical guarantees, unfortunately, so far these methods come
with either strong assumptions or important computational burdens. Li & Zhou (2014) introduced a
safe semi-supervised SVM and showed that the accuracy of their method is never worse than SVMs
trained with only labelled data with the assumption that the true model is accessible. However, if the
distributional assumptions are not satisfied, no improvement or degeneration is expected. Sakai et al.
(2017) proposed an unbiased estimate of the risk for binary classification by including unlabelled
data. The key idea is to use unlabelled data to better evaluate on the one hand the risk of positive
class samples and on the other the risk of negative samples. They provided theoretical guarantees on
its variance and a generalisation error bound. The method is designed only for binary classification
and has not been tested in a deep-learning setting. It has been extended to ordinal regression in
follow-up work (Tsuchiya et al., 2021). In the context of kernel machines, Liu & Goldberg (2020)
used an unbiased estimate of risk, like ours, for a specific choice of H. Guo et al. (2020) proposed
DS 3 L, a safe method that needs to approximately solve a bi-level optimisation problem. In particular,
the method is designed for a different setting, not under the MCAR assumption, where there is a
class mismatch between labelled and unlabelled data. The resolution of the optimisation problem
provides a solution not worse than the complete case but comes with approximations. They provide a
generalisation error bound. Sokolovska et al. (2008) proposed a method with asymptotic guarantees
using strong assumptions such that the feature space is finite and the marginal probability distribution
of x is fully known. Fox-Roberts & Rosten (2014) proposed an unbiased estimator in the generative
setting applicable to a large range of models and they prove that this estimator has a lower variance
than the one of the complete case.

3     D E SSL: U NBIASED SEMI - SUPERVISED LEARNING
To overcome the issues introduced by the second term in the approximation of the risk for the semi-
supervised learning approach, we propose DeSSL, an unbiased version of the SSL estimator using
labelled data to annul the bias. The idea here is to retrieve the properties of classical learning theory.
Fortunately, we will see that the proposed method can eventually have better properties than the com-
plete case, in particular with regard to the variance of the estimate. The proposed DeSSL objective is
                                 1 X                   λ X               λ X
               R̂DeSSL (θ) =           L(θ; xi , yi )+        H(θ; xi )−         H(θ; xi ).           (5)
                                nl                     nu                nl
                                  i∈L                    i∈U                i∈L

Under the MCAR assumption, this estimator is unbiased for any value of the parameter λ. For proof
of this result see Appendix D. We prove the optimality of debiasing with the labelled dataset in
Appendix F. Intuitively, for entropy-based methods, H should be applied only on unlabelled data to
enforce the confidence of the model only on unlabelled datapoints. Whereas, for consistency-based
methods, H can be applied to any subset of data points. Our theory and proposed method remain
the same whether H is applied to all the available data or not (see Appendix K).

3.1   D OES THE D E SSL RISK ESTIMATOR MAKE SENSE ?

The most intuitive interpretation is that by debiasing the risk estimator, we get back to the basics of
learning theory. This way of debiasing is closely related to the method of control variates (Owen,
2013, Chapter 8) which is a common variance reduction technique. The idea is to add an additional
term to a Monte-Carlo estimator with a null expectation in order to reduce the variance of the
estimator without modifying the expectation. Here, DeSSL can also be interpreted as a control variate
on the risk’s gradient itself and should improve the optimisation scheme. This idea is close to the
optimisation schemes introduced by Johnson & Zhang (2013) and Defazio et al. (2014) which reduce
the variance of the gradients’ estimate to improve optimisation performance. As a matter of fact, we
study the gradient’s variance reduction of DeSSL in Appendix E.1.


                                                    5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Another interesting way to interpret DeSSL is as a constrained optimisation problem. Indeed, min-
imising R̂DeSSL is equivalent to minimising the Lagrangian of the following optimisation problem:
                            min R̂CC (θ)
                              θ
                                      1 X             1 X                                         (6)
                             s.t.         H(θ; xi ) =     H(θ; xi ).
                                     nu               nl
                                           i∈U               i∈L


The idea of this optimisation problem is to minimise the complete case risk estimator by assessing
that some properties represented by H are on average equal for the labelled data and the unlabelled
data. For example, if we consider entropy-minimisation, this program encourages the model to have
the same confidence on the unlabelled examples as on the labelled ones.
The debiasing term of our objective will penalise the confidence of the model on the labelled data.
Pereyra et al. (2017) show that penalising the entropy in a supervised context for supervised models
improves on the state-of-the-art on common benchmarks. This comforts us in the idea of debiasing
using labelled data in the case of entropy-minimisation. Moreover, the debiasing term in pseudo-
label is similar to plausibility inference (Barndorff-Nielsen, 1976). Intuitively we understand the
benefits of debiasing the estimator with labelled data to penalise the confidence of the model on
these datapoints. But the debiasing can be performed on any subset of the training data (labelled or
unlabelled). However, in regards to the variance of the estimator, we can prove that debiasing with
only the labelled data or the whole dataset are both optimal and equivalent (see Appendix F).
Our objective also resembles doubly-robust risk estimates used for SSL in the context of kernel ma-
chines by Liu & Goldberg (2020) and for deep learning by Hu et al. (2022). In both cases, their focus
is quite different, as they consider weaker conditions than MCAR, but very specific choices of H.

3.2   I S R̂DeSSL (θ) AN ACCURATE RISK ESTIMATE ?

Because of the connections between our debiased estimate and variance reduction techniques, we
have a natural interest in the variance of the estimate. Having a lower-variance estimate of the risk
would mean estimating it more accurately, leading to better models. Similarly to traditional control
variates (Owen, 2013), the variance can be computed, and optimised in λ:
Theorem 3.1. The function λ 7→ V(R̂DeSSL (θ)|r) reaches its minimum for:
                                           nu Cov(L(θ; x, y), H(θ; x))
                                  λopt =                               ,                          (7)
                                           n       V(H(θ; x))
and at λopt :
                                           nu 2
                V(R̂DeSSL (θ)|r)λopt = 1 −   ρ    V(R̂CC (θ)|r) ≤ V(R̂CC (θ)|r),                  (8)
                                           n L,H

where ρL,H = Corr(L(θ; x, y), H(θ; x)).

Additionally, we have a variance reduction regime V(R̂DeSSL (θ)|r) ≤ V(R̂CC (θ)|r) for all λ
between 0 and 2λopt . A proof of this theorem is available as Appendix E. This theorem provides
a formal justification to the heuristic idea that H should be a surrogate of L. Indeed, DeSSL is
a more accurate risk estimate when H is strongly positively correlated with L, which is likely to
be the case when H is equal or equivalent to an expectation of L. Then, choosing λ positive is a
coherent choice. We demonstrate in Appendix E that L and H are positively correlated when L is
the negative likelihood and H is the entropy. Finally, we experimentally validate this theorem and
the unbiasedness of our estimator in Appendix E.1. Other SSL methods have variance reduction
guarantees, see Fox-Roberts & Rosten (2014) and Sakai et al. (2017). In a purely supervised context,
Chen et al. (2020) show that the effectiveness of data augmentation techniques lies partially in the
variance reduction of the risk estimate. A natural application of this theorem would be to tune λ
automatically by estimating λopt . In our case however, the estimation of Cov(L(θ; x, y), H(θ; x))
with few labels led to unsatisfactory results. However, we estimate it more accurately using the test
set (which is of course impossible in practice) on different datasets and methods to provide intuition
on the order of λopt and the range of the variance reduction regime in Appendix M.2.


                                                    6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


3.3   C ALIBRATION , CONSISTENCY AND ASYMPTOTIC NORMALITY

The calibration of a model is its capacity of predicting probability estimates that are representative of
the true distribution. This property is determinant in real-world applications when we need reliable
predictions. In the sense of scoring rules (Gneiting & Raftery, 2007) theory, we prove DeSSL is as
well-calibrated as the complete case. See Theorem G.1 and proof in Appendix G.
                                          p
We say that θ̂ is consistent if d(θ̂, θ∗ ) −
                                           → 0 when n →
                                                      − ∞, where d is a distance on Θ. The properties
of θ̂ depend on the behaviours of the functions L and H. We will thus use the following standard
assumptions.
Assumption 3.2. The minimum θ∗ of R is well-separated: inf θ:d(θ∗ ,θ)≥ϵ R(θ) > R(θ∗ ).
Assumption 3.3. The uniform weak law of large numbers holds for both L and H.
Theorem 3.4. Under the MCAR assumption, Assumption 3.2 and Assumption 3.3, θ̂ =
arg min R̂DeSSL is consistent.
For proof of this theorem see Appendix G. This theorem is a simple application of van der Vaart’s
(1998) Theorem 5.7 proving the consistency of an M-estimator. The result holds for the complete
case, with λ = 0 which proves that the complete case is a solid baseline under the MCAR assumption.
Coupling of nl and nu under the MCAR assumption Under the MCAR assumption, nl and nu
are random variables. We have r ∼ B(π) (i.e. any x has the probability π of being labelled). Then,
with n growing to infinity, we have nnl = nl +n
                                             nl
                                                u
                                                  →
                                                  − π. Therefore, both nl and nu grow to infinity
     nl   π−1
and nu →− π . This implies nu = O(nl ) when n goes to infinity.

Going further, we prove the asymptotic normality of θ̂DeSSL by simplifying a bit the learning
objective. The idea is to replace nl with πn to remove the dependence between samples. However,
this modification is equivalent to our objective by modifying λ. We also show that the asymptotic
variance can be optimised with respect to λ. We define the cross-covariance matrix between random
vectors ∇L(θ; x, y) and ∇H(θ; x) as Kθ (i, j) = Cov(∇L(θ; x, y)i , ∇H(θ; x)j ).
Theorem 3.5. Suppose L and H are smooth functions in C 2 (Θ, R). Assume R(θ) admits a second-
order Taylor expansion at θ∗ with a non-singular second order derivative Vθ∗ . Under the MCAR
assumption, θ̂DeSSL is asymptotically normal and the trace of the covariance can be minimised.
Indeed, Tr(ΣDeSSL ) reaches its minimum at
                                                  Tr(Vθ−1       −1
                                                       ∗ Kθ ∗ Vθ ∗ )
                       λopt = (1 − π)                                           ,                         (9)
                                        Tr(Vθ∗ E [∇H(θ∗ ; x)∇H(θ∗ ; x)T ] Vθ−1
                                             −1
                                                                            ∗ )

and at λopt , we have Tr(ΣDeSSL ) − Tr(ΣCC ) ≤ 0.
See Appendix I for proof of this result. The Theorem shows there exists a range of λ for which
DeSSL is a better model’s parameters than the complete case. In this context, we have a variance
reduction regime on the risk estimate but even more importantly on the parameters estimate.

3.4   R ADEMACHER COMPLEXITY AND GENERALISATION BOUNDS

In this section, we prove an upper bound for the generalisation error of DeSSL. To simplify, we use
the same modification as for the asymptotic variance. The unbiasedness of R̂DeSSL can directly be
used to derive generalisation bounds based on the Rademacher complexity (Bartlett & Mendelson,
2002), defined in our case as
                 "                                                                                   !#
                            1 X                        λ X                     λ     X
 Rn = E(εi )i≤n sup               εi L(θ; xi , yi ) −        εi H(θ; xi ) +              εi H(θ; xi )   , (10)
                     θ∈Θ   nπ i∈L                     nπ i∈L                n(1 − π) i∈U
where εi are i.i.d. Rademacher variables independent of the data. In the particular case of λ = 0,
we recover the standard Rademacher complexity of the complete case.
Theorem 3.6. We assume that labels are MCAR and that both L and H are bounded. Then, there
exists a constant κ > 0, that depends on λ, L, H, and the ratio of observed labels, such that, with
probability at least 1 − δ, for all θ ∈ Θ,
                                                           r
                                                              log(4/δ)
                             R(θ) ≤ R̂DeSSL (θ) + 2Rn + κ              .                       (11)
                                                                 n

                                                      7
 Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


The proof follows Shalev-Shwartz & Ben-David (2014, Chapter 26), and is available in Appendix J.


 4                     E XPERIMENTS

We evaluate the performance of DeSSL against different classic methods. In particular, we perform
experiments with varying λ on different datasets MNIST, DermaMNIST, CIFAR-10, CIFAR-100
(Krizhevsky, 2009) and five small datasets of MedMNIST (Yang et al., 2021; 2023) with a fixed
λ. The results of these experiments are reported below. In our figures, the error bars represent the
size of the 95% confidence interval (CI). Finally, we modified the implementation of Fixmatch
(Sohn et al., 2020) and compare it with its debiased version on CIFAR-10, CIFAR-100 and on STL10
(Coates et al., 2011). Finally, we show how simple it is to debias an existing implementation, by
demonstrating it on the consistency-based models benchmarked by (Oliver et al., 2018), namely
VAT, Π-model and MeanTeacher on CIFAR-10 and SVHN (Netzer et al., 2011). We observe similar
performances between the debiased and biased versions for the different methods, both in terms
of cross-entropy and accuracy. See Appendix O.

 4.1                   P SEUDO L ABEL

We compare PseudoLabel and DePseudoLabel on CIFAR-10 and MNIST. We test the influence of
the hyperparameters λ and report the accuracy, the cross-entropy and the expected calibration error
(ECE, Guo et al., 2017) at the epoch of best validation accuracy using 10% of nl as the validation set.
 MNIST is an advantageous dataset for SSL since classes are well-separated. We train a LeNet-like
 architecture using nl = 1000 labelled data on 10 different splits of the training dataset into a labelled
 and unlabelled set. Models are then evaluated using the standard 10, 000 test samples. Results are
 reported in Figure 2 and Appendix L. In this example SSL and DeSSL have almost the same accuracy
 for all λ, however, DeSSL seems to be always better calibrated.
 CIFAR-10 We train a CNN-13 from Tarvainen & Valpola (2017) on 5 different splits. We use
 nl = 4000 and use the rest of the dataset as unlabelled. Models are then evaluated using the standard
 test samples. Results are reported in Figure 3. We report the ECE in Appendix M. The performance
 of both methods on CIFAR-100 with nl = 10000 are reported in Appendix M. We observe DeSSL
 provides both a better cross-entropy and ECE with the same accuracy for small λ. For larger λ,
 DeSSL performs better in all the reported metrics. We performed a paired Student’s t-test to ensure
 that our results are significant and reported the p-values in Appendix M. The p-values indicate that
 for λ close to 10, DeSSL is often significantly better in all the metrics. Moreover, DeSSL for large λ
 provides a better cross-entropy and ECE than the complete case whereas SSL never does.
MedMNIST is a large-scale MNIST-like collection of biomedical images. We selected the five
smallest 2D datasets of the collection, for these datasets it is likely that the cluster assumption
no longer holds. Results are reported in Appendix L. We show DePseudoLabel competes with
PseudoLabel in terms of accuracy and even success when PseudoLabel’s accuracy is less than the
complete case. Moreover, DePseudoLabel is always better in terms of cross-entropy, so calibration,
whereas PseudoLabel is always worse than the complete case. We focus on the unbalanced dataset
DermaMNIST with a majority class and we compare the accuracy per class of the complete case,
PseudoLabel and DePseudoLabel, see Figure 4. In this context, PseudoLabel fails to learn correctly
the minority classes as the majority class is over-represented in the pseudo labels. DePseudoLabel
outperforms both the Complete Case and PseudoLabel in term of balanced accuracy.


           0.960
           0.955       DePseudoLabel                                                                DePseudoLabel
                       PseudoLabel                                                       0.79       PseudoLabel                  5
                                                    1.0
           0.950
           0.945                                                                         0.78                                    4
                                                    0.8
Accuracy


                                                                              Accuracy


           0.940
                                             Loss


                                                                                                                          Loss


                                                                                         0.77                                    3
           0.935                                    0.6
           0.930                                                                         0.76                                    2
           0.925                                    0.4
           0.920                                                                         0.75                                    1
                                                    0.2
                   0        100        101                0   100   101                         0      100          101              100   101


 Figure 2: The influence of λ on Pseudo-label and Figure 3:        Influence of λ on Pseudo-label and
 DePseudo-label for a Lenet trained on MNIST with DePseudo-label for a CNN trained on CIFAR with
 nl = 1000: (Left) Mean test accuracy; (Right) Mean nl = 4000: (Left) Mean test accuracy; (Right) Mean
 test cross-entropy, with 95% CI.                   test cross-entropy, with 95% CI.


                                                                          8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                        0.5                                                                               0.5                                                                       0.5

                        0.4                                                                               0.4                                                                       0.4


       Class Accuracy


                                                                                         Class Accuracy


                                                                                                                                                                   Class Accuracy
                        0.3                                                                               0.3                                                                       0.3

                        0.2                                                                               0.2                                                                       0.2

                        0.1                                                                               0.1                                                                       0.1

                        0.0                                                                               0.0                                                                       0.0
                              200   400   600     800    1000   1200   1400                                     200   400   600   800    1000   1200   1400                               200    400    600    800    1000   1200   1400
                                                   epoch                                                                           epoch                                                                        epoch


Figure 4: Class accuracies (without the majority class) on DermaMNIST trained with nl = 1000 labelled data
on five folds. (Left) CompleteCase (B-Acc: 26.88 ± 2.26%); (Middle) PseudoLabel (B-Acc: 22.03 ± 1.45%);
(Right) DePseudoLabel (B-Acc: 28.84 ± 1.02%), with 95% CI.

4.2               F IXMATCH (S OHN ET AL ., 2020)

The efficiency of the debiasing method lies in the correlation of the labelled objective and the unla-
belled objective as shown in Theorem 3.1. So, we debiased a version of Fixmatch that includes strong
augmentations in the labelled objective. See Appendix N for further details. We also compare our
results to the original Fixmatch (Fixmatch∗ in Table 1). While the modified version is slightly worse
than the original Fixmatch, debiasing it works. For this experiment, we use nl = 4000 on 5 different
folds for CIFAR-10 and nl = 10000 on one fold for CIFAR-100. First, we report that a strong com-
plete case baseline using data augmentation reaches 87.27% accuracy on CIFAR-10 (resp. 62.62%
on CIFAR-100). A paired Student’s t-test ensures that our results are significantly better on CIFAR-10
(p-value in Appendix N). Then, we observe that the debiasing method improves both the accuracy
and cross-entropy of this modified version of Fixmatch. Inspired by Zhu et al. (2022), we analyse
individual classes on CIFAR-10 and show that our method improved performance on “poor” classes
more equally than the biased version. Pseudo-label-based methods with a fixed selection threshold
draw more pseudo-labels in the “easy” subpopulations. For instance, in the toy dataset (Figure 6),
PseudoLabel will always draw samples of the class blue in the overlapping area. DeSSL prevents
the method to overfit and be overconfident on the “easy” classes with the debiasing term. Indeed, De-
Fixmatch improves Fixmatch by 1.57% (resp. 1.94%) overall but by 4.91% on the worst class (resp.
8.00%). We report in Appendix N.1 the accuracy per class and in Appendix N.2 the results on STL10.

Table 1: Test accuracy, worst class accuracy and cross-entropy of Complete Case, Fixmatch and
DeFixmatch on 5 folds of CIFAR-10 and one fold of CIFAR-100. Fixmatch∗ is the original version
of Fixmatch, that uses strong augmentations only on the unlabelled.
                                                                               CIFAR-10 (nl = 4000)                                                                                             CIFAR-100 (nl = 10000)
                                                Complete Case                 Fixmatch                           DeFixmatch             Fixmatch∗             Complete Case                       Fixmatch          DeFixmatch             Fixmatch∗
 Accuracy                                       87.27 ± 0.25           93.87 ± 0.13                             95.44 ± 0.10          95.48± 0.17                 62.62                                69.28             71.22               71.93
 Worst class accuracy                           70.08 ± 0.93           82.25 ± 2.27                              87.16 ± 0.46        86.88 ± 0.78                 28.00                                23.00             31.00               29.00
 Cross entropy                                   0.60 ± 0.01            0.27 ± 0.01                              0.20 ± 0.01          0.20 ± 0.01                  1.87                                 1.52              1.42                1.51
 Brier score                                    0.214 ± 0.005          0.101 ±0.003                             0.076 ± 0.001        0.074 ± 0.003                 0.56                                 0.47              0.44               0.44


5     C ONCLUSION

Motivated by the remarks of van Engelen & Hoos (2020) and Oliver et al. (2018) on the missingness
of theoretical guarantees in SSL, we proposed a simple modification of SSL frameworks. We
consider frameworks based on the inclusion of unlabelled data in the computation of the risk
estimator and debias them using labelled data. We show theoretically that this debiasing comes with
several theoretical guarantees. We demonstrate these theoretical results experimentally on several
common SSL datasets. DeSSL shows competitive performance in terms of accuracy compared to its
biased version but improves significantly the calibration. There are several future directions open to
us. Our experiments suggest that DeSSL will perform as well as SSL when classic SSL assumptions
are true (such as the cluster assumption), for instance with MNIST in Figure 2. Still, for MNIST,
DeSSL does not outperform in terms of accuracy but does in terms of cross-entropy and expected
calibration error. However, when these assumptions do not hold anymore DeSSL will outperform
its SSL counterparts. We showed that λopt exists (Theorem 3.1) and therefore our formula provides
guidelines for the optimisation of λ. Finally, an interesting improvement would be to go beyond
the MCAR assumption by considering settings with a distribution mismatch between labelled and
unlabelled data (Guo et al., 2020; Cao et al., 2021; Hu et al., 2022).


                                                                                                                                   9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
This work has been supported by the French government, through the 3IA Côte d’Azur, Investment
in the Future, project managed by the National Research Agency (ANR) with the reference number
ANR-19-P3IA-0002.
We thank Jes Frellsen for suggesting the interpretation of DeSSL as a constrained optimisation
problem. We are also grateful to the OPAL infrastructure from Université Côte d’Azur for providing
resources and support.

R EFERENCES
Martín Abadi, Ashish Agarwal, Paul Barham, Eugene Brevdo, Zhifeng Chen, Craig Citro, Greg S.
 Corrado, Andy Davis, Jeffrey Dean, Matthieu Devin, Sanjay Ghemawat, Ian Goodfellow, Andrew
 Harp, Geoffrey Irving, Michael Isard, Yangqing Jia, Rafal Jozefowicz, Lukasz Kaiser, Manjunath
 Kudlur, Josh Levenberg, Dandelion Mané, Rajat Monga, Sherry Moore, Derek Murray, Chris Olah,
 Mike Schuster, Jonathon Shlens, Benoit Steiner, Ilya Sutskever, Kunal Talwar, Paul Tucker, Vincent
 Vanhoucke, Vijay Vasudevan, Fernanda Viégas, Oriol Vinyals, Pete Warden, Martin Wattenberg,
 Martin Wicke, Yuan Yu, and Xiaoqiang Zheng. TensorFlow: Large-scale machine learning on
 heterogeneous systems, 2015. URL https://www.tensorflow.org/. Software available
 from tensorflow.org.
Daniel Ahfock and Geoffrey J McLachlan. On missing label patterns in semi-supervised learning.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:1904.02883, 2019.
Gholamali Aminian, Mahed Abroshan, Mohammad Mahdi Khalili, Laura Toni, and Miguel Ro-
  drigues. An information-theoretical approach to semi-supervised learning under covariate-shift.
 International Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Statistics, 2022.
Athanassios N Avramidis and James R Wilson. A splitting scheme for control variates. Operations
  Research Letters, 1993.
Ole Barndorff-Nielsen. Plausibility inference. Journal of the Royal Statistical Society: Series B
  (Methodological), 1976.
Peter L Bartlett and Shahar Mendelson. Rademacher and Gaussian complexities: Risk bounds and
  structural results. Journal of Machine Learning Research, 2002.
David Berthelot, Nicholas Carlini, Ian Goodfellow, Nicolas Papernot, Avital Oliver, and Colin A Raf-
  fel. Mixmatch: A holistic approach to semi-supervised learning. Advances in Neural Information
  Processing Systems, 2019.
David Berthelot, Nicholas Carlini, Ekin D. Cubuk, Alex Kurakin, Kihyuk Sohn, Han Zhang, and
  Colin Raffel. ReMixMatch: Semi-supervised learning with distribution matching and augmentation
  anchoring. International conference on Learning Representations, 2020.
Kaidi Cao, Maria Brbic, and Jure Leskovec. Open-world semi-supervised learning, 2021.
Olivier Chapelle, Bernhard Schölkopf, and Alexander Zien. Semi-supervised learning. MIT Press,
  2006.
Shuxiao Chen, Edgar Dobriban, and Jane H Lee. A group-theoretic framework for data augmentation.
  Journal of Machine Learning Research, 2020.
Adam Coates, Andrew Ng, and Honglak Lee. An analysis of single-layer networks in unsupervised
  feature learning. International Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Statistics, 2011.
Adrian Corduneanu and Tommi Jaakkola. On information regularization. Uncertainty in Artificial
 Intelligence, 2003.
Ekin D Cubuk, Barret Zoph, Jonathon Shlens, and Quoc V Le. Randaugment: Practical automated
  data augmentation with a reduced search space. Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
  Recognition Workshops, 2020.


                                                10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Aaron Defazio, Francis Bach, and Simon Lacoste-Julien. SAGA: A fast incremental gradient method
  with support for non-strongly convex composite objectives. Advances in Neural Information
  Processing Systems, 2014.
Patrick Fox-Roberts and Edward Rosten. Unbiased generative semi-supervised learning. The Journal
  of Machine Learning Research, 2014.
Haitao Gan, Zhenhua Li, Yingle Fan, and Zhizeng Luo. Dual learning-based safe semi-supervised
  learning. IEEE Access, 6:2615–2621, 2017.
Tilmann Gneiting and Adrian E Raftery. Strictly proper scoring rules, prediction, and estimation.
  Journal of the American statistical Association, 2007.
Ian Goodfellow, Jean Pouget-Abadie, Mehdi Mirza, Bing Xu, David Warde-Farley, Sherjil Ozair,
  Aaron Courville, and Yoshua Bengio. Generative adversarial nets. Advances in Neural Information
  Processing Systems, 2014.
Ian Goodfellow, Yoshua Bengio, and Aaron Courville. Deep Learning. MIT Press, 2016.
Yves Grandvalet and Yoshua Bengio. Semi-supervised learning by entropy minimization. Advances
  in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2004.
Chuan Guo, Geoff Pleiss, Yu Sun, and Kilian Q Weinberger. On calibration of modern neural
  networks. International Conference on Machine Learning, 2017.
Lan-Zhe Guo, Zhen-Yu Zhang, Yuan Jiang, Yu-Feng Li, and Zhi-Hua Zhou. Safe deep semi-
  supervised learning for unseen-class unlabeled data. International Conference on Machine Learn-
  ing, 2020.
Charles R. Harris, K. Jarrod Millman, Stéfan J van der Walt, Ralf Gommers, Pauli Virtanen, David
  Cournapeau, Eric Wieser, Julian Taylor, Sebastian Berg, Nathaniel J. Smith, Robert Kern, Matti
  Picus, Stephan Hoyer, Marten H. van Kerkwijk, Matthew Brett, Allan Haldane, Jaime Fernández del
  Río, Mark Wiebe, Pearu Peterson, Pierre Gérard-Marchant, Kevin Sheppard, Tyler Reddy, Warren
  Weckesser, Hameer Abbasi, Christoph Gohlke, and Travis E. Oliphant. Array programming with
  NumPy. Nature, 2020.
Xinting Hu, Yulei Niu, Chunyan Miao, Xian-Sheng Hua, and Hanwang Zhang. On non-random
  missing labels in semi-supervised learning. International Conference on Learning Representations,
  2022.
Rie Johnson and Tong Zhang. Accelerating stochastic gradient descent using predictive variance
  reduction. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2013.
Masanori Kawakita and Jun’ichi Takeuchi. Safe semi-supervised learning based on weighted
 likelihood. Neural Networks, 2014.
Diederik P Kingma, Shakir Mohamed, Danilo Jimenez Rezende, and Max Welling. Semi-supervised
  learning with deep generative models. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2014.
Andreas Krause, Pietro Perona, and Ryan Gomes. Discriminative clustering by regularized informa-
  tion maximization. Advances in neural information processing systems, 23, 2010.
Alex Krizhevsky. Learning multiple layers of features from tiny images. Technical report, MIT,
  NYU, 2009.
Samuli Laine and Timo Aila. Temporal ensembling for semi-supervised learning. International
  Conference on Learning Representations, 2017.
Dong-Hyun Lee. Pseudo-Label : The simple and efficient semi-supervised learning method for deep
  neural networks. Workshop on challenges in representation learning, International conference on
  machine learning, 2013.
Yu-Feng Li and Zhi-Hua Zhou. Towards making unlabeled data never hurt. IEEE transactions on
  pattern analysis and machine intelligence, 2014.


                                                11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Yu-Feng Li, James T Kwok, and Zhi-Hua Zhou. Towards safe semi-supervised learning for multivari-
  ate performance measures. AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, 2016.
Roderick JA Little and Donald B Rubin. Statistical Analysis with Missing Data. John Wiley & Sons,
  2019.
Tiantian Liu and Yair Goldberg. Kernel machines with missing responses. Electronic Journal of
  Statistics, 2020.
Marco Loog. Contrastive pessimistic likelihood estimation for semi-supervised classification. IEEE
 transactions on pattern analysis and machine intelligence, 2015.
Fredrik Lundh, M Ellis, et al. Python imaging library (PIL), 2012.
Wes McKinney et al. Data structures for statistical computing in python. Python in Science
 Conference, 2010.
Geoffrey John McLachlan. Estimating the linear discriminant function from initial samples containing
  a small number of unclassified observations. Journal of the American statistical association, 1977.
Alexander Mey and Marco Loog. Improved generalization in semi-supervised learning: A survey of
  theoretical results. IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence, 2022.
Takeru Miyato, Shin-ichi Maeda, Masanori Koyama, and Shin Ishii. Virtual adversarial training: A
  regularization method for supervised and semi-supervised learning. IEEE transactions on pattern
  analysis and machine intelligence, 2018.
Yuval Netzer, Tao Wang, Adam Coates, Alessandro Bissacco, Bo Wu, and Andrew Y Ng. Reading
  digits in natural images with unsupervised feature learning. 2011.
Whitney K Newey and Daniel McFadden. Large sample estimation and hypothesis testing. Handbook
 of econometrics, 1994.
Avital Oliver, Augustus Odena, Colin Raffel, Ekin D Cubuk, and Ian J Goodfellow. Realistic evalua-
  tion of deep semi-supervised learning algorithms. Advances in Neural Information Processing
  Systems, 2018.
Art B. Owen. Monte Carlo theory, methods and examples. 2013.
Adam Paszke, Sam Gross, Francisco Massa, Adam Lerer, James Bradbury, Gregory Chanan, Trevor
  Killeen, Zeming Lin, Natalia Gimelshein, Luca Antiga, Alban Desmaison, Andreas Kopf, Edward
 Yang, Zachary DeVito, Martin Raison, Alykhan Tejani, Sasank Chilamkurthy, Benoit Steiner,
  Lu Fang, Junjie Bai, and Soumith Chintala. PyTorch: An imperative style, high-performance deep
  learning library. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2019.
Fabian Pedregosa, Gaël Varoquaux, Alexandre Gramfort, Vincent Michel, Bertrand Thirion, Olivier
  Grisel, Mathieu Blondel, Peter Prettenhofer, Ron Weiss, Vincent Dubourg, et al. Scikit-learn:
  Machine learning in python. Journal of machine learning research, Octobre 2011.
Gabriel Pereyra, George Tucker, Jan Chorowski, Łukasz Kaiser, and Geoffrey Hinton. Regularizing
  neural networks by penalizing confident output distributions. Workshop track, International
  Conference on Learning Representations, 2017.
Hieu Pham, Zihang Dai, Qizhe Xie, and Quoc V Le. Meta pseudo labels. Conference on Computer
  Vision and Pattern Recognition, 2021.
Mamshad Nayeem Rizve, Kevin Duarte, Yogesh S Rawat, and Mubarak Shah. In defense of pseudo-
 labeling: An uncertainty-aware pseudo-label selection framework for semi-supervised learning.
 International Conference on Learning Representations, 2021.
Mehdi Sajjadi, Mehran Javanmardi, and Tolga Tasdizen. Regularization with stochastic transfor-
 mations and perturbations for deep semi-supervised learning. Advances in Neural Information
 Processing Systems, 2016.


                                                12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Tomoya Sakai, Marthinus Christoffel Plessis, Gang Niu, and Masashi Sugiyama. Semi-supervised
  classification based on classification from positive and unlabeled data. International conference on
  machine learning, 2017.
Bernhard Schölkopf, Dominik Janzing, Jonas Peters, Eleni Sgouritsa, Kun Zhang, and Joris Mooij.
  On causal and anticausal learning. Internation conference on machine learning, 2012.
Henry Scudder. Probability of error of some adaptive pattern-recognition machines. IEEE Transac-
  tions on Information Theory, 1965.
Matthias Seeger. Learning with labeled and unlabeled data. Technical report, 2000.
Denis Serre. Matrices. Theory and Applications (Second edition). Springer, 2010.
Shai Shalev-Shwartz and Shai Ben-David. Understanding Machine Learning: From Theory to
  Algorithms. Cambridge university press, 2014.
Aarti Singh, Robert Nowak, and Jerry Zhu. Unlabeled data: Now it helps, now it doesn’t. Advances
  in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2008.
Kihyuk Sohn, David Berthelot, Chun-Liang Li, Zizhao Zhang, Nicholas Carlini, Ekin D Cubuk, Alex
  Kurakin, Han Zhang, and Colin Raffel. FixMatch: Simplifying semi-supervised learning with
  consistency and confidence. Avances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2020.
Nataliya Sokolovska, Olivier Cappé, and François Yvon. The asymptotics of semi-supervised learning
  in discriminative probabilistic models. International Conference on Machine Learning, 2008.
Antti Tarvainen and Harri Valpola. Mean teachers are better role models: Weight-averaged consistency
  targets improve semi-supervised deep learning results. Advances in Neural Information Processing
  Systems, 2017.
Martin Trapp, Tamas Madl, Robert Peharz, Franz Pernkopf, and Robert Trappl. Safe semi-supervised
 learning of sum-product networks. Conference on Uncertainty in Artificial Intelligence, 2017.
Anastasios A Tsiatis. Semiparametric theory and missing data. Springer, 2006.
Taira Tsuchiya, Nontawat Charoenphakdee, Issei Sato, and Masashi Sugiyama. Semi-supervised
  ordinal regression based on empirical risk minimization. Neural Computation, 2021.
Aad W van der Vaart. Asymptotic statistics. Cambridge university press, 1998.
Jesper E van Engelen and Holger H Hoos. A survey on semi-supervised learning. Machine Learning,
  2020.
Guido Van Rossum and Fred L Drake Jr. Python reference manual. Centrum voor Wiskunde en
  Informatica Amsterdam, 1995.
Vikas Verma, Kenji Kawaguchi, Alex Lamb, Juho Kannala, Yoshua Bengio, and David Lopez-Paz.
  Interpolation consistency training for semi-supervised learning. International Joint Conference on
  Artificial Intelligence, 2019.
Yidong Wang, Hao Chen, Yue Fan, SUN Wang, Ran Tao, Wenxin Hou, Renjie Wang, Linyi Yang, Zhi
  Zhou, Lan-Zhe Guo, et al. USB: A unified semi-supervised learning benchmark for classification.
  Advances Neural Information Processing Systems Datasets and Benchmarks Track, 2022.
Michael Waskom, Olga Botvinnik, Drew O’Kane, Paul Hobson, Saulius Lukauskas, David C
 Gemperline, Tom Augspurger, Yaroslav Halchenko, John B. Cole, Jordi Warmenhoven, Julian
 de Ruiter, Cameron Pye, Stephan Hoyer, Jake Vanderplas, Santi Villalba, Gero Kunter, Eric
 Quintero, Pete Bachant, Marcel Martin, Kyle Meyer, Alistair Miles, Yoav Ram, Tal Yarkoni,
 Mike Lee Williams, Constantine Evans, Clark Fitzgerald, Brian, Chris Fonnesbeck, Antony Lee,
 and Adel Qalieh. Seaborn: v0.8.1, September 2017. URL https://doi.org/10.5281/
 zenodo.883859.
Colin Wei, Kendrick Shen, Yining Chen, and Tengyu Ma. Theoretical analysis of self-training with
  deep networks on unlabeled data. International Conference on Learning Representations, 2021.


                                                 13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Qizhe Xie, Zihang Dai, Eduard Hovy, Minh-Thang Luong, and Quoc V Le. Unsupervised data
  augmentation for consistency training. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2019.
Jiancheng Yang, Rui Shi, and Bingbing Ni. MedMNIST classification decathlon: A lightweight Au-
   toML benchmark for medical image analysis. IEEE 18th International Symposium on Biomedical
   Imaging, 2021.
Jiancheng Yang, Rui Shi, Donglai Wei, Zequan Liu, Lin Zhao, Bilian Ke, Hanspeter Pfister, and
   Bingbing Ni. MedMNIST v2-a large-scale lightweight benchmark for 2d and 3d biomedical image
   classification. Nature Scientific Data, 2023.
Bowen Zhang, Yidong Wang, Wenxin Hou, Hao Wu, Jindong Wang, Manabu Okumura, and Takahiro
  Shinozaki. FlexMatch: Boosting semi-supervised learning with curriculum pseudo labeling.
  Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2021a.
Hongyi Zhang, Moustapha Cisse, Yann N Dauphin, and David Lopez-Paz. mixup: Beyond empirical
  risk minimization. Internation Conference on Learning Representations, 2017.
Shuai Zhang, Meng Wang, Sijia Liu, Pin-Yu Chen, and Jinjun Xiong. How unlabeled data improve
  generalization in self-training? A one-hidden-layer theoretical analysis. International Conference
  on Learning Representations, 2021b.
Xiaojin Zhu, Zoubin Ghahramani, and John D Lafferty. Semi-supervised learning using Gaussian
  fields and harmonic functions. International Conference on Machine Learning, 2003.
Zhaowei Zhu, Tianyi Luo, and Yang Liu. The rich get richer: Disparate impact of semi-supervised
  learning. International Conference on Learning Representations, 2022.


                                                14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


A    T OY EXAMPLE
We trained a 4-layer neural network (1/20/100/20/1) with ReLU activation function using 25, 000
labelled and 25, 000 unlabelled points drawn from two 1D uniform laws with an overlap. We used
λ = 1 and a confidence threshold for Pseudo-label τ = 0.70. We optimised the model’s weights
using a stochastic gradient descent (SGD) optimiser with a learning rate of 0.1.


                                                                       0     2   4          6         8           10


                                                              Figure 5: Data histogram


                    1.0                                                                         1.0
                                  True distribution                                                                    True distribution
                    0.8           Complete case                                                 0.8
                                                                                                                       Complete case
                                  Pseudo-label                                                                         EntMin
                    0.6           DePseudo-label                                                0.6                    DeEntMin
           p(1|x)


                                                                                      p(1|x)


                    0.4                                                                         0.4

                    0.2                                                                         0.2

                    0.0                                                                         0.0
                              1    0      1      2       3       4      5                                     1         0       1      2       3      4      5
                                                 x                                                                                     x

                 0.30
                                                                                            0.36
                 0.29
                                                                                            0.34
                 0.28
                                                                                            0.32
          loss


                                                                                     loss


                 0.27
                                                                                            0.30
                 0.26
                                                                                            0.28
                 0.25
                                                                                            0.26
                          0       500   1000   1500    2000    2500   3000                                0            500    1000   1500    2000   2500   3000
                                               steps                                                                                 steps


Figure 6: 4-layer neural net trained using SSL methods on a 1D dataset drawn from two uniform laws. (Top-left)
Posterior probabilities p(1|x) of the same model trained following either complete case (only labelled data),
Pseudo-label or our DePseudo-label. (Top-right) Same for EntMin and DeEntMin (Bottom-left) Training cross-
entropy for Pseudo-label and DePseudo-label (Bottom-right) Training cross-entropy for EntMin and DeEntMin


                                                                                 15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


B     D ETAILS ON SURROGATES AND MORE EXAMPLES
We provide in this appendix further details on our classification of SSL methods between entropy-
based and consistency-based (see Section 2.3). We detail a general framework for both of these
methods’ classes. We also show how popular SSL methods are related to our framework.

B.1    E NTROPY- BASED

We class as entropy-based, methods that aim to minimise a term of entropy such as Grandvalet &
Bengio (2004) which minimises Shannon’s entropy or pseudo-label which is a form of entropy, see
Remark E.5. These methods encourage the model to be confident on unlabelled data, implicitly using
the cluster assumption. We recall those entropy-based methods can all be described as an expectation
of L under a distribution πx computed at the datapoint x:
                                    H(θ; x) = Eπx (x̃,ỹ) [L(θ; x̃, ỹ)].                            (12)

Pseudo-label: As presented in the core article, the unsupervised objective of pseudo-label can be
written as an expectation of L on the distribution πx (x̃, ỹ) = δx (x̃)pθ (ỹ|x̃). The Pseudo-label unsu-
pervised term can be written as an entropy in term of Rényi entropy, H∞ (x) = − maxy log p(y|x).
For this reason, we class Pseudo-label methods as entropy-based methods. Recently, Lee (2013)
encouraged the pseudo-labels method for deep semi-supervised learning. Then, Rizve et al. (2021)
recently improved the pseudo-label selection by introducing an uncertainty-aware mechanism on
the confidence of the model concerning the predicted probabilities. Pham et al. (2021) reaches
state-of-the-art on the Imagenet challenge using pseudo-labels on a large dataset of additional images.

B.2    P SEUDO - LABEL AND DATA AUGMENTATION

Recently, several methods based on data augmentation have been proposed and proven to perform well
on a large spectrum of SSL tasks. The idea is to have a model resilient to strong data-augmentation of
the input (Berthelot et al., 2019; 2020; Sohn et al., 2020; Xie et al., 2019; Zhang et al., 2021a). These
methods rely both on the cluster assumption and the smoothness assumption and are at the border
between entropy-based and consistency-based methods. The idea is to have the same prediction
for an input and an augmented version of it. For instance, in Sohn et al. (2020), we first compute
pseudo-labels predicted using a weakly-augmented version of x (flip-and-shift data augmentation)
and then minimise the likelihood with the predictions of the model on a strongly augmented version
of x. In Xie et al. (2019), the method is a little bit different as we minimise the cross entropy between
the prediction of the model on x and the predictions of an augmented version. In both cases, the
unsupervised part of the risk estimator can be reformulated as Equation 12.

Fixmatch: In Fixmatch, Sohn et al. (2020), the unsupervised objective can be written as:

                    H(θ; x) = 1[max pθ̂ (y|x1 ) > τ ]L(θ; x2 , arg max pθ̂ (y|x1 ))                  (13)
                                    y                                   y


where θ̂ is a fixed copy of the current parameters θ indicating that the gradient is not prop-
agated through it, x1 is a weakly-augmented version of x and x2 a strongly-augmented
one.     Therefore, we write H as an expectation of L on the distribution πx (x̃, ỹ) =
δx2 (x̃)δarg maxy pθ̂ (y|x1 ) (ỹ)1[maxy pθ̂ (y|x1 ) > τ ].

UDA:     In UDA, Xie et al. (2019), the unsupervised objective can be written as:

                                               X
                                  H(θ; x) =          pθ̂ (y|x)L(θ; x1 , y)                           (14)
                                                 y

where θ̂ is a fixed copy of the current parameters θ indicating that the gradient is not propagated
through it and x1 is an augmented version of x. Therefore, we write H as an expectation of L on the
distribution πx (x̃, ỹ) = δx1 (x̃)pθ̂ (ỹ|x̃).


                                                     16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Others: Recently, have been proposed in the literature Zhang et al. (2021a) and Rizve et al. (2021).
The former is an improved version of Fixmatch with a variable threshold τ with respect to the class
and the training stage. The latter introduces a measurement of uncertainty in the pseudo-labelling
step to improve the selection. They also introduce negative pseudo-labels to improve the single-label
classification.

B.3   C ONSISTENCY- BASED

Consistency-based methods aim to smooth the decision function of the models or have more stable
predictions. These objectives H are not directly a form of expectation of L but are equivalent to an
expectation of L. For all the following methods we can write the unsupervised objective H such that:
                     C1 Eπx (x̃,ỹ) [L(θ; x̃, ỹ)] ≤ H(θ; x) ≤ C2 Eπx (x̃,ỹ) [L(θ; x̃, ỹ)],       (15)
with 0 ≤ C1 ≤ C2 .
Indeed, consistency-based methods minimise an unsupervised objective that is a divergence between
the model predictions and a modified version of the input (data augmentation) or a perturbation of the
model. Using the fact that all norms are equivalent in a finite-dimensional space such as the space of
the labels, we have the equivalence between a consistency-based H and an expectation of L.

VAT The virtual adversarial training method proposed by (Miyato et al., 2018) generates the most
impactful perturbation radv to add to x. The objective is to train a model robust to input perturbations.
This method is closely related to adversarial training introduced by Goodfellow et al. (2014).


                                 H(θ; x) = Div(fθ̂ (x, .), fθ (x + radv , .))
where the Div is a non-negative function that measures the divergence between two distributions, the
cross-entropy or the KL divergence for instance. If the divergence function is the cross-entropy, it is
straightforward to write the unlabelled objective as Equation 3. If the objective function is the KL
divergence, we can write the objective as

                       H(θ; x) = Eπx (x̃+r,ỹ) [L(θ; x̃, ỹ)] − Eπx (x̃,ỹ) [L(θ̂; x̃, ỹ)]         (16)
with πx (x̃, ỹ) = δx (x̃)pθ̂ (y|x). Therefore, variation of H with respect to θ are the same as
Eπx (x̃+r,ỹ) [L(θ; x̃, ỹ)]. VAT is also a method between consistency-based and entropy-based methods
as long as we use the KL-divergence or the cross-entropy as the measure of divergence.

Mean-Teacher A different form of pseudo-labelling is the Mean-Teacher approach proposed by
(Tarvainen & Valpola, 2017) where pseudo-labels are generated by a teacher model for a student
model. The parameters of the student model are updated, while the teacher’s are a moving average
of the student’s parameters from the previous training steps. The idea is to have a more stable
pseudo-labelling using the teacher than in the classic Pseudo-label. Final predictions are made by the
student model. A generic form of the unsupervised part of the risk estimator is then
                                            X
                               H(θ; x) =        (pθ (y|x) − pθ̂ (y|x))2 ,
                                                 y

where θ̂ are the fixed parameters of the teacher.

Π-Model The Π-Models are intrinsically stochastic models (for example a model with dropout)
encouraged to make consistent predictions through several passes of the same x in the model. The
SSL loss is using the stochastic behaviour of the model where the model fθ and penalises different
predictions for the same x (Sajjadi et al., 2016). Let’s note fθ (x, .)1 and fθ (x, .)2 two passes of x
through the model fθ . A generic form of the unsupervised part of the risk estimator is then
                                   H(θ; x) = Div(fθ (x, .)1 , fθ̂ (x, .)2 ),                        (17)
where Div is a measure of divergence between two distributions (often the Kullback-Leibler diver-
gence).


                                                       17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Temporal ensembling Temporal ensembling (Laine & Aila, 2017) is a form of Π-Model where
we compare the current prediction of the model on the input x with an accumulation of the previous
passes through the model. Then, the training is faster as the network is evaluated only once per input
on each epoch and the perturbation is expected to be less noisy than for Π-models.

ICT Interpolation consistency training (Verma et al., 2019) is an SSL method based on the mixup
operation (Zhang et al., 2017). The model trained is then consistent to predictions at interpolations.
The unsupervised term of the objective is then computed on two terms:

          H(θ; x1 , x2 ) = Div fθ (αx1 + (1 − α)x2 , .), αfθ̂ (x1 , .) + (1 − α)fθ̂ (x2 , .) ,    (18)
with α drawn with from a distribution B(a, a). With the exact same transformation, we will be able
to show that this objective is equivalent to a form of expectation of L.


                                                 18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


C     S AFE SEMI - SUPERVISED LEARNING
C.1   O N THE DEFINITION OF SAFE SEMI - SUPERVISED LEARNING

Previous works introduced the notion safe semi-supervised learning for techniques which never
reduce learning performance by introducing unlabelled data (Li & Zhou, 2014; Kawakita & Takeuchi,
2014; Li et al., 2016; Trapp et al., 2017; Guo et al., 2020). While the spirit of the definition of safe
given by these works is the same, there are different ways of formalising it. In the following, we list
the theoretical guarantees given on the performance of SSL methods by each of these works:

       • Li & Zhou (2014) prove that the accuracy of their method, namely S4VM, is never worse
         than the complete case in a transductive setting under the low-density assumption.
       • Kawakita & Takeuchi (2014) prove that the model learned is asymptotically normal and
         has a lower asymptotic variance without assumption on the data distribution but only when
         nl ≤ nu .
       • Li et al. (2016) prove that their method builds a model which is better for a chosen measure
         of performance in the range of top-k precision, Fβ score or AUC than the complete case
         under either the cluster assumption, the low-density assumption or the manifold assumption.
       • Trapp et al. (2017) prove that the Sum-Product network learned has a lower train loss than
         the one with the complete case.
       • Guo et al. (2020) prove that the empirical risk of the SSL model on the labelled train set is
         lower or equal than the one of the complete case with no assumption on the data distribution
         nor the missingness mechanism. Additionally, they prove generalisation error bounds.

Some other works proposed theoretical guarantees in the use of their SSL methods without calling
the method safe. In regard to the definition and the safe SSL methods listed above, we can categorise
the following method as safe. Among them, we cite the following:

       • Sokolovska et al. (2008) prove that the model learned is asymptotically normal and has a
         lower asymptotic variance with the assumptions that the feature space is finite and nu →
                                                                                                − ∞.
       • Fox-Roberts & Rosten (2014) propose an unbiased estimator of the likelihood in a generative
         setting and prove that the estimator is unbiased and has a lower variance than its complete
         case baseline with no assumption on the data distribution.
       • Loog (2015) proposes a method for which the log-likelihood of the SSL model on the
         labelled train set is lower or equal to the one of the complete case with the gaussian
         distribution assumption of Linear Discriminant analysis.
       • Sakai et al. (2017) prove that their risk estimator is unbiased and has a lower variance than
         the complete case baseline. Additionally, they prove generalisation error bounds and the
         bounds decrease with respect to the number of unlabelled data without assumption on the
         data distribution but with strong assumption on the chosen loss function.

C.2   O N THE SEMI - SUPERVISED BIAS

We provide in this appendix a further explanation of the risk induced by the SSL bias as introduced
in Section 2.4.


Presented methods minimise a biased version of the risk under the MCAR assumption and therefore
classical learning theory does not apply anymore,
                       E[R̂SSL (θ)] = E[L(θ; x, y)]+λE[H(θ; x, y)] ̸= R(θ).                        (19)

Learning over a biased estimate of the risk is not necessarily unsafe but it is difficult to provide
theoretical guarantees on such methods even if some works try to do so with strong assumptions on the
data distribution (Mey & Loog 2022, Section 4 and 5, Zhang et al. 2021b). Previous works proposed
generalisation error bounds of SSL methods under strong assumptions on the data distribution or the
true model. We refer to the survey by Mey & Loog (2022). More recently, Wei et al. (2021) proves


                                                  19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


an upper bound for training deep models with the pseudo-label method under strong assumptions.
Under soft assumptions, Aminian et al. (2022) provides an error bound showing that the choice of H
is crucial to provide good performances.
Indeed, the unbiased nature of the risk estimate is crucial in the development of learning theory.
This bias on the risk estimate may look like one of a regularisation, such as a ridge regularisation.
However, SSL and regularisation are intrinsically different for several reasons:

       • Regularisers have a vanishing impact in the limit of infinite data whereas SSL usually do
         not in the proposed methods, see Equation 19. A solution would be to choose λ with respect
         of the number of data points and make it vanish when n goes to infinity. However, in most
         works, the choice of λ is independent of the number of n or nl (Oliver et al., 2018; Sohn
         et al., 2020).
       • One of the main advantages of regularisation is to turn the learning problem into a “more
         convex” problem, see Shalev-Shwartz & Ben-David (2014, Chapter 13). Indeed, ridge
         regularisation will often turn a convex problem into a strongly-convex problem. However,
         SSL faces the danger to turn the learning problem into non-convex as previously noted by
         Sokolovska et al. (2008).
       • The objective of a regulariser is to bias the risk towards optimum with smooth decision
         functions whereas entropy-based SSL will lead to sharp decision functions.
       • Regularisation usually does not depend on the data whereas H does in the SSL framework.

An entropy bias has been actually used by Pereyra et al. (2017) as a regulariser but as entropy
maximisation which should have the exact opposite effect of the SSL method introduced by Grandvalet
& Bengio (2004), the entropy minimisation.


                                                 20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


D    P ROOF THAT R̂DeSSL (θ) IS UNBIASED UNDER MCAR

Theorem D.1. Under the MCAR assumption, R̂DeSSL (θ) is an unbiased estimator of R(θ).

As a consequence of the theorem, under the MCAR assumption, R̂CC (θ) is also unbiased as a special
case of R̂DeSSL (θ) for λ = 0

Proof:   We first recall that the DeSSL risk estimator R̂DeSSL (θ) is defined for any λ by
                                1 X                     λ X                λ X
            R̂DeSSL (θ) =             L(θ; xi , yi ) +         H(θ; xi ) −        H(θ; xi )
                               nl                       nu                 nl
                                  i∈L                      i∈U                i∈L
                                n                                                                 (20)
                              X      ri                      1 − ri   ri
                           =            L(θ; xi , yi ) + λ          −      H(θ; xi ) .
                               i=1
                                     nl                        nu     nl

By the law of total expectation:
                                               h                    i
                            E[R̂DeSSL (θ)] = Er Ex,y [R̂DeSSL (θ)|r] .

As far as we are under
                    h the MCAR assumption,
                                    i       h data (x, y) and the
                                           the                 i missingness variable r are
independent thus, Er Ex,y [R̂DeSSL (θ)|r] = Er Ex,y [R̂DeSSL (θ)] .

We focus on Ex,y [R̂DeSSL (θ)]. First, we replace R̂DeSSL (θ) by its definition and then use the
linearity of the expectation. Then,
                        "                                                               #
                           1 X                      λ X                  λ X
Ex,y [R̂DeSSL (θ)] = E            L(θ; xi , yi ) +         H(θ; xi ) −         H(θ; xi )       by definition
                           nl                       nu                  nl
                              i∈L                      i∈U                 i∈L
                       1 X                          λ X                     λ X
                    =          E [L(θ; xi , yi )] +        E [H(θ; xi )] −       E [H(θ; xi )] by linearity
                       nl                           nu                     nl
                         i∈L                        i∈U                    i∈L



The couples (xi , yi ) are i.i.d. samples following the same distribution. Then, we have
                          1 X                       λ X                  λ X
Ex,y [R̂DeSSL (θ)|r] =             E [L(θ; x, y)] +       E [H(θ; x)] −        E [H(θ; x)] i.i.d samples
                          nl                        nu                   nl
                           i∈L                      i∈U                    i∈L
                     = E [L(θ; x, y)]
                     = R(θ).

Finally, we have the results that , R̂DeSSL (θ) is unbiased as R(θ) is a constant,
                                       h                     i
                 E[R̂DeSSL (θ)] = E Ex,y [R̂DeSSL (θ)|r] = Er [R(θ)] = R(θ).                      (21)


                                                  21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


E     P ROOF AND COMMENTS ABOUT T HEOREM 3.1
Theorem 3.1      The function λ 7→ V(R̂DeSSL (θ)|r) reaches its minimum for:
                                            nu Cov(L(θ; x, y), H(θ; x))
                                 λopt =                                                            (22)
                                            n       V(H(θ; x))
and
                                                    nu 2
                       V(R̂DeSSL (θ)|r)|λopt = 1 −     ρ    V(R̂CC (θ))
                                                    n L,H                                          (23)
                                             ≤ V(R̂CC (θ)),
where ρL,H = Corr(L(θ; x, y), H(θ; x)).

Proof:    For any λ ∈ R,we want to compute the variance:
                                             V(R̂DeSSL (θ)|r).

Under the MCAR assumption, x and y are both jointly independent of r. Also, the couples (xi , yi , ri )
are independent. Therefore, we have

                     n
                     X                       ri                      1 − ri    ri
V(R̂DeSSL (θ)|r) =     V(xi ,yi )∼p(x,y|r)      L(θ, xi , yi ) + λ          −       H(θ, xi )  i.i.d samples
                   i=1
                                            nl                         nu     nl
                    n
                   X                       ri                      1 − ri    ri
                 =     V(xi ,yi )∼p(x,y)      L(θ, xi , yi ) + λ          −       H(θ, xi )    (x, y) and r independent
                   i=1
                                           nl                        nu      nl


Using the fact that the couples (xi , yi ) are i.i.d. samples following the same distribution, we have
                       n
                      X                      ri                   1 − ri    ri
V(R̂DeSSL (θ)|r) =        V(x,y)∼p(x,y)         L(θ, x, y) + λ            −      H(θ, x)
                      i=1
                                             nl                      nu     nl
                       n                                               2
                          ri2

                      X                                 1 − ri    ri
                   =        2 V(L(θ, x, y)) + λ2               −         V(H(θ, x))         using covariance
                          n
                      i=1 l
                                                          nu      nl

                                           ri 1 − ri        ri
                                  + 2λ                   −       Cov(L(θ, x, y), H(θ, x))
                                          nl       nu       nl


Now, we remark that the variable r is binary and therefore r2 = r, (1 − r)2 = 1 − r and r(1 − r) = 0.
Using that and simplifying, we have
                                 n
                                 X ri                       2   (1 − ri )n2l + ri n2u
            V(R̂DeSSL (θ)|r) =          2 V(L(θ, x, y)) + λ                           V(H(θ, x))
                                 i=1
                                       nl                             n2l n2u
                                                        ri
                                                 − 2λ       Cov(L(θ, x, y), H(θ, x))
                                                        n2l


Finally, by summing and simplifying the expression (note that nl + nu = n), we compute the
expression variance,
                           1                      n                 2λ
      V(R̂DeSSL (θ)|r) =      V(L(θ, x, y)) + λ2       V(H(θ, x)) −    Cov(L(θ, x, y), H(θ, x))
                           nl                    nl nu              nl


So V(R̂DeSSL (θ)|r) is a quadratic function in λ and reaches its minimum for λopt such that:
                                            nu Cov(L(θ, x, y), H(θ, x))
                                 λopt =
                                            n       V(H(θ, x))

                                                    22
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


And, at λopt , the variance of R̂DeSSL (θ)|r) becomes
                                                       nu Cov(L(θ, x, y), H(θ, x))2

                                   1
            V(R̂DeSSL (θ)|r) = V(L(θ, x, y)) 1 −
                                  nl                    n V(H(θ, x))V(L(θ; x, y))
                                   1                   nu
                                = V(L(θ, x, y)) 1 −       Corr(L(θ, x, y), H(θ, x))2
                                  nl                   n
                                        nu 2   1
                                = 1−       ρ        V(L(θ, x, y))
                                        n L,H nl
Remark E.1. If H is perfectly correlated with L (ρL,H = 1), then the variance of the DeSSL estimator
is equal to the variance of the estimator with no missing labels.
Remark E.2. Is it possible to estimate λopt in practice ? The data distribution p(x, y) being
unknown, the computation of λopt is not possible directly. Therefore, we need to use an estimator of
the covariance Cov(L(θ; x, y), H(θ; x)) and the variance V(H(θ; x)) (See Equation 24). Also, we
have to be careful not to introduce a new bias with the computation of λopt , indeed, if we compute
it using the training set, λopt becomes dependent on x and y and therefore R̂DeSSL (θ)|r) becomes
biased. A solution would be to use a validation dataset for its computation. Another approach is to
compute it using the splitting method (Avramidis & Wilson, 1993). Moreover, the computation of
λopt is tiresome and time-consuming in practice as it has to be updated for every different value of θ,
so at each gradient step.

                                 1
                                      P
                                 nl    i∈L (L(θ; xi , yi ) − L̄(θ))(H(θ; xi ) − H̄(θ))
                       λ̂opt =              1
                                              Pn                          2
                                                                                                            (24)
                                            n    i=1 (H(θ; xi ) − H̄(θ))
                    Pn
where H̄(θ) = n1 i=1 H(θ; xi ) and L̄(θ) = n1l i∈L L(θ; xi , yi )
                                                     P

Remark E.3. About the sign of λ The theorem still has a quantitative merit when it comes to
choosing λ, by telling that the sign of λ is positive when H and L are positively correlated which
will generally be the case with the examples mentioned in the article. For instance, concerning the
entropy minimisation technique, the following proposition proves that the log-likelihood is negatively
correlated with its entropy and therefore it justifies the choice of λ > 0 in the entropy minimisation.
Proposition E.4. The log-likelihood of the true distribution log p(y|x) is negatively correlated with
its entropy Hỹ (p(ỹ|x)) = −Eỹ∼p(.|x) [log p(ỹ|x)] .
                                      Cov(log p(y|x), Hỹ (p(ỹ|x))) < 0                                    (25)

Proof.
  Cov(log p(y|x), Hỹ (p(ỹ|x))) = Ex,y [log p(y|x)Hỹ (p(ỹ|x))] − Ex,y [log p(y|x)]Ex [Hỹ (p(ỹ|x))]
                                 = −Ex,y [log p(y|x)Eỹ|x [log p(ỹ|x)]]+
                                                                Ex,y [log p(y|x)]Ex [Eỹ|x [log p(ỹ|x)]]


By the law of total expectation, we have that Ex [Eỹ|x [log p(ỹ|x)]] = Ex,ỹ [log p(ỹ|x)], then
         Cov(log p(y|x), Hỹ (p(ỹ|x)) = −Ex,y [log p(y|x)Eỹ|x [log p(ỹ|x)]] + Ex,y [log p(y|x)]2
                                          = Ex,y [log p(y|x)]2 − Ex,y [log p(y|x)Eỹ|x [log p(ỹ|x)]]


On the other hand, also with the law of total expectation, Ex,y [log p(y|x)Eỹ|x [log p(ỹ|x)]] =
Ex [Ey|x [log p(y|x)]Eỹ|x [log p(ỹ|x)]], so


         Ex,y [log p(y|x)Eỹ|x [log p(ỹ|x)]] = Ex [Ey|x [log p(y|x)]2 ]
                                              ≥ Ex [Ey|x [log p(y|x)]]2         Jensen’s inequality
                                                                  2
                                              ≥ Ex,y [log p(y|x)]               total expectation law



                                                       23
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Finally, we have the results,
              Cov(log p(y|x), Hỹ (p(ỹ|x))) ≤ Ex,y [log p(y|x)]2 − Ex,y [log p(y|x)]2
                                             ≤0


Remark E.5. We can also see the Pseudo-label as a form of entropy. Indeed, modulo the confidence
selection on the predicted probability, the Pseudo-label objective is the inverse of the Rényi min-
entropy:
                                   H∞ (x) = − max log p(y|x)
                                                                                                      y


E.1             O N RISK ESTIMATION QUALITY

We train CNN-13 on CIFAR-10 using only 4,000 labelled data and then split the test dataset into
labelled and unlabelled data to estimate the PseudoLabel (PL) and DePseudoLabel (DePL) risks that
we compared to the oracle risk estimate using all the test set. For this experiment, we split 100 times
the test set into 40 labelled data and 9960 unlabelled data in order to estimate the variance of the
risk estimator. We compute λopt using the entire test set. This experiment illustrates that DePL is
unbiased for any value of λ (Figure 7 Left) and its variance can be optimised in λ and at λopt , we
have V(R̂DeP L (θ)|r) ≤ V(R̂CC (θ)|r). (Figure 7 Right)


                                                                                  DePL                                     1.03       DePL
          2.5                                                                     PL                                                  opt
                                                                                  True risk                                1.02
                                                                                                     V(R( , ))/V(RCC( ))


          2.0
                                                                                                                           1.01
 R( , )


          1.5                                                                                                              1.00

          1.0                                                                                                              0.99

                                                                                                                           0.98
                 0    100          101                                      102                                                   0          100   101   102



Figure 7: (Left) Risk estimate value for PseudoLabel (PL) and DePseudoLabel (DePL) compared to
the true value of the risk. (Right) The influence of λ on the ratio V(R̂DeP L (θ)|r)/V(R̂CC (θ)|r)

The gradient of DeSSL is also an unbiased estimator of the risk’s gradient, as the Complete Case. We
compare the quality of these two estimators under the same setting. We compare the variance of the
gradient of DePL risk to the complete case and show that DePL reduces the variance considerably
(see Figure 8). Variance reduction techniques applied on the gradients have shown promising results
in the amelioration of optimisation algorithms (Defazio et al., 2014; Johnson & Zhang, 2013).



                                                               2.0
                                   V( (R( , )))/V( (RCC( )))


                                                               1.5

                                                               1.0

                                                               0.5

                                                               0.0
                                                                     10 2                     10 1                                     100



                     Figure 8: The influence of λ on the ratio V(∇R̂DeP L (θ)|r)/V(∇R̂CC (θ)|r)



                                                                                                 24
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


F    W HY DEBIASING WITH THE LABELLED DATASET ?
We remark that the debiasing can be performed with any subset of the training data, labelled and
unlabelled. The choice of debiasing only with the labelled data can be explained both intuitively and
computationally in regard to the Theorem 3.1. Intuitively, the debiasing term penalises the confidence
on the labelled datapoints and then prevents the overfitting on the train dataset. As remarked in section
3.1, Pereyra et al. (2017) showed that penalising low entropy models acts as a strong regulariser
in supervised settings. This comforts the idea of penalising low entropy on the labelled dataset,
i.e. debiaising the entropy minimisation with the labelled dataset. Considering Pseudo-Label-based
methods, the objective for the labelled data is to predict the correct labels with moderate confidence.
This is also similar to the concept of plausibility inference described by Barndorff-Nielsen (1976).
In regard to Theorem 3.1, we show that the optimum choice of subset for debiaising is either only the
labelled data or the whole dataset and both are equivalent.
We consider a subset A of the training set. We defined a as follow:

                                            1/|A| if xi ∈ A
                                   ai =                          .
                                            0       otherwise

The unbiased estimator is then:
                                                                     n
                                1 X                 λ X             X
             R̂DeSSL,A (θ) =        L(θ; xi , yi )+     H(θ; xi )−λ     ai H(θ; xi ).                     (26)
                                nl                  nu              i=1
                                   i∈L                      i∈U


We compute the variance of this quantity as in the proof of Theorem 3.1 and show that:

                                   n                                                     2
                                   X ri                           2       1 − ri
           V(R̂DeSSL,A (θ)|r) =                V(L(θ, x, y)) + λ                 − ai        V(H(θ, x))
                                         n2l                                nu
                                   i=1                                                                    (27)
                                                        ri ai
                                                   − 2λ       Cov(L(θ, x, y), H(θ, x))
                                                         nl

Suppose that no labelled datapoints are in A. Then, the last term of the variance is null. Hence,
having no labelled datapoints in A leads to a variance increase. We also remark that debiasing with
the entire dataset is equivalent that debiasing with the labelled datapoints. Indeed
                                                                   n
                    1 X                     λ X                1X
    R̂DeSSL (θ) =          L(θ; xi , yi ) +        H(θ; xi ) −        H(θ; xi )
                    nl                      nu                 n i=1
                       i∈L                     i∈U
                    1 X                     λ X                λX                 λX
                  =        L(θ; xi , yi ) +        H(θ; xi ) −        H(θ; xi ) −       H(θ; xi )
                    nl                      nu                 n                  n
                       i∈L                     i∈U                i∈L               i∈U
                    1 X                     λnl X                λnl X
                  =        L(θ; xi , yi ) +         H(θ; xi ) −         H(θ; xi ),
                    nl                      nnu                  nnl
                        i∈L                         i∈U                        i∈L

which is equivalent to debiasing with only the labelled dataset by replacing λ by λ nnl .
At this point, we can still sample a random subset composed of l labelled datapoints and u unlabelled
datapoints. Therefore ai = 1/(l + u)1{xi ∈ A}, we show in the following that the optimum choice
of the couples (l, u) are (nl , 0) and (nl , nu ), so only the labelled or the whole dataset.
We sample l labelled and u unlabelled datapoints to debiased the estimator, by simplifying the term
in the sum of Equation 27 as follow:
                                                     2
                                             1    1
                                              −         if xi ∈ A and ri = 0
                                      n1u       l+u
                                 2  
                   1 − ri                                if xi ∈ A and ri = 1 .
                          − ai     =     (l+u)2
                     nu                  1
                                           2             if xi ∈
                                                               / A and ri = 0
                                      nu
                                     
                                     
                                        0                if xi ∈
                                                               / A and ri = 1

                                                      25
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Then, by summing the term and simplifying, we get:

                    1                   2       1     1            l      nu − u
V(R̂DeSSL (θ)|r) = V(L(θ, x, y)) + λ u            −         +           +          V(H(θ, x))
                   nl                          nu   l+u        (l + u)2     n2u
                                          l
                               − 2λ            Cov(L(θ, x, y), H(θ, x))
                                    nl (l + u)
                    1                     nl nu − u + l
                 = V(L(θ, x, y)) + λ2                   V(H(θ, x))
                   nl                     nu l + u
                                          l
                               − 2λ            Cov(L(θ, x, y), H(θ, x))
                                    nl (l + u)


We want to minimise V(R̂DeSSL (θ)|r) with respect to (λ, l, u). V(R̂DeSSL (θ)|r) reaches is mini-
mum in λ at
                             nu       l      Cov(L(θ, x, y), H(θ, x))
                      λopt =                                           .
                             nl nu − u + l          V(H(θ, x))
Then,
                         1                  nu         l2          Cov(L(θ, x, y), H(θ, x))2
   V(R̂DeSSL (θ)|r) =       V(L(θ, x, y)) −                                                  .
                         nl                 nl (nu − u + l)(l + u)      V(H(θ, x))
We now want to minimise with respect to 0 ≤ u ≤ nu and 1 ≤ l ≤ nl . We can easily show that the
(nu − u + l)(l + u) reaches its minimum for u = 0 or u = nu and for both value:
                                1                  nu l Cov(L(θ, x, y), H(θ, x))2
          V(R̂DeSSL (θ)|r) =       V(L(θ, x, y)) −                                .
                                nl                 nl nu + l V(H(θ, x))
Then l/(nu + l) is an increasing function, then reaches its maximum a l = nl . So finally, the optimal
choices for the couple (nl , 0) and (nl , nu ). We showed that these couples are equivalent.


                                                 26
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


G    P ROOF OF T HEOREM G.1
The calibration of a model is its capacity of predicting probability estimates that are representative
of the true distribution. This property is determinant in real-world applications when we need
reliable predictions. A scoring rule S is a function assigning a score to the predictive distribution
pθ (y|x) relative to the event y|x ∼ p(y|x), S(pθ , (x, y)), where p(x, y) is the true distribution (see
e.g. Gneiting & Raftery, 2007). A scoring rule measures both the accuracy and the quality of
predictive uncertainty, meaning that better calibration is rewarded. The expected scoring rule is
defined as S(pθ , p) = Ep [S(pθ , (x, y))]. A proper scoring rule is defined as a scoring rule such
that S(pθ , p) ≤ S(p, p) (Gneiting & Raftery, 2007). The motivation behind having proper scoring
rules comes from the following: suppose that the true data distribution p is accessible by our
set of models. Then, the scoring rule encourages to predict pθ = p. The opposite of a proper
scoring rule can then be used to train a model to encourage the calibration of predictive uncertainty:
L(θ; x, y) = −S(pθ , (x, y)). The most common losses used to train models are proper scorings rules
such as log-likelihood.
Theorem G.1. If S(pθ , (x, y)) = −L(θ; x, y) is a proper scoring rule, then S ′ (pθ , (x, y, r)) =
−( rn                 1−r    r
   nl L(θ; x, y) + λn( nu − nl )H(θ; x)) is also a proper scoring rule.

The proof follows directly from unbiasedness and the MCAR assumption. The main interpretation of
this theorem is that we can expect DeSSL to be as well-calibrated as the complete case.

Proof. The scoring rule considered in our SSL framework is:

                                          rn                  1−r  r
               S ′ (pθ , (x, y, r)) = −      L(θ; x, y) + λn(     − )H(θ; x) .
                                          nl                   nu  nl
The proper scoring rule of the fully supervised problem is
                                       S(pθ , (x, y, r)) = −L(θ; x, y).
Let p be the true distribution of the data (x, y, r). Under MCAR, r is independent of x and y, then
p(x, y, r) = p(r)p(x, y).

                        Z
           ′
         S (pθ , p) =       p(x, y, r)S ′ (pθ , (x, y, r)) dx dy dr
                        Z
                   =  p(x, y)p(r)S ′ (pθ , (x, y, r)) dx dy dr
                                                            1−r
                      Z
                                     rn                            r
                   = − p(x, y)p(r) L(θ; x, y) + λn(             − )H(θ; x) dx dy dr
                                      nl                     nu    nl
                      Z             Z
                                              rn
                   =−      p(x, y)      p(r) dr L(θ; x, y) dx dy
                       x,y                    nl
                                   | r {z             }
                                            =1
                                              Z
                                                          1−r
                              Z
                                                                r
                        − λn        p(x, y)       p(r)         − ) dr H(θ; x) dx dy
                                x,y                        nu   nl
                                             | r            {z        }
                                                            =0
                      Z
                   =−      p(x, y)L(θ; x, y) dx dy
                            x,y
                   = S(pθ , p)
Therefore, if S(pθ , (x, y)) = −L(θ; x, y) is a proper scoring rule, then S ′ (pθ , (x, y, r)) =
−( rn                  1−r    r
   nl L(θ; x, y) + λn( nu − nl )H(θ; x)) is also a proper scoring rule.


                                                       27
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


H    P ROOF OF T HEOREM 3.4

Assumption 3.2: the minimum θ∗ of R is well-separated.
                                          inf         R(θ) > R(θ∗ )                               (28)
                                      θ:d(θ ∗ ,θ)≥ϵ


Assumption 3.3: uniform weak law of large numbers holds for a function L if:
                                     n
                                1X                                   p
                            sup       L(θ, xi , yi ) − E[L(θ, x, y)] −
                                                                     →0                           (29)
                            θ∈Θ n i=1



Theorem 3.4. Under assumption A and assumption B for both L and H, θ̂ = arg min R̂DeSSL is
asymptotically consistent with respect to n.
This result is a direct application of Theorem 5.7 from van der Vaart (1998, Chapter 5) that states
that under assumption A and B for L, θ̂ = arg min R̂ is asymptotically consistent with respect to n.
Assumption A remains unchanged as we have M-estimators of the same R. We now aim to prove that
under assumption B for both L and H, we have the assumption B on θ −→ rn     nl L(θ; x, y) + λ(1 −
rn
 nl )H(θ; x).
Lemma H.1. If the uniform law of large number holds for both L and H, then it holds for θ −→
rn                    rn
nl L(θ; x, y) + λ(1 − nl )H(θ; x).


Proof. Suppose assumption B for L, then the same result holds if we replace n with nl as n and nl
are coupled by the law of r. Indeed, when n grows to infinity, nl too and inversely. Therefore,

                               1 X                                p
                           sup     L(θ; xi , yi ) − E[L(θ; x, y)] −
                                                                  →0
                           θ∈Θ nl   i∈L
                                                                  n



Now, suppose we have assumption B for H, then we can make the same remark than for L. Now, we
have to show that:


                    n
               1 X rn                           1−r   r                                 p
           sup          L(θ; x, y) + λn             −             H(θ; x) − E[L(θ; x, y)] −
                                                                                          →0
           θ∈Θ n i=1 nl                          nu   nl                                n


We first split the absolute value and the sup operator as


              n
        1 X rn                           1−r   r
    sup          L(θ; x, y) + λn             −             H(θ; x) − E[L(θ; x, y)]
    θ∈Θ n i=1 nl                          nu   nl
                    n                                      n
                1 X rn                                  1X         1−r   r
          ≤ sup           L(θ; x, y) − E[L(θ; x, y)] +        λn       −      H(θ; x)
            θ∈Θ nl i=1 nl                               n i=1       nu   nl
                                                            n
                1 X                                      1X        1−r    r
          ≤ sup        L(θ; x, y) − E[L(θ; x, y)] + sup       λn       −      H(θ; x) .
            θ∈Θ nl i∈L                              θ∈Θ n i=1       nu   nl
            |                {z                  }
                             p
                            −
                            →n
                               0


So we now have to prove that the second term is also converging to 0 in probability. Again by splitting
the absolute value and the sup, we have
           n                                            n                            n
        1X          1−r       r                     λ X (1 − r)n                 λ X rn
   sup        λn          −       H(θ; x) = sup                     H(θ; x) −             H(θ; x)
   θ∈Θ n i=1         nu      nl               θ∈Θ n i=1       nu                 n i=1 nl


                                                      28
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Then we have that,
          n                       n
      λ X                     λ X
  sup        (1 − r)H(θ; x) −        rH(θ; x)
  θ∈Θ nu i=1                  nl i=1
                     n                                        n
                                                                                         !
              λ X                                         λ X
        = sup        (1 − r)H(θ; x) − E[H(θ; x, y)] −            rH(θ; x) − E[H(θ; x, y)]
          θ∈Θ nu i=1                                      nl i=1
                  nl +nu
                                                                                    !
              λ X                                      λ X
        = sup            H(θ; x) − E[H(θ; x, y)] −           H(θ; x) − E[H(θ; x, y)]
          θ∈Θ nu i=n +1                                nl
                                                           i∈L
                         l

                     nX
                      l +nu
                                                                                               !
              λ                                                  λ X
        ≤ sup            H(θ; x) − E[H(θ; x, y)] + sup                  H(θ; x) − E[H(θ; x, y)] .
          θ∈Θ nu                                   θ∈Θ           nl
                                                                    i∈L
                 i=n−l+1
          |               {z                    } |                         {z                  }
                          p                                                 p
                          −
                          →
                          n
                            0                                              −
                                                                           →n
                                                                              0


Thus,
                     n
               1 X rn                         1−r    r                                p
           sup          L(θ; x, y) + λn           1−          H(θ; x) − E[L(θ; x, y)] −
                                                                                      →0
           θ∈Θ n i=1 nl                        nu    nl                               n


And we now just have to apply the results of van der Vaart (1998, Theorem 5.7) to have the asymptotic
consistent of θ̂ = arg min R̂DeSSL .


Remark H.2. A sufficient condition on the function H to verify assumption B, the uniform weak
law of large numbers,
                   P is to be bounded (Newey & McFadden, 1994, Lemma 2.4). For instance,
the entropy H = − y pθ (y|x) log(pθ (y|x)) is bounded and therefore, the entropy minimisation is
asymptotically consistent.


                                                 29
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


I       A SYMPTOTIC NORMALITY OF D E SSL

In the following, we study a modified version of the objective to  simplify the
                                                                                proof. Let us consider
                                   ′             r                   1−r    r
the following DeSSL objective L (θ; x, y, r) = π L(θ; x, y) + λ 1−π − π H(θ; x) which has the
same properties than the original one (unbiasedness, variance reduction property, consistency and
benefit from generalisation error bounds). The idea is to replace nl with πn to simplify the expression.
The value nl converges to πn then the following Theorem should hold with the true DeSSL objective.
We define the cross-covariance matrice between random vectors ∇L(θ; x, y) and ∇H(θ; x) as
Kθ (i, j) = Cov(∇L(θ; x, y)i , ∇H(θ; x)j ).
Theorem I.1. Suppose L and H are smooth functions in C 2 (Θ, R). Assume R(θ) admit a second-
order Taylor expansion at θ∗ with a non-singular second order derivative Vθ∗ . Under the MCAR
assumption, we have that θ̂DeSSL is asymptotically normal with covariance:


                         1 −1
                          V ∗ E ∇L(θ∗ ; x, y)∇L(θ∗ ; x, y)T Vθ−1

             ΣDeSSL =                                            ∗
                         π θ
                                          2
                                        λ
                                              Vθ−1
                                                              ∗     ∗        T
                                                                                 −1
                                 +              ∗ E ∇H(θ ; x, y)∇H(θ ; x, y)    Vθ ∗
                                   π(1 − π)
                                              λ
                                            − Vθ−1          −1
                                                   ∗ Kθ ∗ Vθ ∗ .
                                              π


As a consequence, we can minimise the trace of the covariance. Indeed, Tr(ΣDeSSL ) reaches its
minimum at
                                                     Tr(Vθ−1       −1
                                                          ∗ Kθ ∗ Vθ ∗ )
                       λopt = (1 − π)                                       −1 ,                         (30)
                                           Tr(Vθ−1        ∗           ∗ T
                                                ∗ E [∇H(θ ; x)∇H(θ ; x) ] Vθ ∗ )


and at λopt :

                                           1−π          Tr(Vθ−1       −1 2
                                                             ∗ Kθ ∗ Vθ ∗ )
        Tr(ΣDeSSL ) − Tr(ΣCC ) = −                                             −1 ≤ 0.                   (31)
                                            π Tr(Vθ−1        ∗           ∗ T
                                                   ∗ E [∇H(θ ; x)∇H(θ ; x) ] Vθ ∗ )


The complete case is the special case of DeSSL with λ = 0. Then, the Theorem holds for the
complete case.


Proof. We define L′ (θ; x, y, r) = πr L(θ; x, y) + λ 1−π 1−r
                                                             − πr H(θ; x) The assumptions of the
theorem are sufficient assumptions to apply Theorem 5.23 of Van der Vaart 1998 to the couple
(θ̂DeSSL , L′ ). Hence, we obtain the following representation for representation θ̂DeSSL :
                                       n
    √

                            1     X ri                              1 − ri   ri
        n(θ̂DeSSL − θ∗ ) = √ Vθ−1
                               ∗        ∇L(θ∗ ; xi , yi ) + λ              −          ∇H(θ∗ ; xi ) + op (1).
                             n    i=1
                                      π                             1−π      π
                                                                                                         (32)

                                 √                     L
                                     n(θ̂DeSSL − θ∗ ) −
                                                      → N (0, ΣDeSSL ),

The asymptotic normality follows with variance:

                    ΣDeSSL = Vθ−1
                                            ′ ∗      ′ ∗        T
                                                                    −1
                                  ∗ E ∇L (θ ; x, y)∇L (θ ; x, y)   Vθ ∗ .

Using the MCAR assumption, we simplify the expression of ΣDeSSL :


                                                     30
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


ΣDeSSL = Vθ−1
                   ′ ∗           ′ ∗       T
                                               −1
           ∗ E ∇L (θ ; x, y)∇L (θ ; x, y)     Vθ∗
          1 −1
       = 2 Vθ∗ E r∇L(θ∗ ; x, y)∇L(θ∗ ; x, y)T Vθ−1

                                                    ∗
         π
                                      1−r       r
                    + λ2 Vθ−1
                           ∗  E              +        ∇H(θ ∗
                                                             ; x, y)∇H(θ  ∗
                                                                            ; x, y)T
                                                                                       Vθ−1
                                                                                         ∗
                                    (1 − π)2    π2
                                  λ
                              − 2 Vθ−1
                                                   ∗              ∗     T
                                                                            −1
                                       ∗ E r∇L(θ ; x, y)∇H(θ ; x, y)        Vθ∗
                                 π
         1
       = Vθ−1           ∗          −1
              ∗ Cov(L(θ ; x, y))Vθ ∗
         π
                          λ2                                            −1 λ −1
                                V −1          ∗             ∗       T
                                                                       Vθ∗ − Vθ∗ Kθ∗ Vθ−1

                    +              ∗ E ∇H(θ ; x, y)∇H(θ ; x, y)                             ∗ .
                      π(1 − π) θ                                                 π

We remark that the complete case is the particular case of DeSSL with λ = 0. Then,


                                    λ2
                                          Vθ−1
                                                         ∗      ∗        T
                                                                             −1
             ΣDeSSL = ΣCC +                 ∗ E ∇H(θ ; x, y)∇H(θ ; x, y)    Vθ ∗
                                 π(1 − π)
                                       λ
                                    − Vθ−1          −1
                                           ∗ Kθ ∗ Vθ ∗ .
                                       π


The asymptotic relative efficiency of consequence, the asymptotic relative efficiency θ̂DeSSL com-
pared to θ̂CC is defined as the quotient Tr(Σ DeSSL )
                                          Tr(ΣCC ) . This quotient can be minimised with respect to
λ:
                                                 Tr(Vθ−1       −1
                                                      ∗ Kθ ∗ Vθ ∗ )
                     λopt = (1 − π)                                        −1 ,                (33)
                                     Tr(Vθ−1          ∗           ∗   T
                                            ∗ E [∇H(θ ; x)∇H(θ ; x) ] Vθ ∗ )

and at λopt :
     Tr(ΣDeSSL )     1−π             Tr(Vθ−1        −1 2
                                           ∗ Kθ ∗ Vθ ∗ )
                 =1−                                                  ≤ 1.                     (34)
      Tr(ΣCC )        π Tr(Vθ−1       ∗           ∗    T −1
                             ∗ E [∇H(θ ; x)∇H(θ ; x) ] Vθ ∗ )Tr(ΣCC )


Remark I.2. On the sign of λ. It is easy to show that a sufficient condition to have λopt > 0 is to
have Kθ∗ positive semi-definite. Indeed, using that Vθ∗ is positive definite and Proposition 6.1 of
Serre (2010), we show that Tr(Vθ−1          −1
                                  ∗ Kθ ∗ Vθ ∗ ) > 0 and then λopt > 0.

Remark I.3. Why minimising the trace of ΣDeSSL ? Minimising the trace of ΣDeSSL leads to an
estimator with a smaller asymptotic MSE, see Chen et al. (2020).
Remark I.4. Fully supervised setting. We also remark that our theorem matches the theorem for the
supervised setting. Indeed, observing all the labelled corresponds to the case π = 1 and we obtain:
                                ΣDeSSL = ΣCC = ΣFully supervised .


                                                31
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


J     P ROOF OF T HEOREM 3.6
Our proof will be based on the following result from Shalev-Shwartz & Ben-David (2014, Theorem
26.5).
Theorem J.1. Let H be a set of parameters, z ∼ D a random variable living in a space Z, c > 0,
and ℓ : H × Z −→ [−c, c]. We denote
                                                                        m
                                                                   1 X
                           LD (h) = Ez [ℓ(h, z)], and LS (h) =           ℓ(h, zi ),                      (35)
                                                                   m i=1

where z1 , ..., zm are i.i.d. samples from D. For any δ > 0, with probability at least 1 − δ, we have
                                           "           m
                                                                      !#     r
                                                    1 X                         2 log(4/δ)
            LD (h) ≤ LS (h) + 2E(εi )i≤m sup              εi ℓ(h, zi )   + 4c              ,       (36)
                                            h∈H    m i=1                            m

where ε1 , ..., εm are i.i.d. Rademacher variables independent from z1 , ..., zm .

We can now restate and prove our generalisation bound.

Theorem 3.6. We assume that both L and H are bounded and that the labels are MCAR. Then,
there exists a constant κ > 0, that depends on λ, L, H, and the ratio of observed labels, such that,
with probability at least 1 − δ, for all θ ∈ Θ,
                                                           r
                                                              log(4/δ)
                            R(θ) ≤ R̂DeSSL (θ) + 2Rn + κ               ,                       (37)
                                                                  n
where Rn is the Rademacher complexity
                 "                                                                                   !#
                            1 X                        λ X                     λ     X
    Rn = E(εi )i≤n sup            εi L(θ; xi , yi ) −        εi H(θ; xi ) +              εi H(θ; xi )   , (38)
                     θ∈Θ   nπ i∈L                     nπ i∈L                n(1 − π) i∈U

with ε1 , ..., εm i.i.d. Rademacher variables independent from the data.

Proof. We use Theorem J.1 with z = (x, y, r), H = Θ, m = n, and

                              1                    1 − ri   ri
                    ℓ(h, z) = L(θ; xi , yi ) + λ          −      H(θ; xi ).                              (39)
                              π                    1−π      π
The unbiasedness of our estimate under the MCAR assumption, proven in Appendix D, ensures that
the condition of Equation equation 35 is satisfied with LD (h) = R(θ) and LS (h) = R̂DeSSL (θ).
Now, since L and H are bounded, there exists M > 0 such that |L| < M and |H| < M . We can
then bound ℓ:
                                      M                1     1
                          |ℓ(h, z)| ≤    + λ max           ,     M = c.                   (40)
                                      π              1−π π
Now that we have chosen √ a c that bounds ℓ, we can use Theorem J.1 and finally get Equation
equation 37 with κ = 4c 2.


                                                      32
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


K     D E SSL WITH H APPLIED ON ALL AVAILABLE DATA
For consistency-based SSL methods it is common to use all the available data for the consistency
term:
                                                              n
                                       1 X                 λX
                         R̂SSL (θ) =       L(θ; xi , yi )+       H(θ; xi ).                      (41)
                                       nl                  n i=1
                                          i∈L


With the same idea, we debias the risk estimate with the labelled data:
                                                                  n
                                        1 X                    λX
                       R̂DeSSL (θ) =           L(θ; xi , yi )+       H(θ; xi )
                                        nl                     n i=1
                                           i∈L
                                                                                                 (42)
                                                               λ X
                                                             −       H(θ; xi ).
                                                               nl
                                                                i∈L


Under MCAR, this risk estimate is unbiased and the main theorem of the article hold with minor
modifications. In Theorem 3.1, λopt is slightly different and the expression of the variance at λopt
remains the same. The scoring rule in Theorem G.1 is different but the theorem remains the same.
Both Theorem 3.4, 3.5 and 3.6 remain the same with very similar proofs.
Theorem K.1. The function λ 7→ V(R̂DeSSL (θ)) reaches its minimum for:
                                          Cov(L(θ; x, y), H(θ; x))
                                 λopt =                                                          (43)
                                               V(H(θ; x))
and
                                                       nu 2
                         V(R̂DeSSL (θ))|λopt = (1 −       ρ   )V(R̂CC (θ))
                                                       n L,H                                     (44)
                                                ≤ V(R̂CC (θ))

where ρL,H = Corr(L(θ; x, y), H(θ; x)).

When H is applied on all labelled and unlabelled data, the scoring rule used in the learning process
is then S ′ (pθ , (x, y, r)) = −( rn                    rn                        ′
                                  nl L(θ; x, y) + λ(1 − nl )H(θ; x)) and we have S is a proper scoring
rule.


                                                  33
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


L     MNIST AND M ED MNIST

L.1   MNIST


                            0.960
                            0.955        DePseudoLabel
                                         PseudoLabel                                   1.0
                            0.950
                            0.945
                 Accuracy                                                              0.8
                            0.940


                                                                                Loss
                            0.935                                                      0.6
                            0.930
                            0.925                                                      0.4
                            0.920
                                                                                       0.2
                                     0        100                        101                    0   100    101


                                                           0.045

                                                           0.040

                                                           0.035
                                                     ECE


                                                           0.030

                                                           0.025

                                                                   0   100                           101


Figure 9: The influence of λ on Pseudo-label and DePseudo-label for a Lenet trained on MNIST with nl = 1000:
(Left) Test accuracy; (Middle) Mean test cross-entropy; (Right) Mean test ECE, with 95% CI


L.2   MNIST LABEL NOISE


                              0.76                                                         16
                                         DePseudoLabel
                              0.75       PseudoLabel                                       14
                                                                                           12
                              0.74
                                                                                           10
                   Accuracy


                              0.73
                                                                                    Loss


                                                                                           8
                              0.72                                                         6
                              0.71                                                         4

                              0.70                                                         2
                                     0        100                        101                    0   100    101


                                                           0.250
                                                           0.225
                                                           0.200
                                                           0.175
                                                     ECE


                                                           0.150
                                                           0.125
                                                           0.100
                                                           0.075
                                                                   0   100                           101


Figure 10: The influence of λ on Pseudo-label and DePseudo-label for a Lenet trained on MNIST with label
noise with nl = 1000: (Left) Mean test accuracy; (Middle) Mean test cross-entropy; (Right) Test ECE, with
95% CI.


L.3   M ED MNIST

We trained a 5-layer CNN with a fixed λ = 1 and nl at 10% of the training data. We report in Table 2
the mean accuracy and cross-entropy on 5 different splits of the labelled and unlabelled data and the
number of labelled data used. We report the AUC in Appendix L. DePseudoLabel competes with
PseudoLabel in terms of accuracy and even success when PseudoLabel’s accuracy is less than the
complete case. Moreover, DePseudoLabel is always better in terms of cross-entropy, so calibration,
whereas PseudoLabel is always worse than the complete case.


                                                                               34
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Table 2: Test accuracy and cross-entropy of Complete Case (CC), PseudoLabel (PL) and DePseu-
doLabel (DePL) on five datasets of MedMNIST.
 DATASET       nl                     CC                                    PL                              D E PL
                      C ROSS - ENTROPY     ACCURACY      C ROSS - ENTROPY        ACCURACY      C ROSS - ENTROPY      ACCURACY
 D ERMA        1000     1.95 ± 0.09        68.99± 1.20        2.51 ± 0.20        68.88± 1.03     1.88 ± 0.12         69.30± 0.85
 P NEUMONIA    585      1.47 ± 0.04        83.94± 2.40        2.04 ± 0.04        85.83± 2.13     1.40 ± 0.06         84.36 ± 3.79
 R ETINA       160      1.68 ± 0.03        48.30± 3.06        1.80 ± 0.18        47.75± 2.50     1.67 ± 0.06         49.40 ± 2.62
 B REAST       78       0.80 ± 0.04        76.15± 0.75        1.00 ± 0.26        74.74± 1.04     0.70 ± 0.03         76.67 ± 1.32
 B LOOD        1700     6.11 ± 0.17        84.13± 0.83        6.61 ± 0.22        84.09± 1.17     6.53 ± 0.30         83.68 ± 0.59


Table 3: Test AUC of Complete Case , PseudoLabel and DePseudoLabel on five datasets of MedM-
NIST.

              DATASET          C OMPLETE C ASE           P SEUDO L ABEL              D E P SEUDO L ABEL
              D ERMA             84.26 ± 0.50             82.64 ± 1.19                 83.82 ± 0.95
              P NEUMONIA         94.28 ± 0.46             94.34 ± 0.91                 94.15 ± 0.33
              R ETINA            70.70 ± 0.74             70.12 ± 1.01                 69.97 ± 1.44
              B REAST            74.67 ± 3.68             74.86 ± 3.18                 75.33 ± 3.05
              B LOOD             97.83 ± 0.23             97.83 ± 0.23                 97.72 ± 0.15


                                                         35
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


M     P SEUDO L ABEL AND D E P SEUDO L ABEL ON CIFAR: P - VALUES

M.1    CIFAR-10


                                                    DePseudoLabel
                                   0.79             PseudoLabel                                            5

                                   0.78                                                                    4
                        Accuracy


                                                                                                    Loss
                                   0.77                                                                    3

                                   0.76                                                                    2

                                   0.75                                                                    1
                                          0            100                             101                               100         101


                                                                          0.20

                                                                          0.18

                                                                          0.16
                                                                    ECE


                                                                          0.14

                                                                          0.12

                                                                          0.10

                                                                                         100                       101


Figure 11: The influence of λ on Pseudo-label and DePseudo-label on CIFAR-10 with nl= 4000:
(Left) Mean test accuracy; (Middle) Mean test cross-entropy; (Right) Test ECE, with 95% CI.


                                                                                 Accuracy             1.0
                                                                                 Loss
              0.8                                                                ECE
                                                                                                      0.8
              0.6
                                                                                                      0.6
          p


                                                                                                p


              0.4
                                                                                                      0.4
              0.2                                                                                                                          Accuracy
                                                                                                      0.2
                                                                                                                                           Loss
              0.0                                                                                                                          ECE
                    0                         100                                101                           0               100         101



Figure 12: p-values of a paired student test between PseudoLabel and DePseudoLabel (Right)
DePseudoLabel is better than PseudoLabel; (Left) DePseudoLabel is worst than PseudoLabel.



M.2    C OMPUTATION OF λopt ON THE TEST SET.

As explained in the main text, the estimation of Cov(L(θ; x, y), H(θ; x)) with few labels led to
extremely unstable unsatisfactory results. However, we test the formula on CIFAR-10 and different
methods to provide intuition on the order of λopt and the range of the variance reduction regime
(between 0 and 2λopt ). To do so, we estimate λopt on the test set for CIFAR-10 by training a CNN13
using only 4, 000 labelled data on 200 epochs. The value of λopt is 1.67, 31.16 and 0.66 for entropy
minimisation, pseudo label and Fixmatch. Therefore, the reduced variance regime covers the intuitive
choices of λ in the SSL literature. Unfortunately, computing λopt on the test set is not applicable in
practice.


                                                                                               36
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


M.3   CIFAR-100


                          0.61       CIFAR-100
                                     DePseudoLabel                                         14
                          0.60       PseudoLabel                                           12
                          0.59                                                             10


               Accuracy


                                                                                    Loss
                          0.58                                                             8
                                                                                           6
                          0.57
                                                                                           4
                          0.56
                                                                                           2
                                 0       100                           101                      0         100   101


                                                           0.375
                                                           0.350
                                                           0.325
                                                     ECE   0.300
                                                           0.275
                                                           0.250
                                                           0.225
                                                                   0     100                        101


Figure 13: The influence of λ on Pseudo-label and DePseudo-label on CIFAR-100 with nl= 4000:
(Left) Mean test accuracy; (Middle) Mean test cross-entropy; (Right) Test ECE, with 95% CI.


                                                                               37
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


N     F IXMATCH (S OHN ET AL ., 2020)

We performed a paired Student t-test to ensure that our performances are significantly better on
CIFAR-10 on both accuracy, cross-entropy and Brier score. The results show that DeFixmatch is
significantly better with a p-value of 6.5x10−5 in accuracy, 3.3x10−5 in cross-entropy and 7.6x10−5
in Brier score.

N.1   P ER CLASS ACCURACY

In recent work, Zhu et al. (2022) exposed the disparate effect of SSL on different classes. Indeed,
classes with a high complete case accuracy benefit more from SSL than classes with a low baseline
accuracy. They introduced a metric called the benefit ratio (BR) that quantifies the impact of SSL on
a class C:

                                           accSSL (C) − accCC (C)
                               BR(C) =                            ,                               (45)
                                            accS (C) − accCC (C)
where accSSL (C), accCC (C) and accS (C) are respectively the accuracy of the class with an SSL
trained model, a complete-case model and a fully supervised model (a model that has access to all
labels). Inspired by this work, we report the per-class accuracy and the benefit ratio in Table N.1. We
see that the “poor” classes such as bird, cat and dog tend to benefit from DeFixmatch much more
than from Fixmatch. We compute accS (C) using a pre-trained model with the same architecture1 .
Zhu et al. (2022) also promote the idea that a fair SSL algorithm should benefit different sub-classes
equally, then having BR(C) = BR(C ′ ) for all C, C ′ . While perfect equality seems unachievable in
practice, we propose to look at the standard deviation of the BR through the different classes. While
the standard deviation of Fixmatch is 0.12, the one of DeFixmatch is 0.06. Therefore, DeFixmatch
improves the sub-populations’ accuracies more equally.


Table 4: Mean accuracy per class and mean benefit ratio (BR) on 5 folds for Fixmatch, DeFixmatch
and the Complete Case. Bold: “poor” complete case accuracy classes.

                          C OMPLETE C ASE              F IXMATCH           D E F IXMATCH
                          ACCURACY               ACCURACY       BR      ACCURACY        BR
         AIRPLANE         86.94                  95.94          0.88    96.62           0.94
         AUTOMOBILE       95.26                  97.54          0.68    98.22           0.89
         BIRD             80.46                  90.80          0.68    92.64           0.80
         CAT              70.08                  82.50          0.56    87.16           0.78
         DEER             88.88                  95.86          0.78    97.26           0.94
         DOG              79.66                  87.16          0.53    90.98           0.81
         FROG             93.12                  97.84          0.80    98.62           0.94
         HORSE            90.96                  96.94          0.83    97.64           0.92
         SHIP             94.12                  97.26          0.67    98.06           0.84
         TRUCK            93.18                  96.82          0.84    97.20           0.93



N.2   STL10

DeFixmatch also performs better than Fixmatch on STL-10 using 4200 labelled data for training and
800 for validation.

N.3   F IXMATCH DETAILS

As first detailed in Appendix B, Fixmatch is a pseudo-label-based method with data augmentation.
Indeed, Fixmatch uses weak augmentations of x (flip-and-shift) for the pseudo-labels selection and
then minimises the likelihood with the prediction of the model on a strongly augmented version of x.


                                                  38
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Table 5: Test accuracy, worst class accuracy and cross-entropy of Complete Case, Fixmatch and
DeFixmatch on 5 folds of CIFAR-10, one fold of CIFAR-100 and one fold of STL10.
                                   CIFAR-10 (nl = 4000)                       CIFAR-100 (nl = 10000)                       STL10 (nl = 5000)
                        Complete Case    Fixmatch      DeFixmatch      Complete Case   Fixmatch   DeFixmatch   Complete Case    Fixmatch   DeFixmatch
 Accuracy               87.27 ± 0.25    93.87 ± 0.13    95.44 ± 0.10       62.62        69.28       71.22          88.69          92.64        93.23
 Worst class accuracy    70.08 ± 0.93   82.25 ± 2.27    87.16 ± 0.46       28.00        23.00       31.00          70.75          85.00        85.25
 Cross entropy            0.60 ± 0.01    0.27 ± 0.01    0.20 ± 0.01         1.87         1.52       1.42            0.42           0.30        0.28
 Brier score            0.214 ± 0.005   0.101 ±0.003   0.076 ± 0.001        0.56         0.47       0.44           0.171          0.117        0.109


Weak augmentations are also used for the supervised part of the loss. In this context,
                                            L(θ; x, y) = Ex1 ∼weak(x) [− log(pθ (y|x1 ))]
and

   H(θ; x) = Ex1 ∼weak(x) 1[max pθ̂ (y|x1 ) > τ ]Ex2 ∼strong(x) [− log(pθ (arg max pθ̂ (y|x1 )|x2 ))]
                                                y                                                                 y

where x1 is a weak augmentation of x and x2 is a strong augmentation. We tried to debias an
implementation of Fixmatch 1 however training was very unstable and led to model that were much
worst than the complete case. We believed that this behaviour is because the supervised part of
the loss does not include strong augmentation. Indeed, our theoretical results encourage to have a
strong correlation between L and H, therefore including strong augmentations in the supervised term.
Moreover, a solid baseline for CIFAR-10 using only labelled data integrated strong augmentations
(Cubuk et al., 2020). We modify the implementation, see Code 2 . Therefore, the supervised loss term
can be written as:

                      1
              L(θ; x, y) =Ex1 ∼weak(x) [− log(pθ (y|x1 ))] + Ex2 ∼strong(x) [− log(pθ (y|x2 ))] , (46)
                      2
where x1 is a weak augmentation of x and x2 is a strong augmentation. This modification encourages
us to choose λ = 12 as the original Fixmatch implementation used λ = 1. We also remark that this
modification degrades the performance of Fixmatch (less than 2%) reported in the work of Sohn
et al. (2020). However, including strong augmentations in the supervised part greatly improves the
performance of the Complete Case.


    1
        https://https://github.com/LeeDoYup/FixMatch-pytorch
    2
        https://github.com/HugoSchmutz/DeFixmatch.git


                                                                          39
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


O       CIFAR AND SVHN: O LIVER ET AL . (2018) IMPLEMENTATION OF
        CONSISTENCY- BASED MODEL .

In this section, we present the results on CIFAR and SVHN by debiasing the implementation of
(Oliver et al., 2018) of Π-Model, Mean-Teacher and VAT 3 . We mimic the experiments of Oliver et al.
(2018, figure-4) with the same configuration and the exact same hyperparameters (Oliver et al., 2018,
Appendix B and C). We perform an early stopping independently on both cross-entropy and accuracy.
As reported below, we reach almost the same results as the biased methods.


O.1      CIFAR-10


                             0.9                                                                                                        0.9
                                         Complete Case                                                                                              VAT + EntMin
                                         Pi-Model                                                                                                   VAT + DeEntMin
                             0.8         DePi-Model                                                                                     0.8         Complete Case

                             0.7                                                                                                        0.7
                  accuracy


                                                                                                                             accuracy
                             0.6
                                                                                                                                        0.6
                             0.5
                                                                                                                                        0.5
                             0.4
                                                                                                                                        0.4
                                   250        500        1000             2000              4000         8000                                 250        500         1000        2000   4000      8000
                                                                nl                                                                                                          nl


                                                                                0.9
                                                                                             Mean-Teacher
                                                                                             DeMean-Teacher
                                                                                0.8          Complete Case

                                                                                0.7
                                                                     accuracy


                                                                                0.6

                                                                                0.5

                                                                                0.4
                                                                                      250          500          1000           2000             4000       8000
                                                                                                                       nl



Figure 14: Test accuracy for each SSL approaches on CIFAR-10 with various amounts of labelled data nl .(Left)
Π-model and DeΠ-model. (Right) VAT+EntMin and VAT+DeEntMin. (Bottom) Mean-teacher and DeMean-
teacher. Shadows represent 95% CI.


                                                                                                                                   10.5                                                 VAT + EntMin
                              9                                                                                                                                                         VAT + DeEntMin
                                                                                                                                   10.0                                                 Complete Case
                              8
                                                                                                                                        9.5
                              7
                                                                                            Complete Case                               9.0
                              6                                                             Pi-Model
                      loss


                                                                                                                            loss


                              5                                                             DePi-Model                                  8.5
                              4                                                                                                         8.0
                              3
                                                                                                                                        7.5
                              2
                                   250        500        1000             2000              4000         8000                                 250        500         1000        2000   4000      8000
                                                                nl                                                                                                          nl



                                                                                 9
                                                                                 8
                                                                                 7
                                                                                             Mean-Teacher
                                                                                 6           DeMean-Teacher
                                                                         loss


                                                                                             Complete Case
                                                                                 5
                                                                                 4
                                                                                 3
                                                                                 2
                                                                                      250          500          1000           2000             4000       8000
                                                                                                                       nl



Figure 15: Test cross-entropy for each SSL approaches on CIFAR-10 with various amounts of labelled data
nl .(Left) Π-model and DeΠ-model. (Right) VAT+EntMin and VAT+DeEntMin. (Bottom) Mean-teacher and
DeMean-teacher. Shadows represent 95% CI.

    3
        https://github.com/brain-research/realistic-ssl-evaluation


                                                                                                                   40
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


O.2    SVHN


                             0.95                                                                                         0.95
                             0.90                                                                                         0.90
                             0.85
                                                                                                                          0.85


                  accuracy


                                                                                                               accuracy
                             0.80
                                                                                                                          0.80
                             0.75
                             0.70                                                                                         0.75
                                                                               Complete Case                                                                               VAT + EntMin
                             0.65                                              Pi-Model                                   0.70                                             VAT + DeEntMin
                                                                               DePi-Model                                                                                  Complete Case
                                    250   500   1000              2000         4000         8000                                 250        500         1000        2000   4000      8000
                                                       nl                                                                                                      nl



                                                                  0.95

                                                                  0.90

                                                                  0.85

                                                       accuracy   0.80

                                                                  0.75
                                                                                                                                  Mean-Teacher
                                                                  0.70                                                            DeMean-Teacher
                                                                                                                                  Complete Case
                                                                         250          500          1000            2000            4000       8000
                                                                                                          nl



Figure 16: Test accuracy for each SSL approaches on CIFAR-10 with various amounts of labelled data nl .(Left)
Π-model and DeΠ-model. (Right) VAT+EntMin and VAT+DeEntMin. (Bottom) Mean-teacher and DeMean-
teacher. Shadows represent 95% CI.



                               9                                               Complete Case                                           VAT + EntMin
                                                                                                                           10
                               8                                               Pi-Model                                                VAT + DeEntMin
                                                                               DePi-Model                                   9          Complete Case
                               7
                               6                                                                                            8
                               5                                                                                            7
                        loss


                                                                                                                   loss


                               4                                                                                            6
                               3
                                                                                                                            5
                               2
                                                                                                                            4
                               1
                                    250   500   1000              2000         4000         8000                                 250        500         1000        2000   4000      8000
                                                       nl                                                                                                      nl


                                                                    9                                                             Mean-Teacher
                                                                    8                                                             DeMean-Teacher
                                                                                                                                  Complete Case
                                                                    7
                                                                    6
                                                             loss


                                                                    5
                                                                    4
                                                                    3
                                                                    2

                                                                         250          500          1000            2000            4000       8000
                                                                                                          nl



Figure 17: Test cross-entropy for each SSL approaches on CIFAR-10 with various amounts of labelled data
nl .(Left) Π-model and DeΠ-model. (Right) VAT+EntMin and VAT+DeEntMin. (Bottom) Mean-teacher and
DeMean-teacher. Shadows represent 95% CI.


                                                                                                      41
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


P       C OMPUTATION DETAILS
P.1      C OMPUTATION RESOURCES

Deep Learning experiments of this work required approximately 11,250 hours of GPU computation.
In particular, Fixmatch was trained using 4 GPUs. Here are the details:

          • MNIST : 300 hours
          • medMNIST: 3 hours
          • CIFAR-10: 525 hours
          • CIFAR-100: 1500 hours
          • Fixmatch : 3000 hours
          • Realistic SSL evaluation on both CIFAR and SVHN: 5880 hours

P.2      C OMPUTATION LIBRARIES AND TOOLS
          • Python Van Rossum & Drake Jr (1995)
          • PyTorch Paszke et al. (2019)
          • TensorFlow Abadi et al. (2015)
          • Scikit-learn Pedregosa et al. (2011)
          • Seaborn Waskom et al. (2017)
          • Python imaging library Lundh et al. (2012)
          • Numpy Harris et al. (2020)
          • Pandas McKinney et al. (2010)
          • RandAugment Cubuk et al. (2020)
          • Fixmatch-Pytorch 4
          • Realistic-SSL-evaluation Oliver et al. (2018)


    4
        https://https://github.com/LeeDoYup/FixMatch-pytorch


                                                   42
