Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


A RE N EURONS ACTUALLY C OLLAPSED ? O N THE F INE -
G RAINED S TRUCTURE IN N EURAL R EPRESENTATIONS
 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                            A BSTRACT

         Recent work has observed an intriguing “Neural Collapse” phenomenon in well-
         trained neural networks, where the last-layer representations of training samples
         with the same label collapse into each other. This suggests that the last-layer
         representations are completely determined by the labels, and do not depend on
         the intrinsic structure of input distribution. We provide evidence that this is not a
         complete description, and that the apparent collapse hides important fine-grained
         structure in the representations. Specifically, even when representations apparently
         collapse, the small amount of remaining variation can still faithfully and accurately
         captures the intrinsic structure of input distribution. As an example, if we train
         on CIFAR-10 using only 5 coarse-grained labels (by combining two classes into
         one super-class) until convergence, we can reconstruct the original 10-class labels
         from the learned representations via unsupervised clustering. The reconstructed
         labels achieve 93% accuracy on the CIFAR-10 test set, nearly matching the normal
         CIFAR-10 accuracy for the same architecture. Our findings show concretely how
         the structure of input data can play a significant role in determining the fine-grained
         structure of neural representations, going beyond what Neural Collapse predicts.



1    I NTRODUCTION

Much of the success of deep neural networks has, arguably, been attributed to their ability to
learn useful representations, or features, of the data (Rumelhart et al., 1985). Although neural
networks are often trained to optimize a single objective function with no explicit requirements
on the inner representations, there is ample evidence suggesting that these learned representations
contain rich information about the input data (Levy & Goldberg, 2014; Olah et al., 2017). As a result,
formally characterizing and understanding the structural properties of neural representations is of
great theoretical and practical interest, and can provide insights on how deep learning works and how
to make better use of these representations.
One intriguing phenomenon recently discovered by Papyan et al. (2020) is Neural Collapse, which
identifies structural properties of last-layer representations during the terminal phase of training
(i.e. after zero training error is reached). The simplest of these properties is that the last-layer
representations for training samples with the same label collapse into a single point, which is referred
to as “variability collapse (NC1).” This is surprising, since the collapsed structure is not necessary
to achieve small training or test error, yet it arises consistently in standard architectures trained on
standard classification datasets.
A series of recent papers were able to theoretically explain Neural Collapse under a simplified model
called the unconstrained feature model or layer-peeled model (see Section 2 for a list of references).
In this model, the last-layer representation of each training sample is treated as a free optimization
variable and therefore the training loss essentially has the form of a matrix factorization. Under a
variety of different setups, it was proved that the solution to this simplified problem should satisfy
Neural Collapse. Although Neural Collapse is relatively well understood in this simplified model,
this model completely ignores the role of the input data because the loss function is independent of
the input data. Conceptually, this suggests that Neural Collapse is only determined by the labels
and may happen regardless of the input data distribution. Zhu et al. (2021) provided further empirical
support of this claim via a random labeling experiment.


                                                   1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Figure 1: Fine-grained clustering structure of the last-layer representations of ResNet-18 trained on
Coarse CIFAR-10 (5 super-classes). Left figure: PCA visualization for all training samples. Right
figure: t-SNE visualization for all training samples in super-class 4 (which consists of original classes
4 and 9).


On the other hand, it is conceivable that the intrinsic structure of the input distribution should
play a role in determining the structure of neural net representations. For example, if a class contains
a heterogeneous set of input data (such as different subclasses), it is possible that their heterogeneity
is also respected in their feature representations (Sohoni et al., 2020). However, this appears to
contradict Neural Collapse, because Neural Collapse would predict that all the representations
collapse into the same point as long as they have the same class label. This dilemma motivates us to
study the following main question in this paper:

   How can we reconcile the roles of the intrinsic structure of input distribution vs. the explicit
     structure of the labels in determining the last-layer representations in neural networks?

Our methodology and findings. To study the above question, we design experiments to manually
create a mismatch between the intrinsic structure of the input distribution and the explicit labels
provided for training in standard classification datasets and measure how the last-layer representations
behave in response to our interventions. This allows us to isolate the effect of the input distribution
from the effect of labels. As an illustrative example, for the CIFAR-10 dataset (a 10-class classification
task), we alter its labels in two different ways, resulting in a coarsely-labeled and finely-labeled
version:

       • Coarse CIFAR-10: combine every two class labels into one and obtain a 5-class task (see
         Figure 2 for an illustration);
       • Fine CIFAR-10: split every class label randomly into two labels and obtain a 20-class task.

We train standard network architectures (e.g. ResNet, DenseNet) using SGD on these altered datasets.
Our main findings are summarized below.
First, both the intrinsic structure of the input distribution and the explicit labels provided in training
clearly affect the structure of the last-layer representations. The effect of input distribution emerges
earlier in training, while the effect of labels appears at a later stage. For example, for both Coarse
CIFAR-10 and Fine CIFAR-10, at some point the representations naturally form 10 clusters according
to the original CIFAR-10 labels (which comes from the intrinsic input structure), even though 5 or 20
different labels are provided for training. Later in training (after 100% training accuracy is reached),
the representations collapse into 5 or 20 clusters driven by the explicit labels provided, as predicted
by Neural Collapse.
Second, even after Neural Collapse has occurred according to the explicit label information, the seem-
ingly collapsed representations corresponding to each label can still exhibit fine-grained structures
determined by the input distribution. As an illustration, Figure 1 visualizes the representations from
the last epoch of training a ResNet-18 on Coarse CIFAR-10. While globally there are 5 separated
clusters as predicted by Neural Collapse, if we zoom in on each cluster, it clearly consists of two


                                                    2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


subclusters which correspond to the original CIFAR-10 classes. We also find that this phenomenon
persists even after a very long training period (e.g. 1,000 epochs), indicating that the effect of input
distribution is not destroyed by that of the labels, at least not within a normal training budget.
To further validate our finding that significant input information is present in the last-layer representa-
tions despite Neural Collapse, we perform a simple Cluster-and-Linear-Probe (CLP) procedure on
the representations from ResNet-18 trained on Coarse CIFAR-10, in which we use an unsupervised
clustering method to reconstruct the original labels, and then train a linear classifier on top of these
representations using the reconstructed labels. We find that CLP can achieve > 93% accuracy on the
original CIFAR-10 test set, matching the standard accuracy of ResNet-18, even though only 5 coarse
labels are provided the entire time.

Takeaway. While Neural Collapse is an intriguing phenomenon that consistently happens in well-
trained neural networks, we provide concrete evidence showing that it is not the most comprehensive
description of the behavior of last-layer representations in practice, as it fails to capture the possible
fine-grained properties determined by the intrinsic structure of the input distribution.


2    R ELATED W ORK

The Neural Collapse phenomenon was originally discovered by Papyan et al. (2020), and has led to a
series of further investigations.
A number of papers Fang et al. (2021); Lu & Steinerberger (2020); Wojtowytsch et al. (2020);
Mixon et al. (2022); Zhu et al. (2021); Ji et al. (2021); Han et al. (2021); Zhou et al. (2022); Tirer &
Bruna (2022); Yaras et al. (2022) studied a simplified “unconstrained feature model”, also known as
“layer-peeled model”, and showed that Neural Collapse provably happens under a variety of settings.
This model treats the last-layer representations of all training samples as free optimization variables.
By doing this, the loss function no longer depends on the input data, and therefore this line of work is
unable to capture any effect of the input distribution on the structure of the representations. Ergen &
Pilanci (2021); Tirer & Bruna (2022); Weinan & Wojtowytsch (2022) considered more complicated
models but still did not incorporate the role of the input distribution.
Hui et al. (2022) studied the connection of Neural Collapse to generalization and concluded that
Neural Collapse occurs only on the training set, not on the test set. Galanti et al. (2021) found that
Neural Collapse does generalize to test samples as well as new classes, and used this observation to
study transfer learning and few-shot learning.
Sohoni et al. (2020) observed that the last-layer representations of different subclasses within the same
class are often separated into different clusters, and used this observation to design an algorithm for
improving group robustness. However, it is unclear whether their observation happens in the Neural
Collapse regime, while we find that fine-grained structure in representations can co-exist with Neural
Collapse. Furthermore, Sohoni et al. (2020) looked at settings in which different subclasses have
different accuracies and attributed the representation separability phenomenon to this performance
difference. On the other hand, we find that representation separability happens even when there is no
performance gap between different subclasses.


3    P RELIMINARIES AND S ETUP

This section introduces the notation used throughout this paper, as well as a more detailed explanation
of Neural Collapse and a clarification of the experiment setup.
                                                                                                ′
For a classification task dataset, we denote it by D = {(xk , yk )}nk=1 , where (xk , yk ) ∈ Rd × [C] is
a pair of input features and label, n is the number of samples, d′ is the input dimension, and C is the
number of classes.
For a given neural network, we denote the last-layer representation by H ∈ Rn×d , i.e. the hidden
representation before the final linear transformation, where d is the last-layer dimensionality. For
an original class c ∈ [C], we denote the number of samples in class c by nc , and the last-layer
                                              (c)
representation of k-th sample in class c by hk .


                                                    3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


3.1   P RELIMINARIES OF N EURAL C OLLAPSE

Neural Collapse characterizes 4 phenomena, named NC1-NC4. Here we introduce the first two which
concern the structure of the last-layer representations.
NC1, or variability collapse, predicts that the variance of last-layer representations of samples
                                                                                               within

the same class vanishes as training proceeds. Formally, it can be measured by NC1 = C1 Tr ΣW Σ†B
(Papyan et al., 2020; Zhu et al., 2021), which should tend to 0. The ΣW and ΣB are defined as
                                               nc                             ⊤
                                  1 X 1 X            (c)

                                                                    (c)
                         ΣW =                       hi − µc hi − µc                               (1)
                                  C       nc i=1
                                    c∈[C]
and
                               1 X                          ⊤
                               ΣB =    (µc − µG ) (µc − µG ) ,                                          (2)
                              C
                                 c∈[C]
             Pnc   (c)                                Pn
where µc = nc k=1 hk are the class means and µG = n1 k=1 hk is the global mean.
           1


NC2 predicts that the class means converge to a special structure, i.e. their normalized covariance
converges to the Simplex Equiangular Tight Frame (ETF). This can be characterize by
                               MM⊤

                         def                    1            1      ⊤
                    NC2 =                 −√            I − 1C 1C           →0                   (3)
                             ∥M M ⊤ ∥F         C −1          C           F
during training, where M is the stack of centralized class-means, whose c-th row is µc − µG , and
1C ∈ RC is an all-one vector in length C, I is the identity matrix.

3.2   E XPERIMENT S ETUP

In our experiment, we explore the role of input distribution and labels through assigning coarser or
finer labels to each sample, and then explore the structure of last-layer representation of a model
trained on the dataset with coarse or fine labels and see to what extent the information of original
labels are preserved.
The coarse labels are created in the following way. First choose a number C̃ which is divisible by C,
and create coarse labels by
                                           ỹk = yk mod C̃,                                            (4)
which merges the classes whose index have the same modulus w.r.t. C̃ and thus create C̃ super-classes.
Since the original index of classes generally has no special meanings, this process should act similar
to randomly merging classes1 . We say the samples with the same coarse label belongs to the same
super-class, and call the dataset D̃ = {(xk , ỹk )}nk=1 the coarse dataset, which is the dataset we used
to train the model. Figure 2 provides an illustration of the coarse labels on CIFAR-10 with C̃ = 5,
which we call Coarse CIFAR-10.


                          Figure 2: Dataset illustration of Coarse CIFAR-10.

To create fine labels, we randomly split each class into two sub-classes. Specifically, the fine labels
are created by
                                           ŷk = yk + βC,                                           (5)
where ŷk is the fine label of sample k and C is the number of original classes and β is a Bernoulli
                                                             n
Variable. This process result in a dataset D̂ = {(xk , ŷk )}k=1 with 2C classes. Same as before, we
call D̂ the fine dataset.
   1
     We adopt this determined process for simplicity and reproducibility. However, we do provide additional
results with random merging in appendix.


                                                    4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                                       Figure 4: An illustration of predicted class dis-
                                                       tance matrix heatmaps of Coarse CIFAR-10,
Figure 3: The value of NC1 and NC2 w.r.t. num-         each row and column represents an original class.
ber of training epochs.                                (a): If input distribution dominates the last-layer
                                                       representations. (b): If Neural Collapse domi-
                                                       nates the last-layer representations.


4     E XPLORING THE F INE -G RAINED R EPRESENTATION S TRUCTURE WITH
      C OARSE CIFAR-10
In this section, we experiment with coarsely labeled datasets, using Coarse CIFAR-10 as an illustrative
example. Specifically, the model is trained on the training set of Coarse CIFAR-10 for a certain
number of steps that is sufficient for the model to converge. We then take the last-layer representations
of the model during training and explore their structure.
In order to make an exhaustive observation, the experiment is repeated using different learning rates
and weight-decay rates. Specifically, we choose the learning rate of training in {10−1 , 10−2 , 10−3 }
and weight-decay rate in {5 × 10−3 , 5 × 10−4 , 5 × 10−5 } and test all 9 possible combinations of
them. The experiment is also conducted on multiple datasets and network architectures. Due to space
limit, in this section we focus on experiment of ResNet-18 on Coarse CIFAR-10, where the original
C = 10 and the number of coarse labels is chosen as C̃ = 5. For training hyper-parameters, we
only report results for two representative hyper-parameter combinations, referred to as config #1 and
config #2. The learning rate of config #1 is set to 0.01 and weight-decay rate is 5 × 10−4 , and for
config #2 the learning rate is 0.01 and weight decay rate is 5 × 10−5 . Both settings reach 0 training
error quickly during training. We defer complete experiment results to appendix.
As a preliminary result, we first show that under our experiment settings, Neural Collapse does
happen, i.e. the representation does converge to 5 clusters and the class-means form a Simplex ETF
structure. Specifically, we measure NC1 and NC2 defined in Section 3.1 for both config #1 and config
#2, with C replaced by C̃ since we are calculating it on coarse dataset. The results are shown in
Figure 3, which matches previous results in Papyan et al. (2020); Zhu et al. (2021), indicating that
Neural Collapse does happen under both settings.

4.1   C LASS D ISTANCE

We first look at the average square Euclidian distance of last-layer representations between each two
original classes. Formally, we calculate a class distance matrix D ∈ RC×C , whose entries are
                                                 ni Xnj
                                           1 X                    2
                                 Di,j =                 h(i)  (j)
                                                         u − hv     ,                                 (6)
                                          ni nj u=1 v=1           2

                           (c)
for all i, j ∈ [C], where hk represents the last-layer representation of the k-th sample of super-class
u.
Since the model is trained on coarse dataset, Neural Collapse asserts that for every original class pair
i, j in the same super-class (including the case of i = j), the class distance Di,j should be very small.
In Coarse CIFAR-10, this will result in three darks lines (let darker color represents lower value) in
the heatmap of D since each super class contains two original classes, as illustrated in Figure 4 (b).


                                                   5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


For example, in Coarse CIFAR-10 the original class "airplane" and "dog" both belong to the super
class "airplane & dog", therefore per Neural Collapse’s prediction, their last-layer representations
would collapse to each other, making the average square distance extremely small compared to other
entries. In contrast, if the last-layer representations perfectly reflects the distribution of input, i.e.
original classes, the class distance matrix should be a diagonal matrix as shown in Figure 4 (a),
because the last-layer representation of samples in each original class only collapse to the class-mean
of this original class.
Figures 5 and 6 display the heatmap of class distance matrix D, arranged by number of training
epochs. From the results there are two surprising observations can be made: Firstly, there are indeed
three dark lines at the final stage, however, the three dark lines does not show up simultaneously, and
the central line – represents the samples in the same original classes – shows up earlier. The second
observation is, even in the final stage where the training error is zero, the three lines can be not of the
same degree of darkness, with the central line shallower, and this is especially apparent in Figure 6.
Those observations suggests that, the actual behaviour of the last-layer representations is between
the cases predicted in Figure 4 (a) and (b): the input distribution and training label both have an
impact on the distribution of the last-layer representations, and although the time of them to show up
is different, both of them can be present even after reaching zero training error for a long time. These
observations suggest both the existence of Neural Collapse and the inadequacy of Neural Collapse to
completely describe the behaviour of last-layer representations.


Figure 5: The heatmap of class distance matrix of config #1. From left to right: number of epoch
= 20, 120, 240 and 350.


Figure 6: The heatmap of class distance matrix of config #2. From left to right: number of epoch
= 20, 120, 240 and 350.

4.2   V ISUALIZATION

In this subsection, we take a closer look at the last-layer representations of the model at the end of
training by reducing the dimensionality of the last-layer representations to 2 through t-SNE (Van der
Maaten & Hinton, 2008) and visualize them. Specifically, we visualize each super-class separately,
but color the samples whose original labels are different with different colors.
The visualization results of config #1 and config #2 are displayed in Figures 7 and 8. It can be
observed that, there is distinguishable difference in the distribution of original labels in both config #1
and config #2. This suggests that, the input distribution information, i.e. the original label information,
is well preserved in the last-layer representations under both settings, albeit for config #2 it seems it
can not be distinguished through distance matrix in Section 4.1.

Training extremely long.        In order to explore if the fine-grained structures are still preserved even
after a extremely long time of training, we further train the model with config #2 to 1,000 epochs.
The heatmap of the distance matrix is presented in Figure 9. We also present the t-SNE visualization
result, but only put the result of the first super-class in Figure 10 due to space limitation.


                                                    6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


             Figure 7: The t-SNE visualization of config #1. Each grid is a super-class.


             Figure 8: The t-SNE visualization of config #2. Each grid is a super-class.


4.3   L EARNING CIFAR-10 FROM 5 C OARSE L ABELS

As the results in Section 4.2 suggest, even after the training accuracy
has reached 100% for a long time, the samples within each super-
class still exhibit a clear structure per their original class, and those
structures act as clusters after reducing dimensionality. Inspired by
this observation, we perform a Cluster-and-Linear-Probe (CLP) test to
evaluate to what extent the original class information is preserved in the
last-layer representations. In CLP, we use the representations learned
on Coarse CIFAR-10 to reconstruct 10 labels and run a linear probe
with the reconstructed labels. Specifically, we first use t-SNE to reduce
the dimensionality to 2 and then use KMeans to find 2 clusters of the
dimensionality-reduced representations within each super-class. We           Figure 9: The heatmap of
use the clusters as reconstructed labels to do a linear probe. In linear     distance matrix of ResNet-
probe, we train a linear classifier on top of the previously learned         18 trained on Coarse CIFAR-
representation H on the training set with reconstructed labels and           10 for 1000 epochs.
evaluate the learned linear classifier on original test set. Notice that
because we don’t know the mapping of reconstructed classes to true
original classes, we permute each possible mapping and report the
highest performance. We also train a linear probe with original training
labels as a comparison. The results of config #1 and config #2 are
shown in Figures 11 and 12 respectively.
In most cases, the performance of CLP on original test set is com-
parable with linear probe trained on true original labels or even with
models originally trained on CIFAR-10. Notice that the representation
H is obtained through the model trained with coarse labels, and the          Figure 10: The t-SNE vi-
label reconstruction only uses information of H and the number of            sualization of the last-layer
original classes. This means we can achieve a very high performance          representations of the first
on original test set even if we only have access to almost only the          super-class of ResNet-18
information of coarse labels. This result further confirms that the input    trained on Coarse CIFAR-10
distribution can play an important role in the last-layer representations.   for 1,000 epochs.


                                                    7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                                              Figure 13: The t-SNE visualization of
Figure 11: The CLP result of config #1. “original test”       the last-layer representations of super-
is the highest test set accuracy achieved by ResNet18         class “vehicles 1” of ResNet-18 trained
trained on original CIFAR-10 with the same training           on CIFAR-100 with original super-
hyper-parameters of config #1.                                classes.


Figure 12: The CLP result of config #2. “original test”       Figure 14: The t-SNE visualization
is the highest test set accuracy achieved by ResNet18         of the last-layer representations of
trained on original CIFAR-10 with the same training           super-class “non-insect invertebrates” of
hyper-parameters of config #2.                                ResNet-18 trained on CIFAR-100 with
                                                              original super-classes.



5    H OW D OES S EMANTIC S IMILARITY A FFECT THE F INE -G RAINED
     S TRUCTURE ?

In our experiments with Coarse CIFAR-10, each coarse label is obtained by combining two classes
regardless of the semantics. The fact that the neural network can separate the two classes in its
representation space implies that the network recognizes these two classes as semantically different
(even though they are given the same coarse label). In this section, we explore the following question:
If the sub-classes in a super-class have semantic similarity, will the representations still exhibit a
fine-grained structure to distinguish them? Intuitively, if the coarse label provided is “natural” and
consists of semantically similar sub-classes, it is possible that the neural network will not distinguish
between them and just produce truly collapsed representations.
We take an initial step towards this question by looking at ResNet-18 trained on CIFAR-100 using the
official 20 super-classes (each super-class contains 5 sub-classes) as labels. Unlike randomly merging
classes as we did in Section 4, the official super-classes of CIFAR-100 are natural, merging classes
with similar semantics (for example, “beaver” and “dolphin” both belong to “aquatic mammals”).
This offers a perfect testbed for our question.
We find that ResNet-18 indeed is not able to distinguish all sub-classes in its representation space, but
can still produce separable representations if some sub-classes within a super-class are sufficiently
different. Interestingly, the notion of semantic similarity of ResNet-18 turns out to agree well with
that of humans. Figures 13 and 14 show the t-SNE visualizations of representations from two super-
classes. From the visualizations, although there are not as clear clusters as for Coarse CIFAR-10, the
representations do exhibit visible separations between certain sub-classes. In Figure 13, “bicycles”
and “motorcycles” are entangled together, while they are separated from “bus”, “pickup truck”, and
“train”, which is human-interpretable. In Figure 14, “crab” and “lobster” are mixed together, which are
both aquatic and belong to malacostraca, while the other three are not and have more differentiative
representations.


                                                   8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


These results confirm the intuition that the fine-grained structure in last-layer representations is
affected by, or even based on, the semantic similarity between the inputs.


6    T HE F INE -G RAINED R EPRESENTATION S TRUCTURE ON F INE CIFAR-10

In this section, we consider finely-labeled dataset. We construct a fine version of CIFAR-10 with the
process described in Section 3.2, and call it Fine CIFAR-10. Figure 15 and Figure 16 presents the
results of class distance matrices for config #1 and config #2, which are arranged by the number of
training epochs.
It can be observed that at the early stage of training, there are three dark lines, which indicates
the last-layer representations are converging towards 10 clusters instead of 20 first. At the end of
training, this 10-class relationship is reserved and is especially significant in config #2, although with
a lighter color. This suggests that there exists fine-grained structure even at the terminal phase. Those
observations are consistent with the observations made in Section 4 and supports our conclusion.


Figure 15: The heatmap of class distance matrix of config #1 on Fine CIFAR-10. From left to right:
number of epoch = 20, 120, 240 and 350.


Figure 16: The heatmap of class distance matrix of config #2 on Fine CIFAR-10. From left to right:
number of epoch = 20, 120, 240 and 350.



7    D ISCUSSION

In this paper, we initiated the study of the role of the intrinsic structure of the input data distribution
on the last-layer representations of neural networks, and in particular, how to reconcile it with the
Neural Collapse phenomenon, which is only driven by the explicit labels provided in the training
procedure. Through a series of experiments, we provide concrete evidence that the representations
can exhibit clear fine-grained structure despite their apparent collapse. While Neural Collapse is an
intriguing phenomenon and deserves further studies to understand its cause and consequences, our
work calls for more scientific investigations of the structure of neural representations that go beyond
Neural Collapse.
We note that the fine-grained representation structure we observed depends on the inductive biases
of the network architecture and the training algorithm, and may not appear universally. In our
experiments on Coarse CIFAR-10, we observe the fine-grained structure for ResNet and DenseNet,
but not for VGG (see appendix for extended results). We also note that certain choices of learning
rate and weight-decay rate lead to stronger fine-grained structure than others. We leave a thorough
investigation of such subtlety for future work.


                                                    9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


R EFERENCES
Tolga Ergen and Mert Pilanci. Revealing the structure of deep neural networks via convex duality. In
  International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 3004–3014. PMLR, 2021.
Cong Fang, Hangfeng He, Qi Long, and Weijie J Su. Exploring deep neural networks via layer-peeled
  model: Minority collapse in imbalanced training. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences,
  118(43):e2103091118, 2021.
Tomer Galanti, András György, and Marcus Hutter. On the role of neural collapse in transfer learning.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2112.15121, 2021.
XY Han, Vardan Papyan, and David L Donoho. Neural collapse under mse loss: Proximity to and
 dynamics on the central path. arXiv preprint arXiv:2106.02073, 2021.
Like Hui, Mikhail Belkin, and Preetum Nakkiran. Limitations of neural collapse for understanding
  generalization in deep learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2202.08384, 2022.
Wenlong Ji, Yiping Lu, Yiliang Zhang, Zhun Deng, and Weijie J Su. An unconstrained layer-peeled
 perspective on neural collapse. arXiv preprint arXiv:2110.02796, 2021.
Omer Levy and Yoav Goldberg. Linguistic regularities in sparse and explicit word representations.
 In Proceedings of the Eighteenth Conference on Computational Natural Language Learning,
 pp. 171–180, Ann Arbor, Michigan, June 2014. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi:
 10.3115/v1/W14-1618. URL https://aclanthology.org/W14-1618.
Jianfeng Lu and Stefan Steinerberger. Neural collapse with cross-entropy loss. arXiv preprint
   arXiv:2012.08465, 2020.
Dustin G Mixon, Hans Parshall, and Jianzong Pi. Neural collapse with unconstrained features.
 Sampling Theory, Signal Processing, and Data Analysis, 20(2):1–13, 2022.
Chris Olah, Alexander Mordvintsev, and Ludwig Schubert. Feature visualization. Distill, 2017. doi:
  10.23915/distill.00007. https://distill.pub/2017/feature-visualization.
Vardan Papyan, XY Han, and David L Donoho. Prevalence of neural collapse during the terminal
  phase of deep learning training. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 117(40):
  24652–24663, 2020.
David E Rumelhart, Geoffrey E Hinton, and Ronald J Williams. Learning internal representations by
  error propagation. Technical report, California Univ San Diego La Jolla Inst for Cognitive Science,
  1985.
Nimit Sohoni, Jared Dunnmon, Geoffrey Angus, Albert Gu, and Christopher Ré. No subclass left
  behind: Fine-grained robustness in coarse-grained classification problems. Advances in Neural
  Information Processing Systems, 33:19339–19352, 2020.
Tom Tirer and Joan Bruna. Extended unconstrained features model for exploring deep neural collapse.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2202.08087, 2022.
Laurens Van der Maaten and Geoffrey Hinton. Visualizing data using t-sne. Journal of machine
  learning research, 9(11), 2008.
E Weinan and Stephan Wojtowytsch. On the emergence of simplex symmetry in the final and
  penultimate layers of neural network classifiers. In Mathematical and Scientific Machine Learning,
  pp. 270–290. PMLR, 2022.
Stephan Wojtowytsch et al. On the emergence of simplex symmetry in the final and penultimate
  layers of neural network classifiers. arXiv preprint arXiv:2012.05420, 2020.
Can Yaras, Peng Wang, Zhihui Zhu, Laura Balzano, and Qing Qu. Neural collapse with normalized
  features: A geometric analysis over the riemannian manifold. arXiv preprint arXiv:2209.09211,
  2022.


                                                10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Jinxin Zhou, Xiao Li, Tianyu Ding, Chong You, Qing Qu, and Zhihui Zhu. On the optimization
   landscape of neural collapse under mse loss: Global optimality with unconstrained features. arXiv
   preprint arXiv:2203.01238, 2022.
Zhihui Zhu, Tianyu Ding, Jinxin Zhou, Xiao Li, Chong You, Jeremias Sulam, and Qing Qu. A
  geometric analysis of neural collapse with unconstrained features. Advances in Neural Information
  Processing Systems, 34:29820–29834, 2021.


                                                11
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


A    (N EW ) E XPERIMENT ON C OARSE CIFAR-10 WITHOUT W EIGHT D ECAY
In order to study whether weight decay is crucial for the fine-grained structure, we perform an
additional experiment on Coarse CIFAR-10 when weight decay is 0. We present the final class
distance matrices (see Section 4.1) for three different learning rates 0.1, 0.01, and 0.001 in Figure 17.
Except when the learning rate is 0.001, the training error reaches 0. We see that the fine-grained
representation structure can still emerge without weight decay.


Figure 17: The heatmap of class distance matrix when weight decay is 0. From left to right: learning
rate = 0.1, 0.01, 0.001.


B    (N EW ) E XPERIMENT ON M IXTURE OF G AUSSIANS WITH C OARSE L ABELS
In this section, we reproduce the fine-grained representation structure in a simple synthetic setting,
i.e., classifying mixture of Gaussians using a 2-layer MLP, and perform some preliminary quantitative
studies in this setting. This allows us to preform controlled experiments by varying different
characteristics of the data distribution, architecture, and algorithmic components, and it can serve as
a starting point for future theoretical work.
Formally, we create a dataset from a mixture of Gaussians, where the input from the c-th cluster
is generated from N (µ(c) , I), and each cluster mean µ(c) is drawn i.i.d. from N (0, σ 2 I). The
class label of each datapoint is the index of the cluster it belongs to. The larger σ 2 is, the larger
the separation between each two clusters is, and the more likely it is to observe a fine-grained
representation structure when given coarse labels.
We perform the same coarsening process described in Section 3.2 (by combining two classes into one
super-class) and train a 2-layer MLP on the coarsely labeled dataset. We measure the significance of
the fine-grained structure using the ratio between {the average squared distance between representa-
tions in the same super-class but different sub-classes} and {the average squared distance between
representations in the same subclass}, which we call the Mean Squared Distance Ratio (MSDR).
Mathematically, it is defined as
                                        averagei̸=j in same super-class {Di,j }
                             MSDR =                                             ,
                                               averagei {Di,i }
where Di,j is defined in (6). A larger MSDR means that the fine-grained structure is more pronounced,
while MSDR ≈ 1 indicates no fine-grained structure.
By varying training and data-generating parameters, we investigate factors that impact the significance
of the fine-grained structure. Specifically, we vary the input dimension, hidden dimension in the
network, and weight decay rate, and plot how MSDR scales with σ 2 . The results are shown in
Figures 18 to 20. Note that in each figure we use two different scales in the x-axes to differentiate the
cases of σ 2 < 2 and σ 2 > 2.
From the figures, we observe that both input and hidden dimensions exhibit a clear positive correlation
with MSDR. On the other hand, the weight decay rate does not have an impact on MSDR in this
setting.

Training details. We generate data from 8 clusters, each having 500 samples. We train the model
with gradient descent for 1,000 steps. The results are averaged over 10 runs. When varying one


                                                    12
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Figure 18: Mean Squared Distance Ratio vs. variance σ 2 for different input dimensions. Red lines on
the left end are cases where the training accuracy does not reach 100%.


Figure 19: Mean Squared Distance Ratio vs. variance σ 2 for different hidden dimensions. Red lines
on the left end are cases where the training accuracy does not reach 100%.


Figure 20: Mean Squared Distance Ratio vs. variance σ 2 for different weight decay rates. Red lines
on the left end are cases where the training accuracy does not reach 100%.



                                                13
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


hyper-parameter, other hyper-parameters are set to their default values: dinput = 512, dhidden =
512, weight decay = 0.

B.1   M ODELING S EMANTIC S IMILARITY

In Section 5, we showed that the emergence of fine-grained representations depends on the semantic
similarity between sub-classes. Now we take a step in investigating this question by creating “similar”
and “dissimilar” sub-classes in the Gaussian mixture model considered in this section.
In particular, we use the same data-generating process described above, except that half of the
super-classes will be altered so that they consist of “similar” sub-classes, and we say that the other
super-classes consist of “dissimilar” sub-classes. The way to generate similar sub-classes it to first
                                                                  ′
sample µ ∼ N (0, σ 2 I) and then generate two means µ(c) , µ(c ) ∼ N (µ, τ 2 I). Therefore, we can
      2
vary τ to control the level of similarity between similar sub-classes.
We use default hyper-parameters described above, fix σ 2 = 4, and vary τ 2 . Figure 21 shows the Mean
Squared Distance Ratio for similar and dissimilar subclasses, respectively. We see that fine-grained
structure within a super-class does require sufficient dissimilarity between its sub-classes, which
agrees with our observation from Section 5 on CIFAR-100.


Figure 21: Mean Squared Distance Ratio vs. sub-variance τ 2 . The setting is described in Ap-
pendix B.1.


C     C OMPLETE C OARSE CIFAR-10 E XPERIMENT R ESULTS

In the following sections, we provide extended experiment results. As mentioned in Section 3.2, we
permute learning rate in {10−1 , 10−2 , 10−3 } and weight decay rate in {5×10−3 , 5×10−4 , 5×10−5 }.
Generally, the results will be shown in a 3 × 3 table, of which each grid represents the result of one
hyper-parameter combination, with each row has the same learning rate and each column has the
same weight decay rate.
In this section, we repeat the experiments in Section 4 with all learning rate and weight-decay rate
combinations. Firstly, we present the training statistics (accuracy, loss) of all hyper-parameters in
Figures 22 and 23 as an reference. It can be observed that all hyper-parameter groups achieved very
low training error except the first one (weight decay = 5 × 10−3 , learning rate = 10−1 ). In fact, the
last two hyper-parameter combinations (learning rate = 10−3 , weight decay ∈ {5 × 10−4 , 5 × 10−5 })
didn’t achieve exactly 0 training error (their training error are < 0.5% but not exactly 0), and the
other 6 hyper-parameter combinations all achieved exactly 0 training error.

C.1   C LASS D ISTANCE

Here we present the visualization of the heatmap of class distance matrix D which is defined in
Section 4.1. We choose 4 epochs to show the trend during training. The results are presented in
Figures 24 to 27, whose epoch numbers are 20, 120, 240 and 349 respectively.


                                                  14
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Figure 22: Training and test error during training. Figure 23: Training and test loss during training.


Figure 24: The heatmaps of class distance matri- Figure 25: The heatmaps of class distance matri-
ces of different hyper-parameter combinations at ces of different hyper-parameter combinations at
epoch 20.                                        epoch 120.


C.2   V ISUALIZATION

In this section, we present the t-SNE visualization result of ResNet-18 on Coarse CIFAR-10 in
Figures 28 to 30. The results are divided into three groups, each of which has the same learning rate
and the format of each group is the same as Figures 7 and 8.


C.3   C LUSTER - AND -L INEAR -P ROBE

The Cluster-and-Linear-Probe test results of ResNet-18 trained on Coarse CIFAR-10 with all hyper-
parameter combinations are presented in Figure 31.


                                                 15
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Figure 26: The heatmaps of class distance matri- Figure 27: The heatmaps of class distance matri-
ces of different hyper-parameter combinations at ces of different hyper-parameter combinations at
epoch 240.                                       epoch 349.


Figure 28: Visualization of last layer representations of ResNet-18 trained on Coarse CIFAR-10 with
learning rate = 0.1. Each row represents a hyper-parameter combination and each column represents
a super-class. The weight decay rates from top to bottom are 5 × 10−3 , 5 × 10−4 , 5 × 10−5 .


                                                16
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Figure 29: Visualization of last layer representations of ResNet-18 trained on Coarse CIFAR-10 with
learning rate = 0.01. Each row represents a hyper-parameter combination and each column represents
a super-class. The weight decay rates from top to bottom are 5 × 10−3 , 5 × 10−4 , 5 × 10−5 .


Figure 30: Visualization of last layer representations of ResNet-18 trained on Coarse CIFAR-10
with learning rate = 0.001. Each row represents a hyper-parameter combination and each column
represents a super-class. The weight decay rates from top to bottom are 5 × 10−3 , 5 × 10−4 , 5 × 10−5 .


                                                  17
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Figure 31: The result of Cluster-and-Linear-Probe
test. In the figure“CLP” refers to Cluster-and- Figure 32: The heatmaps of class distance matri-
Linear-Probe, “LPO” refers to linear probe with ces of different hyper-parameter combinations on
original labels and “OT’ refers to the test set ac- Fine CIFAR-10 at epoch 20.
curacy of model trained on original CIFAR-10.


Figure 33: The heatmaps of class distance matri- Figure 34: The heatmaps of class distance matri-
ces of different hyper-parameter combinations on ces of different hyper-parameter combinations on
Fine CIFAR-10 at epoch 200.                      Fine CIFAR-10 at epoch 350.



D    C OMPLETE C LASS D ISTANCE R ESULT OF F INE CIFAR-10

In this section, we provide the visualization of the class distance matrix of Fine CIFAR-10 with all
hyper-parameter combinations, which has been partially displayed in Section 6. As before, multiple
epochs during training are selected to display a evolutionary trend of the class distance matrices. The
results are presented in Figures 32 to 34, whose epoch numbers are 20, 200 and 350 respectively.


                                                  18
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Figure 35: The heatmaps of class distance matri- Figure 36: The heatmaps of class distance matri-
ces of different hyper-parameter combinations on ces of different hyper-parameter combinations on
Coarse CIFAR-100 at epoch 20.                    Coarse CIFAR-100 at epoch 200.


E     E XPERIMENT OF R ES N ET-18 ON C OARSE CIFAR-100

In this section, we report extended experiment results on Coarse CIFAR-100. The same with the case
of Coarse CIFAR-10, we construct CIFAR-100 through the label coarsening process described in
Section 3.2 and choose C̃ = 20, so that every 5 original classes are merged into one super-class. We
repeat most of experiments in Section 4.

E.1   C LASS D ISTANCE

The heatmaps of distance matrices are presented in Figures 35, 36 and 38, whose epoch number are
20, 200 and 350 respectively.

E.2   V ISUALIZATION

In this section, we present the t-SNE visualization result of ResNet-18 on Coarse CIFAR-100. We
only put the result for config #1 here as a demonstration in Figure 37.

E.3   C LUSTER - AND -L INEAR -P ROBE

Notice that we omit the visualization result of Coarse CIFAR-100 since there are too many fig-
ures. We present the Cluster-and-Linear-Probe results to reflect the clustering property of last-layer
representations learned on Coarse CIFAR-100. The CLP results are presented in Figure 39.


F     R ANDOM C OARSE CIFAR-10

In this section, as mentioned in Section 3.2, we make our experiment more complete by performing a
random combination of labels on CIFAR-10 rather than using a determined coarsening process as in
the main paper. The dataset construction is almost the same as the process of assigning coarse labels
described in Section 3.2, except here we randomly shuffle the class indices before coarsening them.
The class distance matrices of three difference epochs are shown in Figures 40 to 42. From the results
we can see, although there are no longer three dark lines, for each row there are generally two dark


                                                 19
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Figure 37: Visualization of last layer representations of ResNet-18 trained on Coarse CIFAR-100
under config #1. Each grid represents a super-class and each color in a grid represents a sub-class.


                                                 Figure 39: The result of Cluster-and-Linear-Probe
Figure 38: The heatmaps of class distance matri- test. In the figure“CLP” refers to Cluster-and-
ces of different hyper-parameter combinations on Linear-Probe, “LPO” refers to linear probe with
Coarse CIFAR-100 at epoch 350.                   original labels and “OT’ refers to the test set ac-
                                                 curacy of model trained on original CIFAR-10.



                                                20
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Figure 40: The heatmaps of class distance matri- Figure 41: The heatmaps of class distance matri-
ces of different hyper-parameter combinations on ces of different hyper-parameter combinations on
Random Coarse CIFAR-10 at epoch 20.              Random Coarse CIFAR-10 at epoch 200.


Figure 42: The heatmaps of class distance matri- Figure 43: The heatmaps of class distance ma-
ces of different hyper-parameter combinations on trices of different hyper-parameter combinations
Random Coarse CIFAR-10 at epoch 350.             with DenseNet-121 on Coarse CIFAR-10 at epoch
                                                 20.


blocks, represents the original classes belongs to the same super-class, and the same observations in
Section 4 can still be made here.


G    E XPERIMENT WITH D ENSE N ET

We also perform our experiments with different neural network structures for completeness. In
this section, we show the result with DenseNet-121 on Coarse CIFAR-10. The experiments with
DenseNet is supportive to our observations in the main paper.


                                                 21
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Figure 44: The heatmaps of class distance ma- Figure 45: The heatmaps of class distance ma-
trices of different hyper-parameter combinations trices of different hyper-parameter combinations
with DenseNet-121 on Coarse CIFAR-10 at epoch with DenseNet-121 on Coarse CIFAR-10 at epoch
20.                                              20.


G.1   C LASS D ISTANCE

The class distance matrices of three epochs during training are presented in Figures 43 to 45.

G.2   C LUSTER - AND -L INEAR -P ROBE

The Cluster-and-Linear-Probe test results are presented in Figure 46.

H     E XPERIMENT WITH VGG
We also extend our experiments to VGG-18. Interestingly, VGG to some extent is a counter example
of the observations made in the main paper: it only displays Neural Collapse, and can not distinguish
different original classes within one super-class, even in an early stage of training. The reason why
VGG is abnormal requires further exploration.
The class distance matrices of three epochs with VGG during training are shown in Figures 47 to 49.
It can be observed that the three dark lines appears almost at the same time and always be of nearly
the same darkness. This represents the trend predicted by Neural Collapse (Figure 4 (a)), but rejects
the prediction made by (Figure 4 (b)).


                                                 22
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Figure 46: The result of Cluster-and-Linear-Probe
test with DenseNet-121. In the figure“CLP” refers Figure 47: The heatmaps of class distance ma-
to Cluster-and-Linear-Probe, “LPO” refers to lin- trices of different hyper-parameter combinations
ear probe with original labels and “OT’ refers to with VGG-18 on Coarse CIFAR-10 at epoch 20.
the test set accuracy of model trained on original
CIFAR-10.


Figure 48: The heatmaps of class distance ma- Figure 49: The heatmaps of class distance ma-
trices of different hyper-parameter combinations trices of different hyper-parameter combinations
with VGG-18 on Coarse CIFAR-10 at epoch 200. with VGG-18 on Coarse CIFAR-10 at epoch 350.


                                               23
