Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


N EURAL D ESIGN FOR G ENETIC P ERTURBATION E XPER -
IMENTS

 Aldo Pacchiano                          Drausin Wulsin & Robert A. Barton & Luis Voloch
 Microsoft Research NYC                  Immunai
 apacchiano@microsoft.com                {drausin,robert.barton,luis}@immunai.com



                                            A BSTRACT

         The problem of how to genetically modify cells in order to maximize a certain
         cellular phenotype has taken center stage in drug development over the last few
         years (with, for example, genetically edited CAR-T, CAR-NK, and CAR-NKT
         cells entering cancer clinical trials). Exhausting the search space for all possible
         genetic edits (perturbations) or combinations thereof is infeasible due to cost and
         experimental limitations. This work provides a theoretically sound framework
         for iteratively exploring the space of perturbations in pooled batches in order
         to maximize a target phenotype under an experimental budget. Inspired by this
         application domain, we study the problem of batch query bandit optimization and
         introduce the Optimistic Arm Elimination (OAE) principle designed to find an
         almost optimal arm under different functional relationships between the queries
         (arms) and the outputs (rewards). We analyze the convergence properties of OAE
         by relating it to the Eluder dimension of the algorithm’s function class and validate
         that OAE outperforms other strategies in finding optimal actions in experiments on
         simulated problems, public datasets well-studied in bandit contexts, and in genetic
         perturbation datasets when the regression model is a deep neural network. OAE
         also outperforms the benchmark algorithms in 3 of 4 datasets in the GeneDisco
         experimental planning challenge.


1   I NTRODUCTION

We are inspired by the problem of finding the genetic perturbations that maximize a given function of
a cell (a particular biological pathway or mechanism, for example the proliferation or exhaustion of
particular immune cells) while performing the least number of perturbations required. In particular,
we are interested in prioritizing the set of genetic knockouts (via shRNA or CRISPR) to perform
on cells that would optimize a particular scalar cellular phenotype. Since the space of possible
perturbations is very large (with roughly 20K human protein-coding genes) and each knockout is
expensive, we would like to order the perturbations strategically so that we find one that optimizes
the particular phenotype of interest in fewer total perturbations than, say, just brute-force applying
all possible knockouts. In this work we consider only single-gene knockout perturbations since they
are the most common, but multi-gene perturbations are also possible (though considerably more
technically complex to perform at scale). While a multi-gene perturbation may be trivially represented
as a distinct (combined) perturbation in our framework, we leave for future work the more interesting
extension of embedding, predicting, and planning these multi-gene perturbations using previously
observed single-gene perturbations.
With this objective in mind we propose a simple method for improving a cellular phenotype under a
limited budget of genetic perturbation experiments. Although this work is inspired by this concrete
biological problem, our results and algorithms are applicable in much more generality to the setting
of experimental design with neural network models. We develop and evaluate a family of algorithms
for the zero noise batch query bandit problem based on the Optimistic Arm Elimination principle
(OAE). We focus on developing tractable versions of these algorithms compatible with neural
network function approximation.


                                                  1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


During each time-step OAE fits a reward model on the observed responses seen so far while at the
same time maximizing the reward on all the arms yet to be pulled. The algorithm then queries the
batch of arms whose predicted reward is maximal among the arms that have not been tried out.
We conduct a series of experiments on synthetic and public data from the UCI Dua & Graff (2017)
database and show that OAE is able to find the optimal “arm" using fewer batch queries than
other algorithms such as greedy and random sampling. Our experimental evaluation covers both
neurally realizable and not neurally realizable function landscapes. The performance of OAE against
benchmarks is comparable in both settings, demonstrating that although our presentation of the OAE
algorithm assumes realizability for the sake of clarity, it is an assumption that is not required in
practice. In the setting where the function class is realizable i.e. the function class F used by OAE
contains the function generating the rewards, and the evaluation is noiseless we show two query lower
bounds for the class of linear and 1−Lipshitz functions.
We validate OAE on the public CMAP dataset Subramanian et al. (2017), which contains tens
of thousands of genetic shRNA knockout perturbations, and show that it always outperforms a
baseline and almost always outperforms a simpler greedy algorithm in both convergence speed
to an optimal perturbation and the associated phenotypic rewards. These results illustrate how
perturbational embeddings learned from one biological context can still be quite useful in a different
biological context, even when the reward functions of these two contexts are different. Finally we
also benchmark our methods in the GeneDisco dataset and algorithm suite (see Mehrjou et al. (2021))
and show OAE to be competitive against benchmark algorithms in the task of maximizing HitRatios.

2   R ELATED W ORK
Bayesian Optimization The field of Bayesian optimization has long studied the problem of
optimizing functions severely limited by time or cost Jones et al. (1998). For example, Srinivas et al.
(2009) introduce the GP-UCB algorithm for optimizing unknown functions. Other approaches based
on adaptive basis function regression have also been used to model the payoff function as in Snoek
et al. (2015). These algorithms have been used in the drug discovery context. Mueller et al. (2017)
applied Bayesian optimization to the problem of optimizing biological phenotypes. Very recently,
GeneDisco was released as a benchmark suite for evaluating active learning algorithms for experiment
design in drug discovery Mehrjou et al. (2021). Perhaps the most relevant to our setting are the
many works that study the batch acquisition setting in Bayesian active learning and optimization
such as Kirsch et al. (2019); Kathuria et al. (2016) and the GP − BUCB algorithm of Desautels
et al. (2014). In this work we move beyond the typical parametric and Bayesian assumptions from
these works towards algorithms that work in conjunction with neural network models. We provide
guarantees for the no noise setting we study based on the Eluder dimension Russo & Van Roy (2013).

Parallel Bandits Despite its wide applicability in many scientific applications, batch learning has
been studied relatively seldom in the bandit literature. Despite this, recent work (Chan et al., 2021)
show that in the setting of contextual linear bandits (Abbasi-Yadkori et al., 2011), the finite sample
complexity of parallel learning matches that of sequential learning irrespective of the batch size
provided the number of batches is large enough. Unfortunately, this is rarely the regime that matters
in many practical applications such as drug development where the size of the experiment batch may
be large but each experiment may be very time consuming, thus limiting their number. In this work
we specifically address this setting in our experimental evaluation in Section E.

Structure Learning Prior work in experiment design tries to identify causal structures with a
fixed budget of experiments Ghassami et al. (2018). Scherrer et al Scherrer et al. (2021) proposes a
mechanism to select intervention targets to enable more efficient causal structure learning. Sussex
et al. (2021) extend the amount of information contained in each experiment by simultaneously
intervening on multiple variables. Causal matching, where an experimenter can perform a set of
interventions aimed to transform the system to a desired state, is studied in Zhang et al. (2021).

Neural Bandits Methods such as Neural UCB and Shallow Neural UCB Zhou et al. (2020); Xu
et al. (2020) are designed to add an optimistic bonus to model predictions of a nature that can be
analytically computed as is extremely reminiscent of the one used in linear bandits (Auer, 2002; Dani
et al., 2008), thus their theoretical validity depends on the ‘linearizing’ conditions to hold. More


                                                  2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


recently (Pacchiano et al., 2021b) have proposed the use of pseudo-label optimisim for the Bank Loan
problem where they propose an algorithm that adds optimism to neural network predictions through
the addition of fake data and is only analyzed in the classification setting. Our algorithms instead add
optimism to their predictions. The later is achieved via two methods, either by explicitly encouraging
it to fit a model whose predictions are large in unseen data, or by computing uncertainties.

Active Learning Active learning is relatively well studied problem Settles (2009); Dasgupta (2011);
Hanneke et al. (2014) particularly in the context of supervised learning. See for example Balcan
et al. (2009), Dasgupta et al. (2007), Settles (2009), Hanneke et al. (2014). There is a vast amount of
research on active learning for classification (see for example Agarwal (2013), Dekel et al. (2010)
and Cesa-Bianchi et al. (2009) where the objective is to learn a linearly parameterized response
model P(y|x). Broadly speaking there are two main sample construction approaches, diversity Sener
& Savarese (2017); Geifman & El-Yaniv (2017); Gissin & Shalev-Shwartz (2019) and uncertainty
sampling Tong & Koller (2001); Schohn & Cohn (2000); Balcan et al. (2009); Settles et al. (2007),
successful in the large Guo & Schuurmans (2007); Wang & Ye (2015); Chen & Krause (2013); Wei
et al. (2015); Kirsch et al. (2019) and small batch sizes regimes respectively. Diversity sampling
methods produce spread out samples to better cover the space while uncertainty-based methods
estimate model uncertainty to select what points to label. Hybrid approaches are common as well. A
common objective in the active learning literature is to collect enough samples to produce a model
that minimizes the population loss over the data distribution. This is in contrast with the objective
we study in this work, which is to find a point in the dataset with a large response. There is a rich
literature dedicated to the development of active learning algorithms for deep learning applications
both in the batch and single sample settings Settles et al. (2007); Ducoffe & Precioso (2018); Beluch
et al. (2018); Ash et al. (2021).

3       P ROBLEM D EFINITION
Let y⋆ : A → R be a response function over A ⊂ Rd . We assume access to a function class
F ⊂ Fun(A, R) where Fun(A, R) denotes the set of functions from A to R. Following the typical
online learning terminology we call A the set of arms. In this work we allow A to be infinite, although
we only consider finite A in practice.
In our setting the experiment designer (henceforth called the learner) interacts with y⋆ and A in a
sequential manner. During the t−th round of this interaction, aided by F and historical query and
response information the learner is required to query a batch of b ∈ N arms {at,i }bi=1 ⊂ A and
observe noiseless responses {yt,i = y⋆ (at,i )}bi=1 after which these response values are added to the
historical dataset Dt+1 = Dt ∪ {(at,i , yt,i )}bi=1 .
In this work we do not assume that y⋆ ∈ F. Instead we allow the learner access to a function
class F to aid her in producing informative queries. This is a common situation in the setting of
neural experiment design, where we may want to use a DNN model to fit the historical responses
and generate new query points without prior knowledge of whether it accurately captures y⋆ . Our
objective is to develop a procedure that can recover an ‘almost optimal’ arm a ∈ A in the least
number of arm pulls possible. We consider the following objective,

    τ −quantile optimality. Find an arm aτ ∈ A belonging to the top τ −quantile1 of {y⋆ (a)}a∈A .

Although ϵ−optimality (find an arm aϵ ∈ A such that y⋆ (aϵ ) + ϵ ≥ maxa∈A y⋆ (a) for ϵ ≥ 0) is the
most common criterion considered in the optimization literature, for it to be meaningful it requires
knowledge of the scale of maxa∈A y⋆ (a). In some scenarios this may be hard to know in advance.
Thus in our experiments we focus on the setting of τ −quantile optimality as a more relevant practical
performance measure. This type of objective has been considered by many works in the bandit
literature (see for example Szorenyi et al. (2015); Zhang & Ong (2021)). Moreover, it is a measure of
optimality better related to practical objectives used in experiment design evaluation, such as hit ratio
in the GeneDisco benchmark library Mehrjou et al. (2021). We show in Section E that our algorithms
are successful at producing almost optimal arms under this criterion after a small number of queries.
The main challenge we are required to overcome in this problem is designing a smart choice of batch
    1
        In the case of an infinite set A quantile optimality is defined with respect to a measure over A.


                                                           3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


queries {at,i }B
               i=1 that balances the competing objectives of exploring new regions of the arm space
and zooming into others that have shown promising rewards.
In this work we focus on the case where the observed response values y⋆ (a) of any arm a ∈ A are
noiseless. In the setting of neural perturbation experiments the responses are the average of many
expression values across a population of cells, and thus it is safe to assume the observed response is
almost noiseless. In contrast with the noisy setting, when the response is noiseless, querying the same
arm twice is never necessary. We leave the question on how to design algorithms for noisy responses
in the function approximation regime for future work. although note it can be reduced to our setting
if we set the exploitation round per data point sufficiently large.

Evaluation. After the queries ∪tℓ=1 {aℓ,i }bi=1 the learner will output a candidate approximate
optimal arm ât among all the arms whose labels she has queried (all arms in Dt+1 ) by considering
(ât , ŷt ) = arg max(a,y)∈Dt+1 y, the point with the maximal observed reward so far. Given a quantile
value τ we measure the performance of our algorithms by considering the first timestep tτfirst where a
τ −quantile optimal point ât was proposed.

4       O PTIMISTIC A RM E LIMINATION
With these objectives in mind, we introduce a family of algorithms based on the Optimistic Arm
Elimination Algorithm (OAE) principle. We call Ut to the subset of arms yet to be queried by our
algorithm. At time t any OAE algorithm produces a batch of query points of size b from2 Ut . Our
algorithms start round t by fitting an appropriate response predictor fet : Ut → R based on the
historical query points Dt and their observed responses so far. Instead of only fitting the historical
responses with a square loss and produce a prediction function fet , we encourage the predictions of fet
to be optimistic on the yet-to-be-queried points of Ut .
We propose two tractable ways of achieving this. First by fitting a model (or an ensemble of models)
feto to the data in Dt and explicitly computing a measure of uncertainty ũt : Ut → R of its predictions
on Ut . We define the optimistic response predictor fet (a) = feto (a) + ũt (a). Second, we achieve this
by defining fet to be the approximate solution of a constrained objective,
                                                         X                    2
                       fet ∈ arg max A(f, Ut )     s.t.         (f (a) − y) ≤ γt .                    (1)
                                   f ∈F
                                                            (a,y)∈Dt
where γt a possibly time-dependent parameter satisfying γt ≥ 0 and A(f, U) is an acquisition
objective tailored to produce an informative   Parm (or batch of arms) from UtP. We consider a couple
                                                                                                     p
of acquisition objectives Aavg (f, U) = |U1 | a∈U f (a), Ahinge (f, U) = |U1 | a∈U (max(0, f (a)))
                                                   P                                      P
for some p > 0 and Asoftmax (f, U) = log             a∈U exp(f (a)) and Asum (f, U) =       a∈U f (a).
An important acquisition functions of theoretical interest, although hard to optimizeP    in practice
are Amax (f, U) = maxa∈U f (a) and its batch version Amax,b (f, U) = maxB⊂U ,|B|=b a∈B f (a).
Regardless of whether fet was computed via Equation 1 or it is an uncertainty aware objective of the
form fet (a) = feto (a) + u
                          et (a), our algorithm then produces a query batch Bt by solving
                                       Bt ∈ arg max Aavg (fet , B).                                (2)
                                              B⊂Ut ,|B|=b

The principle of Optimism in the Face of Uncertainty (OFU) allows OAE algorithms to efficiently
explore new regions of the space by acting greedily with respect to a model that fits the rewards
of the arms in Dt as accurately as possible but induces large responses from the arms she has
not tried. If y⋆ ∈ F, and fet is computed by solving Equation 1, it can be shown the optimistic
                                                  P                P
model overestimates the true response values i.e.    a∈Bt ft (a) ≥    a∈B⋆,t y⋆ (a) where B⋆,t =
                                                          e
                    P
arg maxB⊂Ut ,|B|=b a∈B y⋆ (a). Consult Appendix D.2 for a proof and an explanation of the
relevance of this observation.
Acting greedily based on an optimistic model means the learner tries out the arms that may achieve
the highest reward according to the current model plausibility set. After pulling these arms, the
learner can successfully update the model plausibility set and repeat this procedure.
    2
        The batch equals Ut when |Ut | ≤ b.


                                                      4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Algorithm 1 Optimistic Arm Elimination Principle (OAE)
Input Action set A ⊂ Rd , num batches N , batch size b
Initialize Unpulled arms U1 = A. Observed points and labels dataset D1 = ∅
for t = 1, · · · , N do
    If t = 1 then:
    · Sample uniformly a size b batch Bt ∼ U1 .
    Else:
    · Solve for fet and compute Bt ∈ arg maxB⊂Ut ||B|=b A(fet , B).
    Observe batch rewards Yt = {y∗ (a) for a ∈ Bt }
    Update Dt+1 = Dt ∪ {(Bt , Yt )} and Ut+1 = Ut \Bt .


4.1     T RACTABLE I MPLEMENTATIONS OF OAE

In this section we go over the algorithmic details behind the approximations that we have used when
implementing the different OAE methods we have introduced in Section 4.

4.1.1     O PTIMISTIC R EGULARIZATION
In order to produce a tractable implementation of the constrained problem 1 we approximate it with
the optimism regularized objective,
                                    1    X
                    fet ∈ arg min              (f (a) − y)2 − λreg A(f, Ut ) .                 (3)
                            f ∈F   |Dt |                        |    {z    }
                                              (a,y)∈Dt               Optimism Regularizer

And define Bt following Equation 2. Problem 3 is compatible with DNN function approximation.
In our experiments we set the acquisition function to Aavg , Ahinge with p = 4 and Asoftmax . The
resulting methods are MeanOpt, HingePNorm and MaxOpt. Throughout this work RandomBatch
corresponds to uniform arm selection and Greedy to setting the optimism regularizer to 0.

4.1.2     E NSEMBLE M ETHODS
We consider two distinct methods (Ensemble and EnsembleNoiseY) to produce uncertainty estima-
tions based on ensemble predictions. In both we fit M models {fbti }M
                                                                    i=1 to Dt and define

                 maxi=1,··· ,M fbti (a) + mini=1,··· ,M fbti (a)
      feto (a) =                                                 ,   ũt (a) =     max fbti (a) − fto (a).
                                        2                                        i=1,··· ,M

So that fet = feto + ũt . We explore two distinct methods to produce M different models {fbti }M
                                                                                                i=1
fit to Dt that differ in the origin of the model noise. Ensemble produces M models resulting of
independent random initialization of their model parameters.
The EnsembleNoiseY method injects ‘label noise’ into the dataset responses. For all i ∈ {1, · · · , M }
we build a dataset Dti = {(a, y + ξ) for (a, y) ∈ Dt , ξ ∼ N (0, 1)} where ξ is an i.i.d. zero mean
Gaussian random sample. The functions {fbti }M i=1 are defined as,
                                                 X
                                fbti ∈ arg min          (f (a) − y)2 .
                                              f ∈F
                                                      (a,y)∈Dti

In this case the uncertainty of the ensemble predictions is the result of both the random parameter
initialization of the {fbti }M
                             i=1 and the ‘label noise’. This noise injection procedure draws its inspiration
from methods such as RLSVI and NARL Russo (2019) and Pacchiano et al. (2021a).

4.2     D IVERSITY SEEKING VERSIONS OF OAE

In the case b > 1, the explore / exploit trade-off is not the sole consideration in selecting the arms
that make up Bt . In this case, we should also be concerned about selecting sufficiently diverse
points within the batch Bt to maximize the information gathering ability of the batch. In Section 4.2
we show how to extend Algorithm 1 (henceforth referred to as vanilla OAE) to effectively induce


                                                         5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


query diversity. We introduce two versions OAE − DvD and OAE − Seq which we discuss in more
detail below. A detailed description of tractable implementations of these algorithms can be found in
Appendix C.

4.2.1    D IVERSITY VIA D ETERMINANTS
Inspired by diversity-seeking methods in the Determinantal Point Processes (DPPs) literature Kulesza
& Taskar (2012), we introduce the OAE − DvD algorithm. Inspired by the DvD algorithm Parker-
Holder et al. (2020) we propose to augment the vanilla OAE objective with a diversity regularizer.

                             Bt ∈ arg max Asum (fet , B) + Div(fet , B).                               (4)
                                    B⊆Ut ,|B|=b

OAE − DvD’s Div regularizer is inspired by the theory of Determinantal Point Processes and equals
a weighted log-determinant objective. OAE − DvD has access to a kernel function K : Rd ×Rd → R
and at the start of every time step t ∈ N it builds a kernel matrix Kt ∈ R|Ut |×|Ut | ,
                                  Kt [i, j] = K(ai , aj ),   ∀i, j ∈ Ut .
For any subset B ⊆ Ut we define the OAE − DvD diversity-aware score as,
                                Div(f, B) = λdiv log (Det(Kt [B, B]))                                  (5)
Where Kt [B, B] corresponds to the submatrix of Kt with columns (and rows) indexed by B and λdiv
is a diversity regularizer. Since the resulting optimization problem in Equation 6 may prove to be
extremely hard to solve, we design a greedy maximization algorithm to produce a surrogate solution.
The details can be found in Appendix B.1. OAE − DvD induces diversity leveraging the geometry
of the action space.

4.2.2    S EQUENTIAL BATCH SELECTION RULES
In this section we introduce OAE − Seq a generalization of the OAE algorithm designed to produce
in batch diversity. OAE − Seq produces a query batch by solving a sequence of b optimization
problems. The first element at,1 of batch Bt is chosen as the arm in Ut achieving the most optimistic
prediction over plausible models (following objective 1 and any of the tractable implementations
defined in Section C, either optimistic regularization or ensemble methods). To produce the second
point at,2 in the batch (provided b > 1) we temporarily add the pair (at,1 , ỹt,1 ) to the data buffer
Dt , where ỹt,1 is a virtual reward estimator for at,1 . Using this ’fake labels’ augmented data-set we
select at,2 following the same optimistic selection method used for at,1 . Although other choices are
possible in practice we set ỹt,1 as a mid-point between an optimistic and pessimistic prediction of
the value of y∗ (at,1 ). The name OAE − Seq derives from the ’sequential’ way in which the batch is
produced. If OAE − Seq selected arm a to be in the batch, and this arm has a non-optimistic virtual
reward ỹ(a) that is low relative to the optimistic values of other arms, then OAE − Seq will not select
too many arms close to a in the same batch. OAE − Seq induces diversity not through the geometry
of the arm space but in a way that is intimately related to the plausible arm values in the function class.
A similar technique of adding hallucinated values to induce diversity has been proposed before, for
example in the GP − BUCB algorithm of Desautels et al. (2014). Ours is the first time this general
idea has been tested in conjunction with scalable neural network function approximation algorithms.
A detailed discussion of this algorithm can be found in Section B.1.1.

4.3     T HE S TATISTICAL C OMPLEXITY OF Z ERO N OISE BATCH L EARNING

In this section we present our main theoretical results regarding OAE with function approximation.
In our results we use the Eluder dimension Russo & Van Roy (2013) to characterize the complexity of
the function class F. This is appropriate because our algorithms make use of the optimism principle
to produce their queries Bt . We show two novel results. First, we characterize the sample complexity
of zero noise parallel optimistic learning with Eluder classes with dimension d. Perhaps surprisingly
the regret of Vanilla OAE with batch size b has the same regret profile the case b = 1 up to a constant
burn in factor of order bd. Second, our results holds under model misspecification, that is when
y⋆ ̸∈ F at the cost of a linear dependence in the misspecification error. Although our results are for
the noiseless setting (the subject of this work), we have laid the most important part of the groundwork


                                                     6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


to extend them to the case of noisy evaluation. We explain why in Appendix D.2. We relegate the
formal definition of the Eluder to Appendix D.2.
In this section we measure the misspecification of y⋆ via the ∥ · ∥∞ norm. We assume y⋆ satisfies
minf ∈F ∥f − y⋆ ∥∞ ≤ ω where ∥f − y⋆ ∥∞ = maxa∈A |f (a) − y⋆ (a)|. Let ye⋆ = arg minf ∈F ∥y⋆ −
f ∥∞ be the ∥ · ∥∞ projection of y⋆ onto F. We analyze OAE where fet is computed by solving 1
with γt ≥ (t − 1)bω 2 with acquisition objective Amax,b . We will measure the performance of OAE
via its regret defined as,
                                                                        
                                          T
                                          X    X             X
                           RegF ,b (T ) =         y⋆ (a) −        y⋆ (a) .
                                          ℓ=1    a∈B⋆,t          a∈Bt
                                 P
Where B⋆,t = maxB⊂Ut ,|B|=b a∈B y⋆ (a). The main result in this section is,
Theorem 4.1. The regret of OAE with Amax,b acquisition function satisfies,
                                                      p
                 RegF ,b (T ) = O dimE (F, αT )b + ω dimE (F, αT )T b .

With αt = max t12 , inf{∥f1 − f2 ∥∞ : f1 , f2 ∈ F, f1 ̸= f2 } and C = maxf ∈F ,a,a′ ∈A |f (a) − f (a′ )|.



The proof of theorem 4.1 can be found in Appendix D.2. This result implies the regret is bounded
by a quantity that grows linearly with ω, the amount of misspecification but otherwise only with
the scale of dimE (F, αT )b. The misspecification part of the regret scales as the same rate as a
sequential algorithm running T b batches of size 1. When ω = 0, the regret is upper bounded by
O (dimE (F, αT )d). For example, in the case of linear models, the authors of Russo & Van Roy
(2013) show dimE (F, ϵ) = O (d log(1/ϵ)). This shows that for example sequential OAE when
b = 1 achieves the lower bound of Lemma D.1 up to logarithmic factors. In the setting of linear
models, the b dependence in the rate above is unimprovable by vanilla OAE without diversity aware
sample selection. This is because an optimistic algorithm may choose to use all samples in each batch
to explore a single unexplored one dimensional direction. Theoretical analysis for OAE − DvD
and OAE − Seq is left for future work. In Appendix D.1 we also show lower bounds for the query
complexity for linear and Lipshitz classes.

5    T RANSFER L EARNING ACROSS G ENETIC P ERTURBATION DATASETS
                                        In order to show the effectiveness of OAE in the large batch -
                                        small number of iterations regime we consider genetic perturba-
                                        tions from the CMAP dataset Subramanian et al. (2017), which
                                        contains a 978-gene bulk expression readout from thousands of
                                        single-gene shRNA knockout perturbations3 across a number
                                        of cell lines.
                                      We consider the setting in which we have observed the effect of
                                      knockouts in one biological context (i.e., cell line) and would
                                      like to use it to plan a series of knockout experiments in another.
Figure 1:         Regression mean
                                      Related applications may have different biological contexts,
squared error loss for models that
                                      from different cell types or experimental conditions. We use
predict cell-line specific phenotypic
                                      the level 5 CMAP observations, each of which contains of
rewards from VCAP-derived per-
                                      978-gene transcriptional readout from an shRNA knockout of
turbational features.
                                      a particular gene in a particular cell line. In our experiments,
we choose to optimize a cellular proliferation phenotype, defined as a function on the 978-gene
expression space. See Appendix F for details.
We use the 4 cells lines with the most number genetic perturbations in common: VCAP (prostate
cancer, n = 14602 ), HA1E (kidney epithelium, n = 10487), MCF7 (breast cancer, n = 6638), and
A375 (melanoma, n = 10033). We first learn a 100-dimensional action (perturbation) embedding
ai for each perturbation in VCAP with an autoencoder. The autoencoder has a 100-dimension
    3
      The shRNA perturbations are just a subset of the 1M+ total perturbations across different perturbation
classes.


                                                     7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


  Figure 3: Linear. τ -quantile batch convergence of MeanOpt on genetic perturbation datasets.

bottleneck layer and two intermediate layers of 1500 and 300 ReLU units with dropout and batch
normalization and is trained using the Adam optimizer on mean squared reconstruction loss. We use
these 100-dimensional perturbations embeddings as the features to train the fet functions for each of
the other cell types. According to our OAE algorithm, we train a fresh feed-forward neural network
with two intermediate layers (of 100 and 10 units) for after observing the phenotypic rewards for
each batch of 50 gene (knockout) perturbations. Figure 6 summarizes this approach.
Figure 1 shows the mean squared error
loss of models trained to predict the
cell-line specific phenotypic reward
from the 100-dimensional VCAP-
derived perturbational features. These
models are trained on successive
batches of perturbations sampled via
RandomBatch and using the same
NN 1500-300 hidden layer architec-
ture of the decoder. Not surprisingly,
the loss for the VCAP reward is one
of the lowest, but that of two other
cell lines (HA1E and MCF7) are also
quite similar, showing the NN 1500-
300 neural net function class is flex-
ible to learn the reward function in
one context from the perturbational
embedding in another.
In all of our experiments we con-
sider either a linear or a neural net-
work function class with ReLU acti-
vations. In all of them we consider
a batch size b = 50 and a number
of batches N = 20. Figure 2 shows
the convergence and reward results
for the 4 cell lines when the neu-
ral network architecture equals NN
100-10. Since the perturbation action
features were learned on the VCAP
dataset (though agnostic to any phe-
notypic reward), the optimal VCAP
perturbations are found quite quickly
                                        Figure 2: NN 100-10 τ -quantile batch convergence on ge-
by all versions of MeanOpt includ-
                                        netic perturbation datasets of MeanOpt (left) and Ensemble,
ing Greedy. Interestingly, MeanOpt
                                        EnsembleNoiseY (right).
still outperforms RandomBatch in
the HA1E and MCF7 cell lines but
not on A375. When the neural network architecture equals NN 10-5, MeanOpt is only competitive
with RandomBatch on the VCAP and MCF7 datasets (see figure 37 in Appendix G.4). Moreover,
when F is a class of linear functions, MeanOpt can beat RandomBatch only in VCAP. This can
be explained by looking at the regression fit plots of figure 4. The baseline loss value is the highest
for A375 even for NN 100-10, thus indicating this function class is too far from the true responses
values for A375. The loss curves for NN 10-5 lie well above those for NN 100-10 for all datasets thus
explaining the degradation in performance when switching from a NN 100-10 to a smaller capacity


                                                  8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


of NN 10-5. Finally, the linear fit achieves a very small loss for VCAP explaining why MeanOpt
still outperforms RandomBatch in VCAP with linear models. In all other datasets the linear fit is
subpar to the NN 100-10, explaining why MeanOpt in NN 100-10 works better than in linear ones.
We note that EnsembleOptimism is competitive with RandomBatch in both NN 10-5 and NN
100-10 architectures in 7 our of the 8 experiments we conducted. In Appendix G.4 the reader can find
results for MaxOpt and HingeOpt. Both methods underperform in comparison with MeanOpt. In
Appendix E.2.1 and E.2.2 the reader will find experiments using tractable versions of OAE − DvD
and OAE − Seq. In Appendix E and G, we present extensive additional experiments and discussion
of our findings over different network architectures (including linear), and over a variety of synthetic
and public datasets from the UCI database Dua & Graff (2017).


Figure 4: Training set regression fit curves evolution over training for the suite of gene perturbation
datasets. Each training batch contains 10 datapoints.


5.0.1      G ENE D ISCO E XPERIMENTAL P LANNING B ENCHMARK
We test a Bayesian OAE algorithm against the GeneDisco benchmark Mehrjou et al. (2021), which
assess the "Hit Rate" of different experimental planning algorithms over a number of pooled CRISPR
experiments. We assess our performance against the other acquisition functions provided in the
public implementation4 that select batches based solely on uncertainty considerations. We use the
public implementation of GeneDisco and do not change the neural network architecture provided
corresponding to a Bayesian Neural Network with a hidden layer of size 32. We use the 808
dimensional Achilles treatment descriptors and built fet by adding the BNN’s uncertainty to the model
base predictions. We test our algorithm in the Schmidt et al. 2021 (IFNg), Schmidt et al. 2021 (IL2),
Zhuang et al. 2019 (NK), and Zhu et al. 2021 (SarsCov2) datasets and tested for performance using
the Hit Ratio metric after collecting 50 batches of size 16. This is defined as the ratio of arm pulls
lying in the top .05 quantile of genes with the largest absolute value. Our results are in Table 5. OAE
outperforms the other algorithms by a substantial margin in 3 out of the 4 datasets that we tested.

                      Dataset             TopUncertain     SoftUncertain     OAE-Bayesian
            Schmidt et al. 2021 (IFNg)       0.057             0.046            0.062
             Schmidt et al. 2021 (IL2)       0.083             0.081            0.107
             Zhuang et al. 2019 (NK)         0.035             0.047            0.085
            Zhu et al. 2021 (SarsCov2)       0.035             0.049           0.0411

Figure 5: Hit Ratio Results after 50 batches of size 16. BNN model trained with Achilles treatment
descriptors. Final Hit Ratio average of 5 independent runs. TopUncertain selects the 16 points with
the largest uncertainty values and SoftUncertain samples them using a softmax distribution.


6       C ONCLUSION
In this work we introduce a variety of algorithms inspired in the OAE principle for noiseless batch
bandit optimization. We also show lower bounds for the query complexity for linear and Lipshitz
classes as well as a novel regret upper bound in terms of the Eluder dimension of the query class.
Our theoretical results hold under misspecification. Through a variety of experiments in synthetic,
public and biological data we show that the different incarnations of OAE we propose in this work
can quickly search through a space of actions for the almost optimal ones. This work focused in the
case where the responses are noiseless. Extending our methods and experimental evaluation to the
case where the responses are noisy is an exciting avenue for future work.
    4
        https://github.com/genedisco/genedisco-starter


                                                   9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


R EFERENCES
Yasin Abbasi-Yadkori, Dávid Pál, and Csaba Szepesvári. Improved algorithms for linear stochastic
  bandits. Advances in neural information processing systems, 24:2312–2320, 2011.
Alekh Agarwal. Selective sampling algorithms for cost-sensitive multiclass prediction. In Interna-
  tional Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 1220–1228. PMLR, 2013.
Jordan Ash, Surbhi Goel, Akshay Krishnamurthy, and Sham Kakade. Gone fishing: Neural active
  learning with fisher embeddings. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 34:8927–
  8939, 2021.
P. Auer. Using confidence bounds for exploitation-exploration trade-offs. Journal of Machine
   Learning Research, 3(Nov):397–422, 2002.
Maria-Florina Balcan, Alina Beygelzimer, and John Langford. Agnostic active learning. Journal of
 Computer and System Sciences, 75(1):78–89, 2009.
William H Beluch, Tim Genewein, Andreas Nürnberger, and Jan M Köhler. The power of ensembles
 for active learning in image classification. In Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer
 vision and pattern recognition, pp. 9368–9377, 2018.
Erdem Bıyık, Kenneth Wang, Nima Anari, and Dorsa Sadigh. Batch active learning using determi-
  nantal point processes. arXiv preprint arXiv:1906.07975, 2019.
Nicolo Cesa-Bianchi, Claudio Gentile, and Francesco Orabona. Robust bounds for classification
  via selective sampling. In Proceedings of the 26th annual international conference on machine
  learning, pp. 121–128, 2009.
Jeffrey Chan, Aldo Pacchiano, Nilesh Tripuraneni, Yun S Song, Peter Bartlett, and Michael I Jordan.
   Parallelizing contextual linear bandits. arXiv preprint arXiv:2105.10590, 2021.
Yuxin Chen and Andreas Krause. Near-optimal batch mode active learning and adaptive submodular
  optimization. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 160–168. PMLR, 2013.
V. Dani, T. P. Hayes, and S. M. Kakade. Stochastic linear optimization under bandit feedback. In
  COLT, pp. 355–366. Omnipress, 2008.
Sanjoy Dasgupta. Two faces of active learning. Theoretical computer science, 412(19):1767–1781,
  2011.
Sanjoy Dasgupta, Daniel J Hsu, and Claire Monteleoni. A general agnostic active learning algorithm.
  Advances in neural information processing systems, 20, 2007.
Ofer Dekel, Claudio Gentile, and Karthik Sridharan. Robust selective sampling from single and
  multiple teachers. In COLT, pp. 346–358, 2010.
Thomas Desautels, Andreas Krause, and Joel W. Burdick. Parallelizing exploration-exploitation
  tradeoffs in gaussian process bandit optimization. Journal of Machine Learning Research, 15(119):
  4053–4103, 2014. URL http://jmlr.org/papers/v15/desautels14a.html.
Dheeru Dua and Casey Graff. UCI machine learning repository, 2017. URL http://archive.
  ics.uci.edu/ml.
Melanie Ducoffe and Frederic Precioso. Adversarial active learning for deep networks: a margin
 based approach. arXiv preprint arXiv:1802.09841, 2018.
Yonatan Geifman and Ran El-Yaniv. Deep active learning over the long tail. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:1711.00941, 2017.
AmirEmad Ghassami, Saber Salehkaleybar, Negar Kiyavash, and Elias Bareinboim. Budgeted
 experiment design for causal structure learning. In International Conference on Machine Learning,
 pp. 1724–1733. PMLR, 2018.


                                               10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Daniel Gissin and Shai Shalev-Shwartz.         Discriminative active learning.     arXiv preprint
  arXiv:1907.06347, 2019.
Yuhong Guo and Dale Schuurmans. Discriminative batch mode active learning. Advances in neural
  information processing systems, 20, 2007.
Insu Han, Prabhanjan Kambadur, Kyoungsoo Park, and Jinwoo Shin. Faster greedy map inference for
  determinantal point processes. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 1384–1393.
  PMLR, 2017.
Ruth E Hanna and John G Doench. Design and analysis of CRISPR-Cas experiments. Nat. Biotechnol.,
  38(7):813–823, July 2020.
Steve Hanneke et al. Theory of disagreement-based active learning. Foundations and Trends® in
  Machine Learning, 7(2-3):131–309, 2014.
Donald R Jones, Matthias Schonlau, and William J Welch. Efficient global optimization of expensive
  black-box functions. Journal of Global optimization, 13(4):455–492, 1998.
Tarun Kathuria, Amit Deshpande, and Pushmeet Kohli. Batched gaussian process bandit optimization
  via determinantal point processes. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 29:
  4206–4214, 2016.
Andreas Kirsch, Joost Van Amersfoort, and Yarin Gal. Batchbald: Efficient and diverse batch
  acquisition for deep bayesian active learning. Advances in neural information processing systems,
  32:7026–7037, 2019.
Alex Kulesza and Ben Taskar. Determinantal point processes for machine learning. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:1207.6083, 2012.
Arash Mehrjou, Ashkan Soleymani, Andrew Jesson, Pascal Notin, Yarin Gal, Stefan Bauer, and
  Patrick Schwab. Genedisco: A benchmark for experimental design in drug discovery. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2110.11875, 2021.
Sérgio Moro, Paulo Cortez, and Paulo Rita. A data-driven approach to predict the success of bank
  telemarketing. Decision Support Systems, 62:22–31, 2014.
Jonas Mueller, David Reshef, George Du, and Tommi Jaakkola. Learning optimal interventions. In
  Artificial Intelligence and Statistics, pp. 1039–1047. PMLR, 2017.
George L Nemhauser, Laurence A Wolsey, and Marshall L Fisher. An analysis of approximations for
  maximizing submodular set functions—i. Mathematical programming, 14(1):265–294, 1978.
Aldo Pacchiano, Philip Ball, Jack Parker-Holder, Krzysztof Choromanski, and Stephen Roberts.
  Towards tractable optimism in model-based reinforcement learning. In Uncertainty in Artificial
  Intelligence, pp. 1413–1423. PMLR, 2021a.
Aldo Pacchiano, Shaun Singh, Edward Chou, Alex Berg, and Jakob Foerster. Neural pseudo-label
  optimism for the bank loan problem. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 34,
  2021b.
Jack Parker-Holder, Aldo Pacchiano, Krzysztof M Choromanski, and Stephen J Roberts. Effective
  diversity in population based reinforcement learning. Advances in Neural Information Processing
  Systems, 33:18050–18062, 2020.
Daniel Russo. Worst-case regret bounds for exploration via randomized value functions. Advances in
  Neural Information Processing Systems, 32, 2019.
Daniel Russo and Benjamin Van Roy. Eluder dimension and the sample complexity of optimistic
  exploration. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 26, 2013.
Nino Scherrer, Olexa Bilaniuk, Yashas Annadani, Anirudh Goyal, Patrick Schwab, Bernhard
  Schölkopf, Michael C Mozer, Yoshua Bengio, Stefan Bauer, and Nan Rosemary Ke. Learn-
  ing neural causal models with active interventions. arXiv preprint arXiv:2109.02429, 2021.


                                                11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Greg Schohn and David Cohn. Less is more: Active learning with support vector machines. In ICML,
  volume 2, pp. 6. Citeseer, 2000.
Ozan Sener and Silvio Savarese. Active learning for convolutional neural networks: A core-set
  approach. arXiv preprint arXiv:1708.00489, 2017.
Burr Settles. 2009.
Burr Settles, Mark Craven, and Soumya Ray. Multiple-instance active learning. Advances in neural
  information processing systems, 20, 2007.
Jasper Snoek, Oren Rippel, Kevin Swersky, Ryan Kiros, Nadathur Satish, Narayanan Sundaram,
  Mostofa Patwary, Mr Prabhat, and Ryan Adams. Scalable bayesian optimization using deep neural
  networks. In International conference on machine learning, pp. 2171–2180. PMLR, 2015.
Niranjan Srinivas, Andreas Krause, Sham M Kakade, and Matthias Seeger. Gaussian process opti-
  mization in the bandit setting: No regret and experimental design. arXiv preprint arXiv:0912.3995,
  2009.
Aravind Subramanian, Rajiv Narayan, Steven M Corsello, David D Peck, Ted E Natoli, Xiaodong Lu,
  Joshua Gould, John F Davis, Andrew A Tubelli, Jacob K Asiedu, David L Lahr, Jodi E Hirschman,
  Zihan Liu, Melanie Donahue, Bina Julian, Mariya Khan, David Wadden, Ian C Smith, Daniel Lam,
  Arthur Liberzon, Courtney Toder, Mukta Bagul, Marek Orzechowski, Oana M Enache, Federica
  Piccioni, Sarah A Johnson, Nicholas J Lyons, Alice H Berger, Alykhan F Shamji, Angela N
  Brooks, Anita Vrcic, Corey Flynn, Jacqueline Rosains, David Y Takeda, Roger Hu, Desiree
  Davison, Justin Lamb, Kristin Ardlie, Larson Hogstrom, Peyton Greenside, Nathanael S Gray,
  Paul A Clemons, Serena Silver, Xiaoyun Wu, Wen-Ning Zhao, Willis Read-Button, Xiaohua Wu,
  Stephen J Haggarty, Lucienne V Ronco, Jesse S Boehm, Stuart L Schreiber, John G Doench,
  Joshua A Bittker, David E Root, Bang Wong, and Todd R Golub. A next generation connectivity
  map: L1000 platform and the first 1,000,000 profiles. Cell, 171(6):1437–1452.e17, November
  2017.
Scott Sussex, Andreas Krause, and Caroline Uhler. Near-optimal multi-perturbation experimental
  design for causal structure learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2105.14024, 2021.
Balazs Szorenyi, Róbert Busa-Fekete, Paul Weng, and Eyke Hüllermeier. Qualitative multi-armed
  bandits: A quantile-based approach. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp.
  1660–1668. PMLR, 2015.
Simon Tong and Daphne Koller. Support vector machine active learning with applications to text
  classification. Journal of machine learning research, 2(Nov):45–66, 2001.
Martin J Wainwright. High-dimensional statistics: A non-asymptotic viewpoint, volume 48. Cam-
 bridge University Press, 2019.
Zheng Wang and Jieping Ye. Querying discriminative and representative samples for batch mode
  active learning. ACM Transactions on Knowledge Discovery from Data (TKDD), 9(3):1–23, 2015.
Kai Wei, Rishabh Iyer, and Jeff Bilmes. Submodularity in data subset selection and active learning.
  In International conference on machine learning, pp. 1954–1963. PMLR, 2015.
Pan Xu, Zheng Wen, Handong Zhao, and Quanquan Gu. Neural contextual bandits with deep
  representation and shallow exploration. arXiv preprint arXiv:2012.01780, 2020.
Mengyan Zhang and Cheng Soon Ong. Quantile bandits for best arms identification. In International
 Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 12513–12523. PMLR, 2021.
Vicky Zhang, Chandler Squires, and Caroline Uhler. Matching a desired causal state via shift
  interventions. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 34, 2021.
Dongruo Zhou, Lihong Li, and Quanquan Gu. Neural contextual bandits with ucb-based exploration,
  2020.



                                                12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


C ONTENTS

1   Introduction                                                                                       1

2   Related Work                                                                                       2

3   Problem Definition                                                                                 3

4   Optimistic Arm Elimination                                                                         4
    4.1   Tractable Implementations of OAE . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .         5
          4.1.1    Optimistic Regularization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .       5
          4.1.2    Ensemble Methods . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .        5
    4.2   Diversity seeking versions of OAE . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .        5
          4.2.1    Diversity via Determinants . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .      6
          4.2.2    Sequential batch selection rules . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .      6
    4.3   The Statistical Complexity of Zero Noise Batch Learning . . . . . . . . . . . . . .          6

5 Transfer Learning Across Genetic Perturbation Datasets                                               7
          5.0.1    GeneDisco Experimental Planning Benchmark . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .             9

6   Conclusion                                                                                         9

A Transfer Learning Across Genetic Perturbation Datasets                                              14

B Complementary description of the methods                                                            15
    B.1 Appendix Diversity via Determinants         . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   15
          B.1.1    Sequential batch selection rules . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     16

C Tractable Implementations of OAE − DvD and OAE − Seq                                                17
          C.0.1    Diversity via Determinants . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     17
          C.0.2    Sequential Batch Selection Rules . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .       17

D Theoretical Results                                                                                 18
    D.1 Quantifying the Query Complexity of F . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .           18
    D.2 Optimism and its properties       . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   21
    D.3 Noisy responses . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .       25

E Experiments                                                                                         25
    E.1 Vanilla OAE . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .         26
          E.1.1    Synthetic One Dimensional Datasets . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .       26
          E.1.2    Public Supervised Learning Datasets . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .      29
    E.2 Experiments Diversity Seeking Objectives . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .          30
          E.2.1    OAE − DvD . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .        31


                                                  13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


          E.2.2   OAE − Seq . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .        32


F Cellular proliferation phenotype                                                                     34


G Further Experiments                                                                                  35
    G.1 Synthetic Datasets . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .       35
    G.2 Regression Fitted Datasets . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .         37
    G.3 UCI public datasets . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .        37
    G.4 Transfer Learning Biological Datasets . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .          38



A    T RANSFER L EARNING ACROSS G ENETIC P ERTURBATION DATASETS

In this section we have placed a diagrammatic version of the data pipeline described in section 5.


Figure 6: Neural design for genetic perturbation experiments. (a) Learn a perturbation action
embedding space by training an autoencoder on the gene expression resulting from a large set of
observed genetic perturbations in a particular biological context (e.g., shRNA gene knockouts for a
particular cell line in CMAP). (b) Select an initial batch of B perturbation actions to perform in parallel
within a related (but different) biological context. Selection can be random (uniform) or influenced
by prior information about the relationship between genes and the phenotype to be optimized. (c)
Perform the current batch of experimental perturbations in vitro and observed their corresponding
phenotypic rewards. (d) Concatenate the latest batch’s features and observed rewards to those of
previous batches to update the perturbation reward training set. (e) Train a new perturbation reward
regression (with some degree of pre-defined optimism) network on the observed perturbation rewards.
(f) Use this regressor to predict the optimistic rewards for the currently unobserved perturbations. (g)
Select the next batch from these unobserved perturbations with the highest optimistic reward.


                                                   14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


B     C OMPLEMENTARY DESCRIPTION OF THE METHODS
B.1   A PPENDIX D IVERSITY VIA D ETERMINANTS

Inspired by diversity-seeking methods in the Determinantal Point Processes (DPPs) literature Kulesza
& Taskar (2012), we introduce the OAE − DvD algorithm. Inspired by the DvD algorithm ?? we
propose the use
DPPs can be used to produces diverse subsets by sampling proportionally to the determinant of the
kernel matrix of points within the subset. From a geometric perspective, the determinant of the kernel
matrix represents the volume of a parallelepiped spanned by feature maps corresponding to the kernel
choice. We seek to maximize this volume, effectively “filling” the feature space. Using a determinant
score to induce diversity has been proposed as a strategy in other domains, most notably in the form
of the Diversity via Determinants (DvD) algorithm from Parker-Holder et al. (2020) for Population
Based Reinforcement Learning. It is from this work that we take inspiration to name our algorithm
OAE − DvD. The idea of using DPPs for diversity guided active learning has been explored by Bıyık
et al. (2019). In the active learning setting the objective function used to build the batch is purely
driven by the diversity objective. The method works as follows. At time t, OAE − DvD constructs
a regression estimator fet using the arms and responses in Dt (for example by solving problem 1).
Instead of using Equation 2, our algorithm selects batch Bt by optimizing a diversity aware objective
of the form,
                              Bt ∈ arg max Asum (fet , B) + Div(fet , B).                          (6)
                                      B⊆Ut ,|B|=b
OAE − DvD’s Div regularizer is inspired by the theory of Determinantal Point Processes and equals
a weighted log-determinant objective. OAE − DvD has access to a kernel function K : Rd ×Rd → R
and at the start of every time step t ∈ N it builds a kernel matrix Kt ∈ R|Ut |×|Ut | ,
                                  Kt [i, j] = K(ai , aj ), ∀i, j ∈ Ut .
For any subset B ⊆ Ut we define the OAE − DvD diversity-aware score as,
                                Div(f, B) = λdiv log (Det(Kt [B, B]))                                 (7)
Where Kt [B, B] corresponds to the submatrix of Kt with columns (and rows) indexed by B and λdiv
is a diversity regularizer. Since the resulting optimization problem in Equation 6 may prove to be
extremely hard to solve, we design a greedy maximization algorithm to produce a surrogate solution.
We build the batch Bt greedily. The first point at,1 in the batch is selected to be the point in Ut that
maximizes the response fet . For all i ≥ 2 the point at,i in Ut is selected from Ut \{at,j }i−1
                                                                                            j=1 such that,

            at,i =      max       Asum (fet , {a} ∪ {at,j }i−1 ) + Div(fet , {a} ∪ {at,j }i−1 )
                                                            j=1                                j=1
                   a∈Ut \{at,j }i−1
                                j=1


Algorithm 2 Optimistic Arm Elimination - DvD (OAE − DvD)
Input Action set A ⊂ Rd , num batches N , batch size b, λdiv
Initialize Unpulled arms U1 = A. Observed points and labels dataset D1 = ∅
for t = 1, · · · , N do
    if t = 1 then
         Sample uniformly a size b batch Bt ∼ U1 .

    else
        Compute Bt using the greedy procedure described above.

    Observe batch rewards Yt = {y∗ (a) for a ∈ Bt }
    Update Dt+1 = Dt ∪ {(Bt , Yt )}.
    Update Ut+1 = Ut \Bt .


                                                                        r          e
                                                                                   ft (i)+fet (j)
We define a reward augmented kernel matrix Kaug
                                            t (i, j) = Kt (i, j)            exp         λdet    . This matrix
                                q                                                  q
satisfies Kaug
           t [B, B] = diag            exp(fet /λdet ) [B, B] · Kt [B, B] · diag        exp(ft /λdet ) [B, B]
                                                                                           e


                                                     15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


for all B ⊆ Ut . Since the determinant of  a product of matrices
                                                              is the product of their determinants
                       aug                P
it follows that Det(Kt [B, B]) = exp         a∈B ft (a)/λdet · Det (Kt [B, B]). Thus for all B ⊆ Ut ,
                                                  e
equation 6 with diversity score 7 can be rewritten as
                                Bt ∈ arg max log (Det(Kaug
                                                       t [B, B]))
                                       B⊆Ut ,|B|=b

                                                P
                                                      fe (a)
This is because log (Det(Kaug
                            t [B, B])) =
                                               a∈B t
                                                λdiv     + log (Det(Kt [B, B])) for all B ⊂ Ut . It is
well known the log-determinant set function for a positive semidefinite matrix is submodular (see
for example section 2.2 of Han et al. (2017)). It has long been established that the greedy algorithm
achieves an approximation ratio of (1 − 1e ) for the constrained submodular optimization problem
(see Nemhauser et al. (1978)). This justifies the choices we have made behind the greedy algorithm
we use to select Bt .

B.1.1    S EQUENTIAL BATCH SELECTION RULES

In this section we introduce OAE − Seq a generalization of the OAE algorithm designed to produce
in batch diversity. OAE − Seq produces a query batch by solving a sequence of b optimization
problems. OAE − Seq uses first D        et,0 = Dt the set of arms pulled so far as well as Uet,0 = Ut
(the set of arms yet to be pulled) to produce a function fet,1 that determines the initial arm in the
batch via the greedy choice at,1 = arg maxa∈Ut fet,1 (a). The function fet,1 is computed using the
same method as any vanilla OAE procedure. Having chosen this arm, in the case when b > 1, a
virtual reward yet,1 (possibly different from fet (at,1 )) is assigned to the query arm at,1 , and datasets
Det,1 = Dt ∪ {(at,1 , yet,1 )} and Uet,1 = Ut \{at,1 } are defined. The same optimization procedure that
produced fet,1 is used to output fet,2 now with D    et,1 and Uet,1 as inputs. Arm at,2 is defined as the
greedy choice at,2 = arg maxa∈Uet,1 fet,2 (a). The remaining batch elements (if any) are determined
by successive repetition of this process so that De t,i = Dt ∪{(at,j , yet,j )}i and Uet,i = Ut \{at,j }i .
                                                                               j=1                      j=1
The trace of this procedure leaves behind a sequence of functions and datasets {(fet,i , Uet,i )}bi=1 such
that at,i ∈ arg max eUt,i−1  fet,i (a).

Algorithm 3 Optimistic Arm Elimination - Batch Sequential (OAE − Seq)
Input Action set A ⊂ Rd , number of batches N , batch size b, pessimism-optimism balancing
parameter α.
Initialize Unpulled arms U1 = A. Observed points and labels dataset D1 = ∅
for t = 1, · · · , N do
    if t = 1 then
         Sample uniformly a size b batch Bt ∼ U1 .

    else
        Solve for {(fet,i , Uet,i )}bi=1 via the procedure described in the text.
        Compute
                                           Bt = {at,i ∈ arg max fet,i (a)}bi=1 .                       (8)
                                                       a∈U
                                                         et,i−1



    Observe batch rewards Yt = {f∗ (a) for a ∈ Bt }
    Update Dt+1 = Dt ∪ {(Bt , Yt )} ∈ D.
    Update Ut+1 = Ut \Bt .



To determine the value of the virtual rewards yet,i , we consider a variety of options. We start
by discussing the case when the fake reward yet,i = fet (at,i ) and the acquisition function equals
Asum (f, U).


                                                     16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


When γt = 0, the fake reward satisfies yet,i = fet (at,i ) and y⋆ ∈ F it follows that fet,i = fet
independent of i ∈ [B] is a valid choice for the function ensemble {fet,i }bi=1 . In this case the query
batch Bt can be computed by solving for fet ,
                                   X                    X                   2
                   fet ∈ arg max       f (a)      s.t.        (f (a) − y) = 0.                       (9)
                                 f ∈F
                                         a∈Ut                (a,y)∈D
                                                                   et,i


And defining the batch Bt as
                                                                 X
                                         Bt =     arg max             fet (a).
                                                B⊆Ut s.t. |B|=b a∈B

The equivalence between this definition of Bt and the sequential batch selection rule follows by noting
the equality constraint from 9 ensures that fet,i = fet is a valid solution for each of the intermediate
                                         et,i )}B .
problems defining the sequence {(fet,i , U      i=1

OAE − Seq is designed with a more general batch selection rule that may yield distinct intermediate
arm selection functions {fet,i }. In our experiments we compute the virtual reward yet,i as an average
     optimistic       pessimistic
of fet,i        and fet,i         , optimistic and a pessimistic estimators of the responses in Ut,i−1 .
                                                 optimistic        pessimistic
We consider two mechanisms for computing fet,i              and fet,i          . First when the computation
of ft,i is based on producing an uncertainty function ũt,i and a base model feo , we define feoptimistic =
   e
                                                                                    t,i              t,i
  o                pessimistic     o                                 optimistic       pessimistic
fet,i + ut,i and fet,i         = fet,i − ũt,i . Second, we define fet,i        and fet,i         as the solutions
of the constrained objectives
             optimistic                                            pessimistic
           fet,i        = arg max A(f, Ut )            and       fet,i         = arg min A(f, Ut )
                               f ∈Ft,i                                               f ∈Ft,i

                               P                             2
Where Ft,i = {f ∈ F s.t.          (a,y)∈Dt,i−1 (f (a) − y)
                                                       ≤ γt }. In both cases we define the fictitious
rewards as a weighted average of the pessimistic and optimistic predictors yet,i = αfeoptimistic + (1 −
                                                                                               t,i
    pessimistic
α)fet,i         where α ∈ [0, 1] is an optimism weighting parameter while we keep the functions used
                                                         optimistic
to define what points are part of the batch as fet,i = fet,i        . The principle of adding hallucinated
values to induce diversity has been proposed before for example in the GP − BUCB algorithm
of Desautels et al. (2014).


C     T RACTABLE I MPLEMENTATIONS OF OAE − DvD AND OAE − Seq

In this section we go over the algorithmic details behind the approximations that we have used when
implementing the different OAE methods we have introduced in Section 4.

C.0.1    D IVERSITY VIA D ETERMINANTS

The OAE − DvD algorithm differs from OAE only in the way in which the query batch Bt is
computed. OAE − DvD uses equation 6 instead of equation 2. Solving for Bt is done via the
greedy algorithm described in Section 4.2.1. The function fet can be computed via a regularized
optimization objective or using an ensemble. In our experimental evaluation we opt for defining fet
via the regularization route as the result of solving problem 3. More experimental details including
the type of kernel used are explained in Section E.2. In our experimental evaluation we use the
MeanOpt objective to produce fet and we refer to the resulting method as DetD.

C.0.2    S EQUENTIAL BATCH S ELECTION RULES

We explore different ways of defining the functions {fet,i }bi=1 . Depending on what procedure we
use to optimize and produce these functions we will obtain different versions of OAE − Seq. We
                                                                                 optimistic b
use the name SeqB to denote the OAE − Seq method that fits the functions {fet,i            }i=1 and


                                                        17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


   pessimistic b
{fet,i        }i=1 by solving the regularized objectives,

                   optimistic                  1            X
                 fet,i        ∈ arg min                               (f (a) − y)2 −λreg A(f, Ut,i−1 ),
                                   f ∈F    |Dt,i−1 |
                                                       (a,y)∈Dt,i−1

                  pessimistic                  1            X
                fet,i         ∈ arg min                               (f (a) − y)2 +λreg A(f, Ut,i−1 ).
                                   f ∈F    |Dt,i−1 |
                                                       (a,y)∈Dt,i−1

In our experiments we set the acquisition function to Aavg . For some value5 of λreg > 0.
                                                      optimistic
The functions {fet,i }bi=1 are defined as fet,i = fet,i          and the virtual rewards as yet,i =
   optimistic             pessimistic
αfe
    t,i       + (1 − α)f e
                             t,i      where α ∈ [0, 1] is an optimism-pessimism weighting param-
eter. In our experimental evaluation we use α = 21 . More experimental details are presented in
Section E.2.
                 optimistic b          pessimistic b
The functions {fet,i       }i=1 and {fet,i        }i=1 can be defined with the use of an ensemble.
Borrowing the definitions of Section 4.1.2
                              optimistic     o                     pessimistic     o
                            fet,i        = fet,i +ũt,i ,        fet,i         = fet,i −ũt,i .
         o                                                                   j M
Where fet,i and ũt,i are computed by first fitting an ensemble of models {fbt,i }j=1 using dataset Dt,i−1 .
In our experimental evaluation we explore the use of Ensemble and EnsembleNoiseY optimization
                             j M
styles to fit the models {fbt,i }j=1 . In our experiments we use the names Ensemble − SeqB and
Ensemble − SeqB − NoiseY to denote the resulting sequential batch selection methods. More
details of our implementation can be found in Section E.2.

D         T HEORETICAL R ESULTS
D.1       Q UANTIFYING THE Q UERY C OMPLEXITY OF F

Let ϵ ≥ 0 and define tϵopt (A, f ) to be the first time-step when an ϵ−optimal point ât is proposed by a
learner (possibly randomized) when interacting with arm set A ⊂ Rd and the pseudo rewards are
noiseless evaluations {f (a)}a∈A with f ∈ F. We define the query complexity of the A, F pair as,
                                  Tϵ (A, F) = min max E tϵopt (A, f )

                                                       Alg f ∈F


Where the minimum iterates over all possible learning algorithms. We can lower bound of the
problem complexity for several simple problem classes,
Lemma D.1. When A = {∥x∥ ≤ 1 for x ∈ Rd } and

          1. If F is the class of linear functions defined by vectors in the unit ball F = {x → θ⊤ x :
             ∥θ∥ ≤ 1 for θ ∈ Rd } then Tϵ (A, F) ≥ d when ϵ < d1 and Tϵ (A, F) ≥ ⌈d − ϵd⌉ otherwise.
                                                                                                  1 d

          2. If F is the class of 1-Lipschitz functions functions then Tϵ (A, F) ≥                4ϵ .


Proof. As a consequence of Yao’s principle, we can restrict ourselves to deterministic algorithms.
Indeed,
                  min max E tϵopt (A, f ) = max min Ef ∼DF tϵopt (A, f )

                         Alg f ∈F                           DF DetAlg

Thus, to prove the lower bound we are after it is enough to exhibit a distribution DF over instances
f ∈ F and show a lower bound for the expected tϵopt (A, f ) where the expectation is taken using DF .
With the objective of proving item 1 let DF be the uniform distribution over the sphere Unif d (1).
By symmetry it is easy to see that
                                   Eθ∼Unif d (r) [θi ] = 0,      ∀i ∈ d and ∀r ≥ 0.
    5
        As we have pointed out in Section 4.2.2 setting λreg = 0 reduces OAE − Seq to vanilla OAE.


                                                            18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Thus,
                                                                                        2
                                                                                (i) r
                             Varθ∼Unif d (r) (θi ) = Eθ∼Unif d (r) [θi2 ] =                 .                (10)
                                                                                      d
Equality (i) follows because
                            d
                            X
                                  Eθ∼Unif d (r) [θi2 ] = Eθ∼Unif d (r) [∥θ∥2 ] = r2
                            i=1

and because by symmetry for all i, j ∈ [d] the second moments agree,
                                    Eθ∼Unif d (r) [θi2 ] = Eθ∼Unif d (r) [θj2 ]
Finally,
                                                       q                  r
                                                  Eθ∼Unif d (r) [θi2 ] = √ .
                             Eθ∼Unif d (r) [|θi |] ≤                                             (11)
                                                                           d
Let DetAlg be the optimal deterministic algorithm for DF and a1 be its first action. Since DF is the
unofrm distribution over the sphere, inequality 11 expected scale of the reward reward experienced is
upper bounded by √1d , and furthermore, since ∥a1 ∥ = 1, the expected second moment of the reward
experienced (where expectations are taken over DF ) equals d1 .
We now employ a conditional argument, if DetAlg has played a1 and observed a reward r1 ,
We assume that up to time m algorithm DetAlg has played actions a1 , · · · , am and received rewards
r1 , · · · , rm .
Given these outcomes, DetAlg can recover the component of θ lying in span(a1 , · · · , am ). Let
am+1 be DetAlg’s action at time m+1. By assumption this is a deterministic function of a1 , · · · , am
and r1 , · · · , rm . Since θ is drawn from Unif d (1), the expected squared dot product between the
component of a⊥                                             ⊥
                    m+1 = Proj(am+1 , span(a1 , · · · , am ) ) satisfies,


                                                                         0 2
                                            h              2 i     1 − ∥θm ∥
                                                θ⊤ a⊥                          1 − ∥a0m+1 ∥2

                  Eθ∼DF |{a⊤       m
                           1 θ=ri }i=1              m+1          =
                                                                     d−m
                                                                         0 2
                                                                   1 − ∥θm ∥
                                                                 =           .                               (12)
                                                                     d−m
        0
where θm   = Proj(θ, span(a1 , · · · , am )). The last inequality follows because the conditional distri-
bution of Proj(θ, span(a1 , · · · , am )⊥ ) given a1 , · · · , am and r1 , · · · , rm is a q
                                                                                           uniform distribution
                                               p                                   ⊥
over the d − m dimensional sphere of radius 1 − ∥θm ∥ , the scale of am+1 is 1 − ∥a0m+1 ∥2 and
                                                            0   2

we have assumed the ∥a0m+1 ∥ = 0. Thus, the agreement of a⊥                                      ⊥
                                                          m+1 with Proj(θ, span(a1 , · · · , am ) )
satisfies Equation 10.
We consider the expected square norm of the recovered θ up to time m. This is the random variable
         Pm             2
    ∥ = t=1 θ⊤ a⊥
  0 2
∥θm                  t    where a⊥                                     ⊥
                                 t = Proj(at , span(a1 , · · · , at−1 ) ). Thus,


                                      "m        #
                                          ⊤ ⊥ 2
                         0 2           X
                  Eθ∼DF ∥θm ∥ = Eθ∼DF    θ at
                                                     t=1
                                                   "m                                                    #
                                                    X                                 h            2 i
                                      = Eθ∼DF              Eθ∼DF |{a⊤ θ=ri }t−1             θ⊤ a⊥
                                                                                                t
                                                                        1       i=1
                                                     t=1
                                                    "m                      #
                                                                 0
                                      (i)            X     1 − ∥θt−1 ∥2
                                      = Eθ∼DF
                                                       t=1
                                                              d−m
Equality (i) holds because of 12. Recall that by Equation 10,
                                                       1
                                      Eθ∼DF ∥θ10 ∥2 = .

                                                          d


                                                          19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Thus by the above equalities,
                                                 1 1 − d1        2
                                Eθ∼DF ∥θ20 ∥2 = +

                                                               = .
                                                    d   d−1      d
Unrolling these equalities further we conclude that
                                                0 2  m
                                       Eθ∼DF ∥θm    ∥ = .
                                                          d
This implies the expected square agreement between the learner’s virtual guess ât is upper bounded
by m                     1
    d . Thus, when ϵ < d , the expected number of queries required is at least d. When ϵ > d, the
expected number of queries instead satisfies a lower bound of ⌈d − ϵd⌉.
We now show shift our attention to Lipschitz functions. First we introduce the following simple
construction of a 1−Lipschitz function over a small ball of radius ϵ. We use this construction
throughout our proof. Let x ∈ Rd be an arbitrary vector, define B(x, ϵ) as the ball centered around
x of radius 2ϵ under the ∥ · ∥2 norm and S(x, 2ϵ) as the sphere (the surface of B(x, 2ϵ)) centered
around x
Define the function fxϵ : Rd → R as,

                                        minz′ ∈S(x,2ϵ) ∥z − z′ ∥2

                                                                     if z ∈ B(x, 2ϵ)
                        fxϵ (z) =
                                        0                            o.w.
It is easy to see that fxϵ is 1−Lipschitz. We consider three different cases,

      1. If z1 , z2 ∈ B(x, 2ϵ)c then |fxϵ (z1 ) − fxϵ (z2 )| = 0 ≤ ∥z1 − z2 ∥. The result follows.
      2. If z1 ∈ B(x, 2ϵ) but z2 ∈ B(x, 2ϵ)c . Let z3 be the intersection point in the line going
         from z1 to z2 lying on S(x, 2ϵ). Then |fxϵ (z1 ) − fxϵ (z2 )| = minz′ ∈S(x,2ϵ) ∥z1 − z′ ∥2 ≤
         ∥z1 − z3 ∥2 ≤ ∥z1 − z2 ∥2 .
      3. If z1 , z2 ∈ B(x, 2ϵ). It is easy to see that |fxϵ (z1 ) − fxϵ (z2 )| = |∥z1 − x∥2 − ∥z2 − x∥2 |.
         And therefore by the triangle inequality applied to x, z1 , z2 , that |∥z1 − x∥2 − ∥z2 − x∥2 | ≤
         ∥z1 − z2 ∥2 . The result follows.

Let N (B(0, 1), 2ϵ) be a 2ϵ−packing of the unit ball. For simplicity we’ll use the notation N2ϵ =
|N (B(0, 1), 2ϵ)|. Define the set of functions F ϵ = {fxϵ for all x ∈ N (B(0, 1), 2ϵ)} and define DF
as the uniform distribution over F ϵ ⊂ F. Similar to the case when F is the set of linear functions,
we make use of Yao’s principle. Let DetAlg be an optimal deterministic algorithm for DF .
Let ai be DetAlg’s i−th query point and ri be the i−th reward it receives. If the ground truth was fxϵ
and the algorithm does not sample a query point from inside B(x, 2ϵ), it will receive a reward of 0 and
thus would not have found an ϵ−optimal point. Thus topt (fxϵ ) ≥ first time to pull an arm in B(x, 1).
As a consequence of this fact,
                                                                 1
                               Efxϵ ∼DF [1(a1 ∈ B(x, 2ϵ))] ≤        .
                                                                N2ϵ
                                        2ϵ −1
Hence Efxϵ ∼DF [1(a1 ̸∈ B(x, 2ϵ))] ≥ NN   2ϵ
                                              . Therefore,
                                                  N2ϵ
                                                 X          N2ϵ − ℓ
                                        E tϵopt ≥

                                                           N2ϵ − ℓ + 1
                                                     ℓ=1
                                                     N2ϵ /2
                                                     X         N2ϵ − ℓ
                                                 ≥
                                                              N2ϵ − ℓ + 1
                                                      ℓ=1
                                               1
                                           ≥ N2ϵ .
                                               4
          (i)                        (ii)     d
                                          1

Since N2ϵ ≥ Covering(B(0, 1), 4ϵ) ≥ 4ϵ          where inequality (i) is a consequence of Lemma 5.5
and inequality (ii) from Lema 5.7 in Wainwright (2019).



                                                       20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Translating to Quantile Optimality . The results of Lemma D.1 can be interpreted in the langauge
of quantile optimality by imposing a uniform measure over the sphere. In this case ϵ−optimality is
                                            2
equivalent (approximately) to a 1 − 2−d(1−ϵ) quantile.
The results of Lemma D.1 hold regardless of the batch size B. It is thus impossible to design an
algorithm that can single out an ϵ-optimal arm in less than Tϵ (A, F) queries for all problems defined
by the pair A, F simultaneously.

D.2    O PTIMISM AND ITS PROPERTIES

The objective of this section is to prove Theorem 4.1 which we restart for the reader’s convenience.
Theorem 4.1. The regret of OAE with Amax,b acquisition function satisfies,
                                                          p
                    RegF ,b (T ) = O dimE (F, αT )b + ω dimE (F, αT )T b .

With αt = max t12 , inf{∥f1 − f2 ∥∞ : f1 , f2 ∈ F, f1 ̸= f2 } and C = maxf ∈F ,a,a′ ∈A |f (a) − f (a′ )|.



Let’s start by defining the ϵ−Eluder dimension, a complexity measure introduced by Russo &
Van Royp  (2013)
            P to 2analyze optimistic algorithms. Throughout this section we’ll use the notation
∥g∥A =        a∈A g (a) to denote the data norm of function g : A → R.
Definition D.2. Let ϵ ≥ 0 and Z = {ai }ni=1 ⊂ A be a sequence of arms.

      1. An
         pPaction   a is ϵ−dependent on Z with respect to F if any f, f ′ ∈ F satisfying
            n               ′      2                             ′
            i=1 (f (ai ) − f (ai )) ≤ ϵ also satisfies |f (a) − f (a)| ≤ ϵ.

      2. An action a is ϵ−independent of Z with respect to F if a is not ϵ−dependent on Z.
      3. The ϵ−eluder dimension dimE (F, ϵ) of a function class F is the length of the longest
         sequence of elements in A such that for some ϵ′ ≥ ϵ, every element is ϵ′ −independent of its
         predecessors.
Lemma D.3. Let’s assume y⋆ satisfies minf ∈F ∥y⋆ − f ∥∞ ≤ ω where ∥g∥∞ = maxa∈Z |g(a)|. Let
ye⋆ = arg minf ∈F ∥y⋆ − f ∥∞ be the ∥ · ∥∞ projection of y⋆ onto F. If fet is computed by solving 1
with γt ≥ (t − 1)ω 2 b with acquisition objective Amax,b the response predictions of fet over values Bt
satisfy,                 X                      X                   X
                              y⋆ (a) ≤ bω +         ye⋆ (a) ≤ bω +       fet (a).
                          a∈B∗,t                     a∈B∗,t                       a∈Bt
                                   P
where B⋆,t = maxB⊂Ut ,|B|=b            a∈B y⋆ (a).


Proof. Let Ft be the subset of F satisfying f ∈ Ft if (x,y)∈Dt (f (x) − y)2 ≤ (t − 1)ω 2 ≤ γt . By
                                                        P

definition ye⋆ ∈ Ft . Substituting the definition of Amax,b into Equation 1,
                                                             X
                                   fet ∈ arg max max             f (a).
                                                f ∈Ft B⊂Ut ,|B|=b
                                                                       a∈B

Since ye⋆ ∈ Ft ,
                                    X               X                   X                    X
                         max              f (b) =          fet (a) ≥            ye⋆ (a) ≥            ye⋆ (a).
               f ∈Ft ,B⊂Ut ,|B|=b
                                    a∈B             a∈Bt               a∈B
                                                                         e∗,t               a∈B∗,t


Where Be⋆,t = maxB⊂U ,|B|=b P                                        P
                        t        a∈B y
                                     e⋆ (a) and B⋆,t = maxB⊂Ut ,|B|=b a∈B y⋆ (a). Finally, for all
a ∈ A, we have ye⋆ (a) + ω ≥ y⋆ (a). This finalizes the proof. m

Since ye⋆ (a) + ω ≥ y⋆ (a). for all a ∈ A, Lemma D.3 implies,
                                                
                Xt     X               X                    X t X
                            y⋆ (a) −      y⋆ (a) ≤ 2btω +       fet (a) − ye⋆ (a)                             (13)
                   ℓ=1   a∈B⋆,t            a∈Bt                            ℓ=1 a∈Bt



                                                           21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


We define the width of a subset Fe ⊆ F at an action a ∈ A by,
                                        rFe (a) = sup |f (a) − f ′ (a)|.
                                                    f,f ′ ∈F
                                                           e
                                                                                                P
And use the shorthand notation rt (a) to denote rFt (a) where Ft = {f ∈ F s.t.                     (a,y)∈Dt (f (a) −
y)2 ≤ γt }. Equation 13 implies,
                                                    
                   X t    X               X                      Xt X
                                y⋆ (a) −     y⋆ (a) ≤ 2btω +
                                                                        rt (a)                                   (14)
                       ℓ=1    a∈B⋆,t             a∈Bt                          ℓ=1 a∈Bt
                                             Pt P
In order to bound the contribution of the sum ℓ=1 a∈Bt rt (a) we use a similar technique as
in Russo & Van Roy (2013). First we prove a generalization of Proposition 3 of Russo & Van Roy
(2013) to the case of parallel feedback.
Proposition D.4. If {γt ≥ 0|t ∈ N} is a nondecreasing sequence and Ft = {f ∈ F :
                      2
P
  (a,y)∈Dt (f (a) − y) ≤ γt } then,

                                  T X
                                  X                                      γt d
                                             1(rt (a) > ϵ) ≤ O                + bd .
                                  t=1 a∈Bt
                                                                          ϵ2

Where d = dimE (F, ϵ).

Proof. We will start by upper bounding the number of disjoint sequences in Dt−1 that an action
a ∈ Bt can be ϵ−dependent on when rt (a) > ϵ.
If rt (a) > ϵ there exist f¯, f ∈ Ft such that f¯(a) − f (a) > ϵ. By definition if a ∈ Bt is ϵ−dependent
on a sequence S ⊆ ∪t−1                      ¯       2     2                   ¯       2     2
                       ℓ=1 Bℓ = Dt then ∥f − f ∥S > ϵ (since otherwise ∥f − f ∥S ≤ ϵ would imply
a to be ϵ−independent of Dt ). Thus if a is ϵ−dependent on K disjoint sequences S1 , · · · , SK ⊆ Dt ,
then ∥f¯ − f ∥2Dt ≥ Kϵ2 . By the triangle inequality,

                                                                           √
                             ∥f¯ − f ∥Dt ≤ ∥f¯ − ye⋆ ∥Dt + ∥f − ye⋆ ∥Dt ≤ 2 γt .
                      √     √
Thus it follows that ϵ K < 2 γt and therefore
                                                               4γt
                                                     K≤                                                           (15)
                                                                ϵ2

Next we prove a lower bound for K. In order to do so we prove a slightly more general statement.
Consider a batched sequence of arms {āℓ,i }i∈[b],ℓ∈[τ ] where for the sake of the argument āℓ,i is
not necessarily meant to be aℓ,i . We use the notation B̄ℓ = {āℓ,i }i∈[b] to denote the ℓ−th batch in
{āℓ,i }i∈[b],ℓ∈[τ ] and D̄t = ∪t−1
                                ℓ=1 B̄ℓ .

Let τ ∈ N and define K   e as the largest integer such that Kd e + b ≤ τ b. We show there is a batch
number ℓ′ ≤ τ and in-batch index i′ such that aℓ′ ,i′ is ϵ−dependent on a subset of disjoint sequences
of size at least K̃
                 2 out of a set of K disjoint sequences S̄1 , · · · , S̄K̃ ⊆ D̄ℓ−1 .
                                   e

First let’s start building the S̄i sequences by setting S̄i =the i−th element in {āℓ,i }i∈[b],ℓ∈[τ ] ordered
lexicographically. This will involve elements of up to batch B̄⌈K̃/b⌉ .
Since we are going to apply the same argument recursively in our proof, let’s denote the ‘current’
batch index in the construction of S̄1 , · · · , S̄Ke as ℓ̄, this is, we set S̄1 , · · · , S̄Ke ⊆ D̄ℓ̄ . At the start of
the argument ℓ̄ = ⌈K̃/b⌉.
                                                                     e of the {S̄i }Ke sequences,
If there is an arm a ∈ B̄ℓ̄+1 such that a is ϵ−dependent on at least K/2            i=1
the result would follow. Otherwise, it must be the case that for all a ∈ B̄ℓ̄+1 there are at least K
                                                                                                                     e
                                                                                                   2
sequences in {S̄i }K   on which a is ϵ−independent.
                    e
                   i=1


                                                          22
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Let’s consider a bipartite graph with edge sets B̄ℓ̄+1 and {S̄i }K
                                                                 i=1 . We draw an edge between
                                                                      e

                                                                                                        K
a ∈ B̄ℓ̄+1 and S̄j ∈ {S̄i }Ki=1 if a is ϵ−independent on S̄j . If for all a ∈ B̄ℓ̄+1 there are at least 2
                                  e                                                                    e

sequences in {S̄i }K
                   i=1 on which a is ϵ−independent, Lemma D.5 implies the existence of a matching
                    e

of size at least min( K                                                              K
                      8 , b) between elements in B̄ℓ̄+1 and the sequences in {S̄i }i=1 .
                      e                                                              e


                                             (τ −1)b
The case min( K        K
              8 , b) = 8 can only occur when         ≤ b and therefore when τ b ≤ 8bd + b.
                    e         e
                                                8d

In case min( K 8 , b) = b. If we reach ℓ̄ = τ it must be the case that at least (τ − 1)b points could be
                e

accommodated into the K    e sequences. By definition of K e it must be the case that each sub-sequence
Si satisfies |Si | ≥ d. Since each element of subsequence Si is ϵ−independent of its predecesors,
|Si | = d. In this case we would conclude there is an element in B̄τ that is ϵ−dependent on K     e and
                    K     (τ −1)b                        8γτ d                 K    4γτ
therefore at least 2 = 2d subsequences. If τ b ≥ ϵ2 + 2d + b then 2 ≥ ϵ2 + 1.
                     e                                                          e


Combining the results of the two last paragraphs we conclude that if τ b ≥ 8γϵ2τ d + 2d + 2b + 8bd
then there is a batch index ℓ′ ∈ [τ ] such that there is an arm āℓ′ ,i ∈ B̄ℓ′ that is ϵ−dependent of at
            4γτ
least K
      2 ≥ ϵ2 + 1 disjoint sequences contained in D̄ℓ .
      e
                                                         ′


Let’s apply the previous result to the sequence of at,i for i ∈ [b] and t ∈ R such that rt (at,i ) > ϵ. An
                                                            Pt P
immediate consequence of the previous results is that if ℓ=1 a∈Bℓ 1(rℓ (a) > ϵ) ≥ 8γϵ2t d + 2d +
2b+8bd there must exist an arm in Bt such that it is ϵ−dependent on at least 4γ 2 +1 disjoint sequences
                                                                                 t
                                                                         Pt ϵP
of Dt . Nonetheless, Equation 15 implies this is impossible. Thus, ℓ=1 a∈Bℓ 1(rℓ (a) > ϵ) ≤
8γt d                      8γt d
 ϵ2 + 2d + 2b + 8bd ≤ ϵ2 + 12bd. The result follows.


Finally, the RHS of equation 14 can be upper bounded using a modified version of Lemma 2 of Russo
& Van Roy (2013) (which can be found in Appendix D.2 ) yielding,
                                
 T
X       X              X               1                                    p
             y⋆ (a) −     y⋆ (a) ≤ +O min (dimE (F, αT )b, T ) C + dimE (F, αT )ωT .
                                       T
ℓ=1   a∈B⋆,t                a∈Bt

Where αt = max t12 , inf{∥f1 − f2 ∥∞ : f1 , f2 ∈ F, f1 ̸= f2 } and C = maxf ∈F ,a,a′ ∈A |f (a) −


f (a′ )|. The quantity in the left is known as regret. This result implies the regret is bounded by a
quantity that grows linearly with ω, the amount of misspecification but otherwise only with the scale
of dimE (F, αT )b. Our result is not equivalent to splitting the datapoints in b parts and adding b
independent
     p        upper bounds.  The resulting upper bound in the later case will have in a term of the form
O b dimE (F, αT )ωT whereas in our analysis this term does not depend on b. When ω = 0,
the regret is upper bounded by O (dimE (F, αT )d). For example, in the case of linear models, the
authors of Russo & Van Roy (2013) show dimE (F, αT ) = O (d log(1/ϵ)). This shows that for
example sequential OAE when b = 1 achieves the lower bound of Lemma D.1 up to logarithmic
factors. In the setting of linear models, the b dependence in the rate above is unimprovable by vanilla
OAE without diversity aware sample selection. This is because an optimistic algorithm may choose
to use all samples in each batch to explore explore a single unexplored one dimensional direction.
Theoretical analysis for OAE − DvD and OAE − Seq is left for future work.
Lemma D.5. Let G be a bipartite graph with node set A ∪ B such that |A| = K̃ and |B| = b. If for
all nodes v ∈ B it follows that N (v) ≥ K
                                        2 then,
                                        e



      1. If K
            2 ≥ b there exists a perfect matching between the nodes in B and the ones in A.
            e



      2. If instead K                              K
                    2 < b there exists a subset of 8 nodes in A with a perfect matching to B.
                        e                            e



Proof. The first item follows immediately from Hall’s marriage theorem. Notice that in this case the
neighboring set of any subset of nodes in B has a cardinality of at least K
                                                                          2 and therefore it is at least
                                                                          e

the size of B. The conditions of Hall’s theorem are satisfied thus implying the existence of a perfect
matching between the nodes in B to the nodes in A.


                                                   23
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


In the second scenario, let’s first prove there exists a subset A′ of A of size at least K
                                                                                         4 such that every
                                                                                                e

element in A′ has at least 4b neighbors in B. We prove this condition by the way of contradiction.
There are at least b2K edges in the graph. Suppose there were at most L vertices in A with degree
                        e

greater or equal to 4b . This value of L must satisfy the inequality,

                                                 e − L)       b      bK
                                                                      e
                                           Lb + (K              −1 ≥    .
                                                              4       2

This is because the maximum number of edges a vertex in A can have equals b. Thus, L ≥ K
                                                                                       3 − 1.
                                                                                                           e


All nodes in L have degree at least 4b . If we restrict ourselves to a subset L
                                                                              e of L of size Ke and since
                                                                                              8
in this scenario K    b
                 8 < 4 , Hall’s stable marriage theorem implies there is a perfect matching between
                   e

L
e to B. The result follows.


Lemma 2 of Russo & Van Roy (2013) adapted to notation of OAE.
Lemma  P D.6. If {γt ≥ 20|t ∈ N} is a nondecreasing sequence and Ft                                    = {f      ∈
F s.t.  (a,y)∈Dt (f (a) − y) ≤ γt } then with probability 1 for all T ∈ N,

                       T X
                       X                                       p
                                  rt (a) ≤ O dimE (F, αT )b + ω dimE (F, αT )T b .
                       t=1 a∈Bt

                       1 1

Where αt = max         tb , 2 inf{∥f1 − f2 ∥∞ : f1 , f2 ∈ F, f1 ̸= f2 }         and C = maxf ∈F ,a,a′ ∈A |f (a) −
f (a′ )|.


Proof. The proof of lemma D.6 follows the proof template as that of Lemma 2 in Russo & Van Roy
(2013). We reproduce it here for completeness.
For ease of notation we use d = dimE (F, αT ).                                   We first re-order the sequence
{r1 (a1,1 ), r1 (a1,2 ), · · · , r1 (a1,b ), · · · , rT (aT,b )) as ri1 ≤ · · · ≤ riT b . We have,


T X
X                      Tb
                       X             Tb
                                     X                         Tb
                                                               X                       (i)   Tb
                                                                                             X
           rt (a) =          rij =         1(rij ≤ αT )rij +         1(rij > αT )rij ≤ 1 +         1(rij > αT )rij
t=1 a∈Bt               j=1           j=1                       j=1                           j=1


Where inequality (i) holds by definition of αT noting that
           Tb
           X                                             1
                 1(rij ≤ αT )rij = 0,          if αT =     inf{∥f1 − f2 ∥∞ : f1 , f2 ∈ F, f1 ̸= f2 }.
           j=1
                                                         2

and
                                     Tb
                                     X                                          1
                                           1(rij ≤ αT )rij ≤ 1,       if αT =      .
                                     j=1
                                                                                Tb

Proposition D.4 (since d ≥ dimE (F, ϵ) for all ϵ ≥ αT ) implies that for all ij with rij > αT , we can
bound j as
                              T X
                                                                          !
                             X                                γT d
                         j≤           1(rt (a) > rij ) ≤ O          + bd
                             t=1
                                                               ri2j
                                            a∈Bt


                                                          24
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Algorithm 4 Noisy Batch Selection Principle (OAE)
Input Action set A ⊂ Rd , num batches N , batch size b
Initialize Observed points and labels dataset D1 = ∅
for t = 1, · · · , N do
    If t = 1 then:
    · Sample uniformly a size b batch Bt ∼ U1 .
    Else:
    · Solve for fet and compute Bt ∈ arg maxB⊂Ut ||B|=b A(fet , B).
    Observe batch rewards Yt = {y∗ (a) for a ∈ Bt }
    Update Dt+1 = Dt ∪ {(Bt , Yt )} and Ut+1 = Ut \Bt .


                                                  q                                                  Pcbd
                                                        γT d
So there is a constant c > 0 such that rij ≤ O        (j−cbd)+       . For all j ≤ cbd notice that    j=1 rij =
O (bd) since the radii rij are all of constant size. We conclude that,
                                                          s            
                              Tb                     Tb
                            X                        X          γT d
                                 rij ≤ O bd +                          
                             j=1
                                                             (j − cbd)+
                                                   j=cbd+1
                                                         Z T b−cbd √     !
                                                  p
                                     ≤ O bd + γT d                   kdk
                                                            j=1
                                                 p
                                   = O bd +          γT dT b .

Substituting γT = ω 2 T b we conclude,
                                   Tb
                                   X                   √
                                         rij = O bd + ω dT b .
                                   j=1

Thus finalizing the result.


Combining the result of Lemma D.6 and Equation 14 finalizes the proof of Theorem 4.1.

D.3    N OISY RESPONSES

In this section we describe how our results imply improved bounds for the setting with noisy responses.
In this case we assume that yt,i = y⋆ (at,i ) + ξt,i where ξt,i is conditionally zero mean.
We consider the following optimistic least squares algorithm,


E     E XPERIMENTS

We demonstrate the effectiveness of our OAE algorithm in several problem settings across public
and synthetic datasets. We evaluate the algorithmic implementations described in Section 4.1 by
setting the acquisition function to Aavg (f, U) and the batch selection rule as in Equation 2 for the
vanilla OAE methods and as Equations 6 and 8 for OAE’s diversity inducing versions OAE − DvD
and OAE − Seq respectively. All neural network architectures use ReLU activations. All ensemble
methods use an ensemble size of M = 10 and xavier parameter initialization.

Small vs Large Batch Regimes. Oftentimes the large batch - small number of iterations regime
is the most interesting scenario from a practical perspective Hanna & Doench (2020). In scientific
settings like pooled genetic perturbations, each experiment may take a long time (many weeks or
months) to conclude, but it is possible to conduct a batch of experiments in parallel together. We
study this regime in Section 5.


                                                  25
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Figure 7: (top row) Synthetic one dimensional datasets (bottom) Evolution of MeanOpt in the
MultiValleyOneDimHole dataset using λreg = 0.001. From left to right: Iterations 5, 15, 25, 45.

E.1     VANILLA OAE

We test MeanOpt, HingePNorm, MaxOpt, Ensemble and EnsembleNoiseY’s performance (see
Section 4.1 for a detailed description of each of these algorithms) over different values of the
regularization parameter λreg , including the ‘greedy’ choice of λreg = 0, henceforth referred to as
Greedy. We compare these algorithms to the baseline method that selects points Bt by selecting
a uniformly random batch of size B from the set Ut , henceforth referred to as RandomBatch and
against each other.
We conduct experiments on three kind of datasets. First in Section E.1.1 we capture the behavior
of OAE in a set of synthetic one dimensional datasets specifically designed to showcase different
landscapes for y⋆ ranging from uni-modal to multi-modal with missing values. In Section E.1.2 we
conduct similar experiments on public datasets from the UCI database Dua & Graff (2017). In both
sections E.1.1 and E.1.2 all of our experiments have a batch size of 3, a time horizon of N = 150
and over two types of network architectures. In Section 5 we consider the setting in which we have
observed the effect of knockouts in one biological context (i.e., cell line) and would like to use it
to plan a series of knockout experiments in another. We test OAE in this context by showing the
effectiveness of the MeanOpt, HingePNorm, MaxOpt, Ensemble and EnsembleNoiseY methods
in successfully leveraging the learned features from a source cell line in the optimization of a particular
cellular proliferation phenotype for several target cell lines.
All of our vanilla OAE methods show that better expressivity of the underlying model class F
allows for better performance (as measured by the number of trials it requires to find a response
within a particular response quantile from the optimum). Low capacity (in our experiments ReLU
neural networks with two layers of sizes of 10 and 5) models have a harder time competing against
RandomBatch than larger ones (ReLU neural networks with two layers of sizes 100 and 10). We
also present results for linear and ‘very high’ capacity models (two layer of sizes 300 and 100).

E.1.1    S YNTHETIC O NE D IMENSIONAL DATASETS

Figure 7 shows different one dimensional synthetic datasets that used to validate our methods.
The leftmost, the OneHillValleyOneDim dataset consists of 1000 arms uniformly sampled from
the interval [−10, 10]. The responses y are unimodal. The learner’s goal is to find the arm with
x−coordinate value equals to 3 as it is the one achieving the largest response. We use the dataset
OneHillValleyOneDimHole to test for OAE’s ability to find the maximum when the surrounding
points are not present in the dataset.
The remaining two datasets MultiValleyOneDim and MultiValleyOneDimHole are built with the
problem of multimodal optimization in mind. Each of these datasets have 4 local maxima. We use
MultiValleyOneDim to test the OAE’s ability to avoid getting stuck in local optima. The second
dataset mimics the construction of the OneHillValleyOneDimHole dataset and on top of testing
the algorithm’s ability to escape local optima, it also is meant to test what happens when the global
optimum’s neighborhood isn’t present in the dataset. Since one of the algorithms we test is the greedy
algorithm (corresponding to λ = 0), the ’Hole’ datasets are meant to present a challenging situation
for this class of algorithms.


                                                    26
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Figure 8: NN 10-5. τ -quantile batch convergence (left) and corresponding rewards over batches
(right) on the OneHillValleyOneDim (easier) and MultiValleyOneDim (harder), OneHillValleyOneD-
imHole and MultiValleyOneDimHole synthetic datasets show how the OAE algorithm can achieve
higher reward faster than RandomBatch or Greedy. The neural network architecture has two hidden
layers of sizes 10 and 5.


Figure 9: NN 100-10. τ -quantile batch convergence (left) and corresponding rewards over batches
(right) on the suite of synthetic datasets when the neural network architecture has two hidden layers
of sizes 100 and 10.

We test several neural network architectures across all experiments. In all these cases we use ReLU
activation functions trained for 5000 steps via the Adam optimizer using batches of size 10. In our
tests we use a batch size B = 3, a number of batches N = 150 and repeat each experiment a total of
25 times, reporting average results with standard error bars at each time step.
First we compare the MeanOpt version of OAE with a simple RandomBatch strategy that selects
a random batch of size B from the dataset points that have not been queried yet and a Greedy
algorithm corresponding to MeanOpt with λreg = 0. Figures 8, 9 and 10 show representative results
for MeanOpt with (λreg = 0.001, 0.01, 0.1) accross three different neural network architectures, NN
10-5, NN 100-10, and NN 300-100. In all cases, the high optimism versions of MeanOpt perform
substantially better than RandomBatch. In both multimodal datasets Greedy underperforms with
respect to the versions of MeanOpt with λreg > 0. This points to the usefulness of optimism when
facing multimodal optimization landscapes. We also note that for example NN 10-5 is the best
performing architecture for MeanOpt with λreg = 0.001 despite the regression loss of fitting the
MultiValleyOneDim’s responses with a NN 10-5 architecture not reaching zero (see Figure 13).
This indicates the function class F need not contain y⋆ for MeanOpt to achieve good performance.


Figure 10: NN 300-100. τ -quantile batch convergence on the suite of synthetic datasets when the
network architecture has two hidden layers of sizes 300 and 100.

                                                 27
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Moreover, it also indicates the use of higher capacity models, despite being able to achieve better
regression fit may not perform better than lower capacity ones in the task of finding a good performing
arm. We leave the task of designing smart strategies to select the optimal network architecture for
future work. It suffices to note all of the architectures used in our experimental evaluation performed
better than more naive strategies such as RandomBatch.
Second, in Figures 11 and 12 we evaluate MeanOpt vs ensemble implementations of OAE across
the two neural network architectures NN 10-5 and NN 100-10. We observe that Ensemble performs
competitively with all other methods in the one dimensional datasets and outperforms all in the
OneHillValleyOneDimHole. In the multi dimensional datasets, MeanOpt performs better than
Ensemble, EnsembleNoiseY and Greedy. In this case the most optimistic version of MeanOpt
(λreg = .1) is the best performing of all. This may indicate that in multi modal environments the
optimism injected by the random initialization of the ensemble models in Ensemble or the reward
noise in EnsembleNoiseY do not induce an exploration strategy as effective as the explicit optimistic
fit of MeanOpt. In unimodal datasets, the opposite is true, MeanOpt with a large regularizer
(λreg = 0.1) underperforms Ensemble, EnsembleNoiseY and Greedy. In Appendix G.1 the reader
may find similar results for MaxOpt and HingeOpt. Similar results hold in that case.


Figure 11: NN 10-5. τ -quantile batch convergence of MeanOptimism vs EnsembleOptimism vs
EnsembleNoiseY.


Figure 12: NN 100-10. τ -quantile batch convergence of MeanOptimism vs EnsembleOptimism vs
EnsembleNoiseY.


Figure 13: Training set regression fit curves evolution over training for the suite of synthetic datasets.
Each training batch contains 10 datapoints.


                                                   28
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Figure 15: NN 10-5. τ -quantile batch convergence on the Adult and BikeSharingDay datasets with
regression-fitted response values.


E.1.2    P UBLIC S UPERVISED L EARNING DATASETS

                                                               We test our methods on public
                                                               binary classification (Adult, Bank)
                                                               and regression (BikeSharingDay,
                                                               BikeSharingHour, BlogFeedback)
                                                               datasets from the UCI repository (Dua
                                                               & Graff, 2017). In our implemen-
                                                               tation, the versions of the UCI
                                                               datasets we use have the following
                                                               characteristics. Due to our internal
                                                               data processing that splits the data
                                                               into train, test and validation sets the
                                                               number of datapoints we consider
                                                               may be different from the size of
                                                               their public versions. Our code
                                                               converts the datasets categorical
                                                               attributes into numerical ones using
                                                               one hot encodings. That explains
                                                               the discrepancy between the number
                                                               of attributes listed in the public
                                                               description of these datasets and ours
                                                               (see     https://archive.ics.
                                                               uci.edu/ml/index.php). The
                                                               BikeSharingDay dataset consists of
                                                               658 datapoints each with 13 attributes.
                                                               The BikesharingHour dataset con-
Figure 14: NN 100-10. τ -quantile batch convergence (left) sists of 15642 datapoints each with
BikeSharingDay, BikeSharingHour and BlogFeedback 13 attributes. The BlogFeedback
datasets with original response values.                        dataset consists of 52396 datapoints
                                                               each with 280 attributes. The Adult
                                                               dataset consists of 32561 datapoints
each with 119 attributes. The Bank dataset (Moro et al., 2014) consists of 32950 datapoints each
with 60 attributes. To evaluate our algorithm we assume the response (regression target or binary
classification label) values are noiseless. We consider each observation i in a dataset to represent a
discrete action, each of which has features ai and reward y∗ (ai ) from the response. In all of our
experiments we use a batch size of 3 and evaluate over 25 independent runs each with 150 batches.
We first use all 5 public datasets to test OAE in the setting when the true function class F is known
(in this case, a neural network) is known contain the function OAE learns over the course of the
batches. We train a neural network under a simple mean squared error regression fit to the binary
responses (for the binary classification datasets) or real-valued responses (for the regression datasets).
This regression neural network consists of a neural network with two hidden layers. In Figure 15
we present results where the neural network layers have sizes 10 and 5 and the responses are fit to
the Adult classification dataset and the regression dataset BikeSharingDay. In Appendix G.2 and
Figure 32 we present results where we fit a two layer neural network model of dimensions 100 and 10
to the responses of the Bank classification dataset and the BikeSharingHour regression dataset. In
each case we train the regression fitted responses on the provided datasets using 5, 000 batch gradient


                                                   29
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Figure 16: Training set regression fit curves evolution over training for the UCI datasets. Each
training batch contains 10 datapoints.


Figure 17: Linear. τ -quantile batch convergence on the BikeSharingDay, BikeSharingHour and
BlogFeedback datasets.


steps (with a batch size of 10). During test time we use the real-valued response predicted by our
regression model as the reward for the corresponding action. This ensures the dataset’s true reward
response model has the same architecture as the reward model used by OAE.
We use the same experimental parameters and comparison algorithms as in the synthetic dataset experi-
ments. Figure 15 shows the results on the binary classification Adult and regression BikeSharingDay
datasets using these fitted responses. We observe the MeanOpt algorithm handily outperforms
RandomBatch on both datasets. Appendix G.2 shows similar results for BikeSharingHour and
Bank. We also compare the performance of MeanOpt, Ensemble and EnsembleNoiseY in the
Adult and BikeSharingDay datasets. In both cases, ensemble methods achieved better performance
than MeanOpt. It remains an exciting open question to verify whether these observations translates
into a general advantage for ensemble methods in the case when y⋆ ∈ F.
Given OAE’s strong performance when the true and learned reward functions are members of the
same function class F, we next explore the performance when they are not necessarily in the same
class by revising the problem on the regression datasets to use their original, real-world responses.
Figure 14 shows results for the BikeSharingDay, BikeSharingHour and BlogFeedback datasets.
In this case Ensemble outperforms both RandomBatch in τ -quantile convergence time. In all of
these plots we observe that high optimism approaches underperform compared with low optimism
ones. Ensemble and Greedy (the degenerate version λreg = 0 of MeanOpt) achieve the best
performance across all three datasets. We observe the same phenomenon take place even when F is
a class of linear functions (see figure 18). Just as we observed in the case of the suite of synthetic
datasets, setting F to be a class of linear models MeanOpt still achieves substantial performance
gains w.r.t RandomBatch (see figure 17) despite its regression fit loss never reaching absolute zero
(see figure 16). In Appendix G.3, figure 33 we compare the performance of MaxOpt and HingeOpt
with RandomBatch when F is a class of neural networks with hidden layers of sizes 100 and 10. We
observe the performance of MaxOpt, although beats RandomBatch is suboptimal in comparison
with MeanOpt. In contrast HingeOpt has a similar performance to MeanOpt.

E.2   E XPERIMENTS D IVERSITY S EEKING O BJECTIVES

In this section we explore how diversity inducing objectives can sometimes result in better
performing variants of OAE. We implement and test DetD, SeqB, Ensemble − SeqB and


                                                 30
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Figure 18: Linear. τ -quantile batch convergence on the BikeSharingDay, BikeSharingHour and
BlogFeedback datasets.


Figure 20: NN 10-5.τ -quantile batch convergence performance of DetD vs RandomBatch in the
suite of synthetic datasets.


Ensemble − SeqB − NoiseY. In all the experiments we have conducted we kept the batch size
b and the number of batches N for each dataset equal to the settings used in Section E.1. The
neural network architectures are the same we have considered before, two layer networks with ReLU
activations.

E.2.1   OAE − DvD

                                           We implemented and tested the DetD algorithm described
                                           in Section C.0.1. In our experiments we set λdiv = 1 and
                                           set fet to be the result of solving the MeanOpt objective
                                           (see problem 3) for different values of λreg . We set K to
                                           satisfy,
                                                                                             !
                                                                                           2
                                                                              a1      a2
                                                    K(a1 , a2 ) = exp −            −
                                                                             ∥a1 ∥ ∥a2 ∥
Figure 19: NN 100-10. τ -quantile batch
convergence performance of DetD vs
RandomBatch in the BikeSharingDay We see that across the suite of synthetic datasets and ar-
dataset.                                chitectures (NN 10-5 and NN 100-10) the performance
                                        of MeanOpt degrades when diversity is enforced (see fig-
                                        ures 20 and 21 and compare with figures 8 and 9). A sim-
                                        ilar phenomenon is observed in the suite of UCI datasets
                                        (see figure 19 for DetD results on the BikeSharing dataset
and figure 14 for comparison).
In contrast, we note that DetD beats the performance of RandomBatch in the A373, MCF7 and
HA1E datasets and over the two neural architectures NN 10-5 and NN 100-10. Nonetheless, the
DetD is not able to beat RandomBatch in the VCAP dataset. These results indicate that a diversity
objective that relies only on the geometry of the arm space and does not take into account the response
values may be beneficial when y⋆ ̸∈ F but could lead to a deterioration in performance when y⋆ ∈ F.
The algorithm designer should be careful when balancing diversity objectives and purely optimism
driven exploration strategies, since the optimal combination depends on the nature of the dataset. It
remains an interesting avenue for future research to design strategies that diagnose in advance the
appropriate diversity/optimism balance for OAE − DvD.


                                                  31
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Figure 21: NN 100-10. τ -quantile batch convergence performance of DetD vs RandomBatch in
the suite of synthetic datasets.


Figure 22: NN 10-5. τ -quantile batch convergence performance of DetD vs RandomBatch in the
suite of genetic perturbation datasets.



E.2.2   OAE − Seq

In this section we present our experimental evaluation of the three tractable implementations of
OAE − Seq we described in Section C.0.2. In our experiments we set the optimism-pessimism
weighting parameter α = 1/2 and the acquisition function to Aavg . We are primarily concerned with
answering whether ‘augmenting’ the MeanOpt, Ensemble and EnsembleNoiseY methods with a
sequential in batch selection mechanism leads to an improved performance for OAE. We answer
this question in the affirmative. In our experimental results we show that across datasets and neural
network architectures adding in batch sequential optimism either improves or leads to no substantial
degradation in the number of batches OAE requires to arrive at good arm.


Figure 24:   NN 100-10. τ -quantile batch convergence performance of (left) MeanOpt
vs SeqB, (center) Ensemble vs Ensemble − SeqB and (right) Ensemble − NoiseY vs
Ensemble − SeqB − NoiseY on the suite of synthetic datasets.


Figure 23: NN 100-10. τ -quantile batch convergence performance of DetD vs RandomBatch in
the suite of genetic perturbation datasets.

                                                 32
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Figure 26: NN 10-5. τ -quantile batch convergence performance of (left) MeanOpt vs SeqB, (center)
Ensemble vs Ensemble − SeqB and (right) Ensemble − NoiseY vs Ensemble − SeqB − NoiseY
on the suite of synthetic datasets.


Figure 25: NN 100-10. τ -quantile batch convergence performance of MeanOpt vs SeqB on the
gene perturbation datasets.

More precisely in figures 26 and 24 we show that in the set of synthetic datasets adding a sequential
in batch selection rule improves the performance of OAE across the board for (almost) all datasets
and all methods MeanOpt, Ensemble and EnsembleNoiseY and two neural architectures NN 10-5
and NN 100-10. Similar gains are observed when incorporating a sequential batch selection rule to
OAE in the BikeSharingDay and BikeSharingHour datasets when F corresponds to the class NN
100-10 (see figure 27). Finally, we observe the performance of OAE − Seq either did not degrade or
slightly improved that of MeanOpt, Ensemble and EnsembleNoiseY in the BlogFeedback and the
genetic perturbation datasets (see figures 34, 25 and 38). We conclude that incorporating a sequential
batch decision rule, although it may be computationally expensive, is a desirable strategy to adopt. It


                                                  33
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Figure 27:   NN 100-10. τ -quantile batch convergence performance of (left) MeanOpt
vs SeqB, (center) Ensemble vs Ensemble − SeqB and (right) Ensemble − NoiseY vs
Ensemble − SeqB − NoiseY on the BikeSharingDay and BikeSharingHour datasets.


is interesting to note that in contrast with DetD the diversity induced by SeqB did not alleviate the
subpar performance of MeanOpt in the set of genetic perturbation datasets. This can be explained
by SeqB induces query diversity by fitting fake responses and it therefore may be limited by the
expressiveness of F. The DetD instead injects diversity by using the geometry of the arm space and
may bypass the limitations of exploration strategies induced by F. Unfortunately DetD may result in
suboptimal performance when y⋆ ∈ F.


F    C ELLULAR PROLIFERATION PHENOTYPE


Let G be the list of genes present in CMAP also associated with proliferation phenotype according to
the Seurat cell cycle signature, and let xi,g represent the level 5 gene expression of perturbation ai
for gene g ∈ G. We define the proliferation reward for perturbation ai as the average expression of
the genes in G,


                                                          1 X
                                      f∗prolif (ai ) =        xi,g
                                                         |G|
                                                           g∈G


For convenience, G = {AURKB, BIRC5, CCNB2, CCNE2, CDC20, CDC45, CDK1, CENPE,
GMNN, KIF2C, LBR, NCAPD2, NUSAP1, PCNA, PSRC1, RFC2, RPA2, SMC4,
STMN1, TOP2A, UBE2C, UBR7, USP1}.


                                                    34
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


G     F URTHER E XPERIMENTS



G.1   S YNTHETIC DATASETS


Figure 28: NN 10-5. MaxOptimism comparison vs RandomBatch over the suite of synthetic
datasets.


Figure 29: NN 100-10. MaxOptimism comparison vs RandomBatch over the suite of synthetic
datasets.

                                               35
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Figure 30:   NN 10-5. HingePNorm comparison vs RandomBatch over the suite of synthetic
datasets.


Figure 31: NN 100-10. HingePNorm comparison vs RandomBatch over the suite of synthetic
datasets.

                                               36
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


G.2   R EGRESSION F ITTED DATASETS


Figure 32: NN 100-10. BikeSharingHour and Bank Regression Fitted Datasets. Our algorithms
perform substantially better than RandomBatch. Optimistic approaches are better than Greedy in
the Bank dataset.


G.3   UCI PUBLIC DATASETS


Figure 33:   NN 100-10.      MaxOptimism and HingePNormOptimism comparison vs
RandomBatch in the BikeSharingDay, BikeSharingHour and BlogFeedback datasets.

                                               37
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Figure 34:   NN 100-10. τ -quantile batch convergence performance of (left) MeanOpt
vs SeqB, (center) Ensemble vs Ensemble − SeqB and (right) Ensemble − NoiseY vs
Ensemble − SeqB − NoiseY on the BlogFeedback dataset.


G.4   T RANSFER L EARNING B IOLOGICAL DATASETS


Figure 35: NN 10-5. MaxOptimism and HingePNormOptimism comparison vs RandomBatch.

                                               38
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Figure 36: NN 100-10.          MaxOptimism and HingePNormOptimism comparison vs
RandomBatch.


                                               39
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Figure 37:  NN 10-5. τ -quantile batch convergence of MeanOpt (left), Ensemble and
EnsembleNoiseY (right) on genetic perturbation datasets.


                                               40
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Figure 38: NN 10-5. τ -quantile batch convergence performance of (left) MeanOpt vs SeqB, (center)
Ensemble vs Ensemble − SeqB and (right) Ensemble − NoiseY vs Ensemble − SeqB − NoiseY
on the genetic perturbation datasets.


                                               41
