Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


S TRATEGIC C LASSIFICATION WITH
G RAPH N EURAL N ETWORKS
 Itay Eilat∗, Ben Finkelshtein∗, Chaim Baskin, Nir Rosenfeld
 Technion – Israel Institute of Technology
 {itayeilat,benfin}@campus.technion.ac.il
 {chaimbaskin,nirr}@cs.technion.ac.il



                                               A BSTRACT
          Strategic classification studies learning in settings where users can modify their
          features to obtain favorable predictions. Most current works focus on simple classi-
          fiers that trigger independent user responses. Here we examine the implications
          of learning with more elaborate models that break the independence assumption.
          Motivated by the idea that applications of strategic classification are often social in
          nature, we focus on graph neural networks, which make use of social relations be-
          tween users to improve predictions. Using a graph for learning introduces inter-user
          dependencies in prediction; our key point is that strategic users can exploit these to
          promote their own goals. As we show through analysis and simulation, this can
          work either against the system—or for it. Based on this, we propose a differentiable
          framework for strategically-robust learning of graph-based classifiers. Experiments
          on several real networked datasets demonstrate the utility of our approach.


1    I NTRODUCTION
Machine learning is increasingly being used to inform decisions about humans. But when users of
a system stand to gain from certain predictive outcomes, they may be prone to “game” the system
by strategically modifying their features (at some cost). The literature on strategic classification
(Brückner & Scheffer, 2011; Hardt et al., 2016) studies learning in this setting, with emphasis on how
to learn classifiers that are robust to strategic user behavior. The idea that users may respond to a
decision rule applies broadly and across many domains, from hiring, admissions, and scholarships to
loan approval, insurance, welfare benefits, and medical eligibility (McCrary, 2008; Almond et al.,
2010; Camacho & Conover, 2011; Lee & Lemieux, 2010). This, along with its clean formulation as a
learning problem, have made strategic classification the target of much recent interest (Sundaram
et al., 2021; Zhang & Conitzer, 2021; Levanon & Rosenfeld, 2021; Ghalme et al., 2021; Jagadeesan
et al., 2021; Zrnic et al., 2021; Estornell et al., 2021; Lechner & Urner, 2021; Harris et al., 2021;
Levanon & Rosenfeld, 2022; Liu et al., 2022; Ahmadi et al., 2022; Barsotti et al., 2022a).
But despite these advances, most works in strategic classification remain to follow the original
problem formulation in assuming independence across users responses. From a technical perspective,
this assumption greatly simplifies the learning task, as it allows the classifier to consider each user’s
response in isolation: user behavior is modeled via a response mapping ∆h (x) determining how
users modify their features x in response to the classifier h, and learning aims to find an h for
which y ≈ h(∆h (x)). Intuitively, a user will modify her features if this ‘moves’ her across the
decision boundary, as long as this is worthwhile (i.e., gains from prediction exceed modification
costs). Knowing ∆h allows the system to anticipate user responses and learn an h that is robust.
For a wide range of settings, learning under independent user responses has been shown to be
theoretically possible (Hardt et al., 2016; Zhang & Conitzer, 2021; Sundaram et al., 2021) and
practically feasible (Levanon & Rosenfeld, 2021; 2022). Unfortunately, once this assumption of
independence is removed—results no longer hold. One reason is that current approaches can safely
assume independence because the decision rules they consider induce independence: when predictions
inform decisions for each user independently, users have no incentive to account for the behavior of
others. This limits the scope of predictive models to include only simple functions of single inputs.
    * Equal contribution, alphabetical order


                                                    1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


In this paper, we aim to extend the literature on strategic classification to support richer learning
paradigms that enable inter-dependent user responses, with particular focus on the domain of Graph
Neural Networks (GNNs) (Monti et al., 2017; Wang et al., 2019; Bronstein et al., 2017; Hamilton
et al., 2017). Generally, user responses can become dependent through the classifier if predictions
for one user rely also on information regarding other users, i.e., if h(xi ) is also a function of other
xj . In this way, the affects of a user modifying her features via xj 7→ ∆h (xj ) can propagate to
other users and affect their decisions (since h(xi ) now relies on ∆h (xj ) rather than xj ). For GNNS,
this expresses through their relience on the graph. GNNs take as input a weighted graph whose
nodes correspond to featurized examples, and whose edges indicate relations that are believed to
be useful for prediction (e.g., if j→i indicates that yi = yj is likely). In our case, nodes represent
users, and edges represent social links. The conventional approach is to first embed nodes in a
way that depends on their neighbors’ features, ϕi = ϕ(xi ; xnei(i) ), and then perform classification
(typically linear) in embedded space, ŷi = sign(w⊤ ϕi ). Notice ŷi depends on xi , but also on all other
xj ∈ xnei(i) ; hence, in deciding how to respond, user i must also account for the strategic responses
of her neighbors j ∈ nei(i). We aim to establish the affects of such dependencies on learning.
As a concrete example, consider Lenddo1 , a company that provides credit scoring services to lending
institutions. Lenddo specializes in consumer-focused microlending for emerging economies, where
many applicants lack credible financial records. To circumvent the need to rely on historical records,
Lenddo uses applicants’ social connections, which are easier to obtain, as a factor in their scoring
system.2 As an algorithmic approach for this task, GNNs are an adequate choice (Gao et al., 2021).
Once loan decisions become dependent on social relations, the incentives for acting strategically
change (Wei et al., 2016). To see how, consider that a user who lies far to the negative side of the
decision boundary (and so independently cannot cross) may benefit from the graph if her neighbors
“pull” her embedding towards the decision boundary and close enough for her to cross. Conversely,
the graph can also suppress strategic behavior, since neighbors can “hold back” nodes and prevent
them from crossing. Whether this is helpful to the system or not depends on the true label of the node.
This presents a tradeoff: In general, graphs are useful if they are informative of labels in a way that
complements features; the many success stories of GNNs suggest that this is often the case (Zhou
et al., 2020). But even if this holds sans strategic behavior—once introduced, graphs inadvertently
create dependencies through user representations, which strategic users can exploit. Graphs therefore
hold the potential to benefit the system, but also its users. Here we study the natural question: who
does the graph help more? Through analysis and experimentation, we show that learning in a way
that neglects to account for strategic behavior not only jeopardizes performance, but becomes worse
as reliance on the graph increases. In this sense, the graph becomes a vulnerability which users can
utilize for their needs, turning it from an asset to the system—to a potential threat.
As a solution, we propose a practical approach to learning GNNs in strategic environments. We show
that for a key neural architecture (SGC; Wu et al. (2019)) and certain cost functions, graph-dependent
user responses can be expressed as a ‘projection-like’ operator. This operator admits a simple and
differentiable closed form; with additional smoothing, this allows us to implement responses as a
neural layer, and learn robust predictors h using gradient methods. Experiments on synthetic and
real data (with simulated responses) demonstrate that our approach not only effectively accounts for
strategic behavior, but in some cases, can harness the efforts of self-interested users to promote the
system’s goals. Our code is publicly available at: http://github.com/StrategicGNNs/Code.

1.1      R ELATED WORK

Strategic classification. Since its introduction in Hardt et al. (2016) (and based on earlier formula-
tions in Brückner & Scheffer (2009); Brückner et al. (2012); Großhans et al. (2013)), the literature
on strategic classification has been growing at a rapid pace. Various aspects of learning have been
studied, including: generalization behavior (Zhang & Conitzer, 2021; Sundaram et al., 2021; Ghalme
et al., 2021), algorithmic hardness (Hardt et al., 2016), practical optimization methods (Levanon &
Rosenfeld, 2021; 2022), and societal implications (Milli et al., 2019; Hu et al., 2019; Chen et al.,
2020; Levanon & Rosenfeld, 2021). Some efforts have been made to extend beyond the conventional
user models, e.g., by adding noise (Jagadeesan et al., 2021), relying on partial information (Ghalme
   1
       http://lenddoefl.com; see also http://www.wired.com/2014/05/lenddo-facebook/.
   2
       For a discussion on ethics, see final section. For similar initiatives, see https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Lenddo.


                                                            2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


et al., 2021; Bechavod et al., 2022), or considering broader user interests (Levanon & Rosenfeld,
2022); but these, as do the vast majority of other works, focus on linear classifiers and independent
user responses.3 We study richer predictive model classes that lead to correlated user behavior.
Graph Neural Networks (GNNs). The use of graphs in learning has a long and rich history, and
remains a highly active area of research (Wu et al., 2020). Here we cover a small subset of relevant
work. The key idea underlying most methods is to iteratively propagate and aggregate information
from neighboring nodes. Modern approaches implement variations of this idea as differentiable
neural architectures (Gori et al., 2005; Scarselli et al., 2008; Kipf & Welling, 2017; Gilmer et al.,
2017). This allows to express more elaborate forms of propagation (Li et al., 2018; Alon & Yahav,
2021) and aggregation (Wu et al., 2019; Xu et al., 2019; Li et al., 2016), including attention-based
mechanisms (Veličković et al., 2018; Brody et al., 2022). Nonetheless, a key result by Wu et al.
(2019) shows that, both theoretically and empirically, linear GNNs are also quite expressive.
Robustness of GNNs. As most other fields in deep learning, GNNs have been the target of recent
inquiry as to their sensitivity to adversarial attacks. Common attacks include perturbing nodes, either
in sets (Zügner et al., 2018; Zang et al., 2021) or individually (Finkelshtein et al., 2020). Attacks can
be applied before training (Zügner & Günnemann, 2019; Bojchevski & Günnemann, 2019; Li et al.,
2021; Zhang & Zitnik, 2020) or at test-time (Szegedy et al., 2014; Goodfellow et al., 2015); our work
corresponds to the latter. While there are connections between adversarial and strategic behavior
(Sundaram et al., 2021), the key difference is that strategic behavior is not a zero-sum game; in some
cases, incentives can even align (Levanon & Rosenfeld, 2022). Thus, system-user relations become
more nuanced, and provide a degree of freedom in learning that does not exist in adversarial settings.

2       L EARNING SETUP

Our setting includes n users, represented as nodes in a directed graph G = (V, E) with non-negative
edge weights W = {wij }(i,j)∈E , wij ≥ 0. Each user i is also described by a feature vector xi ∈ Rℓ
and a binary label yi ∈ {±1}. We use x−i = {xj }j̸=i to denote the set of features of all nodes other
than i. Using the graph, our goal is to learn a classifier h that correctly predicts user labels. The
challenge in our strategic setting is that inputs at test-time can be strategically modified by users, in
response to h and in a way that depends on the graph and on other users (we describe this shortly).
Denoting by xhi the (possibly modified) strategic response of i to h, our learning objective is:
                                     X
                            argmin       L(yi , ŷi ),       ŷi = h(xhi ; xh−i )                     (1)
                                   h∈H      i

where H is the model class and L is a loss function (i.e., log-loss). Note that both predictions ŷi and
modified features xhi can depend on G and on on xh−i (possibly indirectly through h). We focus on
the inductive graph learning setting, in which training is done on G, but testing is done on a different
graph, G′ (often G, G′ are two disjoint components of a larger graph). Our goal is therefore to learn
a classifier that generalizes to other graphs in a way that is robust to strategic user behavior.
Graph-based learning. We consider linear graph-based classifiers—these are linear classifiers that
operate on linear, graph-dependent node embeddings, defined as:
                                                                                X
         hθ,b (xi ; x−i ) = sign(θ⊤ ϕ(xi ; x−i ) + b),  ϕ(xi ; x−i ) = w
                                                                       eii xi +   w
                                                                                  eji xj       (2)
                                                                                               j̸=i

where ϕi = ϕ(xi ; x−i ) is node i’s embedding,4 θ ∈ Rℓ and b ∈ R are learned parameters, and
eij ≥ 0 are pairwise weights that depend on G and W . We refer to users j with w
w                                                                                     eji ̸= 0 as the
embedding neighbors of i. A simple choice of weights is w eji = wji for (j, i) ∈ E (and 0 otherwise),
but different methods propose different ways to construct w;
                                                          e here we adopt the weight scheme of Wu
et al. (2019). We assume the weights we are predetermined, and aim to learn θ and b in Eq. (1).
Our focus on linear GNNs stems from several factors. From the perspective of strategic classification,
linear decision rules ensure that strategic responses are computationally tractable (see Eq. (4)). This is
conventionally required, and most works remain in the linear regime. From the perspective of GNNs,
    3
        The only exception we know of is Liu et al. (2022) who study strategic ranking, but do not consider learning.
    4
        Note that embedding preserve the dimension of the original features.


                                                           3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                                                                                                            raw 𝑥𝑖
(A)        𝑖                                    𝑗             (D)       𝑖                                                   modified 𝑥𝑖′
                                                                                                                            emb. 𝜙𝑖 , 𝑦ො𝑖 = 1
                                                                 0.33
                                                                                                                            emb. 𝜙𝑖 , 𝑦ො𝑖 = −1
                                                                             0.6
(B)       𝑘              𝑖   𝑗                            𝑘             𝑖                   𝑗          (E)                  graph edge
                                                                                                                            move (w/o graph)
                                                                                                                            effective radius

      (C)      𝑗                        𝑖                        𝛼 = 0.1                 𝛼 = 0.5             𝛼 = 0.9
                                                         𝑖                                                                 (F)

       −3          −2   −1       0      1      2         −3             −2          −1             0         1         2         3



Figure 1: Simple graphs, complex behavior. In all examples hb has b = 0, and w        eij = 1 unless
otherwise noted. (A) Without the graph, i does not move, but with j→i, ϕi is close enough to cross.
(B) i can cross, but due to j→i, must move beyond 0. (C) Without the graph, i has ŷi = 1, but due to
j→i, must move. (D) Without the graph i would move, but with the graph—cannot. (E) Hitchhiker:
i cannot move, but once j moves and crosses, ϕi crosses for free. (F) Effective radii for various α.


linear architectures have been shown to match state-of-the-art performance on multiple tasks (Wu
et al., 2019), implying sufficiently manifest the fundamental role of graphs. Thus, linear GNNs serve
as a minimal necessary step for bridging standard strategic classification and graph-based learning, in
a way that captures the fundamental structure of the learning task in both domains. Nonetheless, as
we show in Sec. 4, even for linear GNNs—user responses can cause learning to be highly non-linear.
Strategic inputs. For the strategic aspects of our setting, we build on the popular formulation of
Hardt et al. (2016). Users seek to be classified positively (i.e., have ŷi = 1), and to achieve this,
are willing to modify their features (at some cost). Once the system has learned and published h, a
test-time user i can modify her features xi 7→ x′i in response to h. Modification costs are defined by
a cost function c(x, x′ ) (known to all); here we focus mainly on 2-norm costs c(x, x′ ) = ∥x − x′ ∥2
(Levanon & Rosenfeld, 2022; Chen et al., 2020), but also discuss other costs (Brückner et al., 2012;
Levanon & Rosenfeld, 2021; Bechavod et al., 2022). User i modifies her features (or “moves”) if
this improves her prediction (i.e., if h(xi ) = −1 but h(x′i ) = 1) and is cost-effective (i.e., prediction
gains exceed modification costs); for linear classifiers, this means crossing the decision boundary.
Note that since y ∈ {±1}, gains are at most h(x′ ) − h(x) = 2. Users therefore do not move to any
x′ whose cost c(x, x′ ) exceeds a ‘budget’ of 2, and the maximal moving distance is d = 2.
Distribution shift. One interpretation of strategic classification is that user responses cause distribu-
tion shift, since in aggregate, p(x′ ) ̸= p(x). Crucially, how the distribution changes depends on h,
which implies that the system has some control over the test distribution p(x′ ), indirectly through
user how users respond—a special case of model-induced distribution shift (Miller et al., 2021;
Maheshwari et al., 2022). The unique aspect of our setting is that user responses are linked through
their mutual dependence on the graph. We next describe our model of user responses in detail.

3         S TRATEGIC USER BEHAVIOR : MODEL AND ANALYSIS

Eq. (2) states that h classifies i according to her embedding ϕi , which in turn is a weighted sum
of her features and those of her neighbors. To gain intuition as to the effects of the graph on user
behavior, it will be convenient to assume weights w e are normalized5 so that we can write:
                          ϕi = ϕ(xi ; x−i ) = (1 − αi )xi + αi x̄i                 for some αi ∈ [0, 1]                                   (3)
I.e., ϕi can be viewed as an interpolation between xi and some point x̄i ∈ Rℓ representing all other
nodes, where the precise point along the line depends on a parameter αi that represents the influence
of the graph (in a graph-free setting, αi = 0). This reveals the dual effect a graph has on users: On
the one hand, the graph limits the ability of user i to influence her own embedding, since any effort
invested in modifying xi affects ϕi by at most 1 − αi . But the flip side of this is that an αi -portion of
ϕi is fully determined by other users (as expressed in x̄i ); if they move, i’s embedding also ‘moves’
for free. A user’s ‘effective’ movement radius is ri = d(1 − αi ). Fig. 1 (F) shows this for varying αi .
      5
          This is indeed the case in several common approaches.


                                                             4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


3.1    S TRATEGIC RESPONSES

Given that h relies on the graph for predictions—how should a user modify her features xi to
obtain ŷi = 1? In vanilla strategic classification (where h operates on each xi independently), users
are modeled as rational agents that respond to the classifier by maximizing their utility, i.e., play
x′i = argmaxx′ h(x′ ) − c(xi , x′ ), which is a best-response that results in immediate equilibrium
(users have no incentive to move, and the system has no incentive to change h).6 In our graph-based
setting, however, the dependence of ŷi on all other users via h(xi ; x−i ) makes this notion of best-
response ill-defined, since the optimal x′i can depend on others’ strategic responses, x′−i , which are
unknown to user i at the time of decision (and may very well rely on x′i itself).
As a feasible alternative, here we generalize the standard model by assuming that users play myopic
best-response over a sequence of multiple update rounds. As we will see, this has direct connections
                                                                                                   (t)
to key ideas underlying graph neural networks. Denote the features of node i at round t by xi , and
     (0)                                                                                   (t)
set xi = xi . A myopic best response means that at round t, each user i chooses xi to maximize
her utility at time t according to the state of the game at time t − 1, i.e., assuming all other users play
   (t−1)
{xj      }j̸=i , with costs accumulating over rounds. This defines a myopic response mapping:

                         ∆h (xi ; x−i , κ) ≜ argmax h(x′ ; x−i ) − c(xi , x′ ) − κ                         (4)
                                               x′ ∈Rℓ
                                                  (t+1)         (t)   (t)   (t)
where at round t updates are made (concurrently) via xi = ∆h (xi ; x−i , κi ) with accumulating
       (t)  (t−1)      (t−1)    (t)   (0)                                  (t)     (t) (t)
costs κi = κi     + c(xi     , xi ), κi = 0. Predictions for round t are ŷi = h(xi ; xi−i ).
Eq. (4) naturally extends the standard best-response mapping (which is recovered when αi = 0 ∀i,
and converges after one round). By adding a temporal dimension, the actions of users propagate
over the graph and in time to affect others. Nonetheless, even within a single round, graph-induced
dependencies can result in non-trivial behavior; some examples for ℓ = 1 are given in Fig. 1 (A-D).

3.2    A NALYSIS

We now give several results demonstrating basic properties of our response model and consequent
dynamics, which shed light on how the graph differentially affects the system and its users.
Convergence. Although users are free to move at will, movement adheres to a certain useful pattern.
                                                                                  (t)     (t−1)
Proposition 1. For any h, if users move via Eq. (4), then for all i ∈ [n], xi ̸= xi               at most once.

Proof. User i will move only when: (i) she is currently classified negatively, h(xi ; xi− ) = −1, and
(ii) there is some x′ for which utility can improve, i.e., h(x′ ; xi− ) − c(xi , x′ ) > −1, which in our
case occurs if h(x′ ; xi− ) = 1 and c(xi , x′ ) < 2 (since h maps to [−1, 1]).7 Eq. (4) ensures that the
modified x′i will be such that ϕ(x′i ; x−i ) lies exactly on the decision boundary of h; hence, x′i must
be closer to the decision boundary (in Euclidian distance) than xi . This means that any future moves
of an (incoming) neighbor j can only push i further away from the decision boundary; hence, the
prediction for i remains positive, and she has no future incentive to move again.8

Hence, all users move at most once. The proof reveals a certain monotonicity principle: users always
(weakly) benefit from any strategic movement of others. Convergence follows as an immediate result.
Corollary 1. Myopic-best response dynamics converge for any h (and after at most n rounds).

We will henceforth use xhi to denote the features of user i at convergence (w.r.t. h), denoted Tmax .
Hitchhiking. When i moves, the embeddings of (outgoing) neighbors j who currently have ŷj = −1
also move closer to the decision boundary; thus, users who were initially too far to cross may be able to
   6
     Note ‘rational’ here implies users are assumed to know h. As most works in the field, we also make this
assumption; for the practically-inclined reader, note that (i) in some cases, there is reason to believe it may
approximately hold (e.g., http://openschufa.de), and (ii) relaxing this assumption (and others) is an ongoing
community effort (Ghalme et al., 2021; Jagadeesan et al., 2021; Bechavod et al., 2022; Barsotti et al., 2022b).
   7
     In line with Hardt et al. (2016), we assume that if the value is zero then the user does not move.
   8
     Users moving only once ensures that cumulative costs are never larger than the final gain.


                                                        5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


do so at later rounds. In this sense, the dependencies across users introduced by the graph-dependent
embeddings align user incentives, and promote an implicit form of cooperation. Interestingly, users
can also obtain positive predictions without moving. We refer to such users as ‘hitchhikers’.
                                             (t)                               (t+1)
Proposition 2. There exist cases where ŷi = −1 and i doesn’t move, but ŷi          = 1.

A simple example can be found in Figure 1 (E). Hitchhiking demonstrates how relying on the graph
for classification can promote strategic behavior—even under a single response round.
Cascading behavior. Hitchhiking shows how the movement of one user can flip the label of another,
but the effects of this process are constrained to a single round. When considering multiple rounds, a
single node can trigger a ‘domino effect’ of moves that span the entire sequence.
Proposition 3. For any n, there exists a graph where a single move triggers n additional rounds.
Proposition 4. For any n and k ≤ n, there exists a graph where n − k users move at round k.

Proofs are constructive and modular, and rely on graphs that are predictively useful (Appendix A.2).
Note also that graph diameter is not a mediating factor (Appendix E.3). Both results show that, through
monotonicity, users also (weakly) benefit from additional rounds. This has concrete implications.
Corollary 2. In the worst case, the number of rounds until convergence is Ω(n).
Corollary 3. In the worst case, Ω(n) users move after Ω(n) rounds.

Thus, to exactly account for user behavior, the system must correctly anticipate the strategic
responses of users many rounds into the future, since a bulk of predictions may flip in the last round.
Fortunately, these results also suggests that in some cases, blocking one node from crossing can
prevent a cascade of flips; thus, it may be worthwhile to ‘sacrifice’ certain predictions for collateral
gains. This presents an interesting tradeoff in learning, encoded in the learning objective we present
next, and which we motivate with our final result on the potential impact of strategic behavior:
Proposition 5. The gap in accuracy between (i) the optimal non-strategic classifier on non-strategic
data, and (ii) the optimal strategic classifier on strategic data, can be as large as 30% (see Apx. E.1).

4    L EARNING AND OPTIMIZATION
We are now ready to describe our learning approach. Our learning objective can be restated as:
                                            X
                               ĥ = argmin      L(yi , h(xhi ; xh−i ))                         (5)
                                         h∈H     i

for H = {hθ,b } as in Eq. (2). The difficulty in optimizing Eq. (5) is that xh depend on h through the
iterative process, which relies on ∆h . At test time, xh can be computed exactly by simulating the
dynamics. However, at train time, we would like to allow for gradients of θ, b to propagate through
xh . For this, we propose an efficient differential proxy of xh , implemented as a stack of layers, each
corresponding to one response round. The number of layers is a hyperparameter, T .
Single round. We begin with examining a single iteration of the dynamics, i.e., T = 1. Note that
since a user moves only if the cost is at most 2, Eq. (4) can be rewritten as:
                                      ′
                                       xi if h(xi ; x−i ) = −1 and c(xi , x′i ) ≤ 2
                   ∆h (xi ; x−i ) =                                                          (6)
                                       xi o.w.
where x′i = projh (xi ; x−i ) is the point to which xi must move in order for ϕ(xi ; x−i ) to be projected
onto h. This projection-like operator (on xi ) can be shown to have a closed-form solution:
                                                         θ⊤ ϕ(xi ; x−i ) + b
                              projh (xi ; x−i ) = xi −                       θ                         (7)
                                                             ∥θ∥22 weii
See Appendix B.1 for a derivation using KKT conditions. Eq. (7) is differentiable in θ and b; to make
the entire response mapping differentiable, we replace the ‘hard if’ in Eq. (6) with a ‘soft if’, which
we now describe. First, to account only for negatively-classified points, we ensure that only points in
the negative halfspace are projected via a ‘positive-only’ projection:
                                                         θ⊤ ϕ(xi ; x−i ) + b

                            +
                       projh (xi ; x−i ) = xi − min 0,                         θ                    (8)
                                                              ∥θ∥22 w
                                                                    eii

                                                     6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


           0.9                                                                                 0.9                                    2 34
                                                                                                                                T=1             T = 1 234
                    non-strategic (bench)                                                                       4                                            97.5%
           0.8      robust (ours)                                                              0.8         2
                                                                                                            3                                                   95.0%
accuracy       naïve:                                                                                                                                                   90.0%


                                                                                    accuracy
                                                                                                     T=1
                    1 round         5 rounds                                                   0.7
           0.7      2 rounds        10 rounds
                    3 rounds        converged
                                                                                               0.6                                                                       = 0.0
           0.6                                                                                                                                                           = 0.45
                                                                                               0.5                                                                       = 0.9
             0.0         0.2         0.4          0.6        0.8          1.0                        0.0            0.5         1.0       1.5      2.0      2.5     3.0           3.5
                                   reliance on graph ( )                                                                               threshold (b)


Figure 2: (Left) Accuracy of learned ĥ for varying graph importancies α ∈ [0, 1]. (Right) Accuracy
for all threshold classifiers hb , with sensitivity (horizontal lines) and per network depth T (dots).


Then, we replace the c ≤ 2 constraint with a smoothed sigmoid that interpolates between xi and the
projection, as a function of the cost of the projection and thresholded at 2. This gives our differentiable
approximation of the response mapping:
       ˜ i ; x−i , κ) = xi + (x′ − xi )στ 2 − c(xi , x′ ) − κ where x′ = proj+ (xi ; x−i ) (9)

       ∆(x                        i                       i                    i        h

where σ is a sigmoid and τ is a temperature hyperparameter (τ → 0 recovers Eq. (6)) and for T = 1,
κ = 0. In practice we add a small additive tolerance term for numerical stability (See Appendix B.3).
Multiple rounds. Next, we consider the computation of (approximate) modified features after T > 1
                                                                              ˜ iteratively as:
rounds, denoted x̃(T ) , in a differentiable manner. Our approach is to apply ∆
                                                (t+1)     ˜        (t)   (t)    (t)                                       (0)
                                            x̃i         = ∆(x̃ i ; x̃−i , κi ),                                      x̃i        = xi                                            (10)
            ˜ as a layer in a neural network, approximating T rounds can be done by stacking.
Considering ∆
                          (t)                                                                                                    (t)          (t−1)               (t−1)           (t)
In Eq. (10), κi is set to accumulate costs of approximate responses, κi = κi              + c(x̃i   , x̃i ).
                                                    (t)        (0)   (t)
One observation is that for 2-norm costs, κi = c(x̃i , x̃i ) (by the triangle inequality; since
all points move along a line, equality holds). We can therefore simplify Eq. (9) and replace
    (t−1)            (t−1)         (0)
c(xi      , x′i ) − κi     with c(xi , x′i ). For other costs, this gives a lower bound (see Appendix B.1).

5            E XPERIMENTS
5.1              S YNTHETIC DATA

We begin our empirical evaluation by demonstrating different aspects of learning in our setting using
a simple but illustrative synthetic example. Additional results and insights on movement trends, the
effects of movement on accuracy, and the importance of looking ahead, can be found in Appendix D.1.
For our experimental setup, we set ℓ = 1 and sample features xi ∈ R for each class from a
corresponding Gaussian N (y, 1) (classes are balanced). For each node, we uniformly sample 5
neighbors from the same class and 3 from the other, and use uniform weights. This creates a
task where both features and the graph are informative about labels, but only partially, and in a
complementary manner (i.e., noise is uncorrelated; for i with yi = 1, if xi < 0, it is still more likely
that most neighbors have xj > 0, and vice versa). As it is a-priori unclear how to optimally combine
these sources, we study the effects of relying on the graph to various degrees by varying a global α,
              eii = (1 − α) and w
i.e., setting w                   eij = α/degi for all i and all j ̸= i. We examine both strategic and
non-strategic settings, the latter serving as a benchmark. Since ℓ = 1, H = {hb } is simply the class
of thresholds, hence we can scan all thresholds b and report learning outcomes for all models hb ∈ H.
For non-strategic data, the optimal h∗ has b∗ ≈ 0; for strategic data, the optimal h∗ can be found
using line search. Testing is done on disjoint but similarly sampled held-out features and graph.
The effects of strategic behavior. Figure 2 (left) presents the accuracy of the learned ĥ for varying
α and in different settings. In a non-strategic setting (dashed gray), increasing α helps, but if reliance
on the graph becomes exaggerated, performance deteriorates (α ≈ 0.7 is optimal). Allowing users
to respond strategically reverses this result: for α = 0 (i.e., no graph), responses lower accuracy by


                                                                                7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                                 Cora          CiteSeer       PubMed
                Naïve                          52.56 ± 0.20   61.06 ± 0.10   19.02 ± 0.01
                Robust (ours)                  77.51 ± 0.38   75.21 ± 0.25   82.41 ± 0.38
                Non-strategic (benchmark)      87.95 ± 0.08   77.11 ± 0.05   91.34 ± 0.03

         Table 1: Test accuracy of different methods. For all results T = 3 and d = 0.25.


≈ 0.26 points; but as α is increased, the gap grows, this becoming more pronounced as test-time
response rounds progress (blue lines). Interestingly, performance under strategic behavior is worst
around the previously-optimal α ≈ 0.75. This shows how learning in a strategic environment—but
neglecting to account for strategic behavior—can be detrimental. By accounting for user behavior, our
approach (orange line) not only recovers performance, but slightly improves upon the non-strategic
setting (this can occur when positive points are properly incentivized; see Appendix D.1).
Sensitivity analysis. Figure 2 (right) plots the accuracy of all threshold models hb for increasing
values of α. For each α, performance exhibits a ‘bell-curve’ shape, with its peak at the optimal h∗ .
As α increases, bell-curves change in two ways. First, their centers shift, decreasing from positive
values towards zero (which is optimal for non-strategic data); since using the graph limits users’
effective radius of movement, the optimal decision boundary can be less ‘stringent’. Second, and
interestingly, bell-curves become narrower. We interpret this as a measure of tolerance: the wider
the curve, the lower the loss in accuracy when the learned ĥ is close to (but does not equal) h∗ . The
figure shows for a subset of α-s ‘tolerance bands’: intervals around b∗ that include thresholds b for
which the accuracy of hb is at least 90%, 95%, and 97.5% of the optimum (horizontal lines). Results
indicate that larger α-s provide less tolerance. If variation in ĥ can be attributed to the number of
examples, this can be interpreted as hinting that larger α-s may entail larger sample complexity.
Number of layers (T ). Figure 2 (right) also shows for each bell-curve the accuracy achieved by
learned models ĥ of increasing depths, T = 1, . . . , 4 (colored dots). For α = 0 (no graph), there
are no inter-user dependencies, and dynamics converge after one round. Hence, T = 1 suffices
and is optimal, and additional layers are redundant. However, as α increases, more users move
in later rounds, and learning with insufficiently large T results in deteriorated performance. This
becomes especially distinct for large α: e.g., for α = 0.9, performance drops by ∼ 11% when using
T = 1 instead of the optimal T = 4. Interestingly, lower T always result in lower, more ‘lenient’
thresholds; as a result, performance deteriorates, and more quickly for larger, more sensitive α. Thus,
the relations between α and T suggest that greater reliance on the graph requires more depth.

5.2   E XPERIMENTS ON REAL DATA

Data. We use three benchmark datasets used extensively in the GNN literature: Cora, CiteSeer, and
PubMed (Sen et al., 2008; Kipf & Welling, 2017), and adapt them to our setting. We use the standard
(transductive) train-test split of Sen et al. (2008); the data is made inductive by removing all test-set
nodes that can be influenced by train-set nodes (Hamilton et al., 2017). All three datasets describe
citation networks, with papers as nodes and citations as edges. Although these are directed relations
by nature, the available data include only undirected edges; hence, we direct edges towards lower-
degree nodes, so that movement of higher-degree nodes is more influential. As our setup requires
binary labels, we follow standard practice and merge classes, aiming for balanced binary classes that
sustain strategic movement. Appendix C includes further details. see Appendix D.2 for additional
results on strategic improvement, extending neighborhood size, and node centrality and influence.
Methods. We compare our robust learning approach to a naïve approach that does not account for
strategic behavior (i.e., falsely assumes that users do not move). As a benchmark we report the perfor-
mance of the naïve model on non-strategic data (for which it is appropriate). All methods are based on
the SGC architecture (Wu et al., 2019) as it is expressive enough to effectively utilize the graph, but
simple enough to permit rational user responses (Eq. (4); see also notes Sec. 1.1). We use the standard
weights Wf = D− 21 AD− 12 where A is the adjacency matrix and D is the diagonal degree matrix.
Optimization and setup. We train using Adam and set hyperparameters according to Wu et al. (2019)
(learning rate=0.2, weight decay=1.3·10−5 ). Training is stopped after 20 epochs (this usually suffices


                                                   8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                Cora                                     CiteSeer                                     PubMed
                                                     80
           80                                                                                    80
Accuracy                                             70                                                               Naive
                                                                                                 60                   Robust (ours)
           60
                                                     60                                          40                   Non-strategic (bench)
           40                                        50                                          20
                0.0   0.1   0.2    0.3   0.4   0.5        0.0   0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4            0.5        0.0   0.1   0.2      0.3    0.4    0.5
                                                                max moving distance (d)
                                Cora                                     CiteSeer                                     PubMed
                                                     75                                          80
           80
                                                                                                                      Naive
Accuracy


           70                                        70                                          60                   Robust (ours)
                                                                                                 40                   Non-strategic (bench)
           60                                        65
                                                                                                 20
                0     2     4      6     8     10         0     2      4        6      8   10         0     2     4        6       8     10
                                                                    number of layers (T)

Figure 3: Accuracy for increasing: (Top:) max distance d (T = 3); (Bottom:) depth T (d = 0.25).


for convergence). Hyperparameters were determined based only on the train set: τ = 0.05, chosen to
be the smallest value which retained stable training, and T = 3, as training typically saturates then
(we also explore varying depths). We use β-scaled 2-norm costs, cβ (x, x′ ) = β∥x − x′ ∥2 , β ∈ R+ ,
which induce a maximal moving distance of dβ = 2/β. We observed that values around d = 0.5
permit almost arbitrary movement; we therefore experiment in the range d ∈ [0, 0.5], but focus
primarily on the mid-point d = 0.25 (note d = 0 implies no movement). Mean and standard errors
are reported over five random initializations. Appendix C includes further details.
Results. Table 1 presents detailed results for d = 0.25 and T = 3. As can be seen, the naive
approach is highly vulnerable to strategic behavior. In contrast, by anticipating how users collectively
respond, our robust approach is able to recover most of the drop in accuracy (i.e., from ‘benchmark’
to ‘naïve’; Cora: 35%, CiteSeer: 16%, PubMed: 72%). Note this is achieved with a T much smaller
than necessary for response dynamics to converge (Tmax : Cora=7, CiteSeer=7, PubMed=11).
Fig. 3 (top) shows results for varying max distances d ∈ [0, 0.5] and fixing T = 3 (note d = 0
entails no movement). For Cora and CiteSeer, larger max distances—the result of lower modification
costs—hurt performance; nonetheless, our robust approach maintains a fairly stable recovery rate
over all values of d. For PubMed, our approach retains ≈ 92% of the optimum, showing resilience to
reduced costs. Interestingly, for CiteSeer, in the range d ∈ [0.05, 0.15], our approach improves over
the baseline, suggesting it utilizes strategic movements for improved accuracy (as in Sec. 5.1).
Fig. 3 (bottom) shows results for varying depths T ∈ {0, . . . , 10}. For all datasets, results improve
as T increases, but saturate quickly at T ≈ 3; this suggests a form of robustness of our approach
to overshooting in choosing T (which due to smoothing can cause larger deviations from the true
dynamics). Using T = 1 recovers between 65%−91% (across datasets) of the optimal accuracy. This
shows that while considering only one round of user responses (in which there are no dependencies)
is helpful, it is much more effective to consider multiple, dependent rounds—even if only a few.


6               D ISCUSSION

In this paper we study strategic classification under graph neural networks. Relying on a graph for
prediction introduces dependencies in user responses, which can result in complex correlated behavior.
The incentives of the system and its users are not aligned, but also not discordant; our proposed
learning approach utilizes this degree of freedom to learn strategically-robust classifiers. Strategic
classification assumes rational user behavior; this necessitates classifiers that are simple enough to
permit tractable best-responses. A natural future direction is to consider more elaborate predictive
architectures coupled with appropriate boundedly-rational user models, in hopes of shedding further
light on questions regarding the benefits and risks of transparency and model explainability.


                                                                         9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


E THICS AND SOCIETAL IMPLICATIONS
In our current era, machine learning is routinely used to make predictions about humans. These,
in turn, are often used to inform—or even determine—consequential decisions. That humans can
(and do) respond to decision rules is a factual reality, and is a topic of continual interest in fields
such as economics (e.g., Nielsen et al., 2010) and policy-making (e.g., Camacho & Conover, 2013);
the novelty of strategic classification is that it studies decision rules that are a product of learned
predictive models. Strategic classification not only acknowledges this reality, but also proposes tools
for learning in ways that account for it. But in modeling and anticipating how users respond, and by
adjusting learning to accommodate for their effects—learning also serves to ‘steer’ its population of
users, perhaps inadvertently, towards certain outcomes (Hardt et al., 2022).
GNNs are no exception to this reality. In the domain of graph-based learning, the role of predictive
models is expressed in how they associate social connections with decision outcomes for individuals;
Clearly, the choice of whether to make use of social data for decisions can be highly sensitive, and
doing so necessitates much forethought and care. But the question of whether to use social data to
enhance prediction is not a binary in nature, i.e., there is no simple ‘right’ or ‘wrong’. Consider
our example of the credit scoring company, Lenddo. On the one hand, Lenddo has been criticized
that it may be discriminating applicants based on who they chose to socialize with (or, rather, who
chooses to socialize with them). But on the other hand, Lenddo, who focuses primarily on developing
countries, has been acclaimed for providing financial assistance to a large community of deserving
applicants who, due to conservative norms in typically credit scoring rules, would otherwise be denied
a consequential loan.9
Such considerations apply broadly. In other focal domains in strategic classification, such as loans,
university admissions, and job hiring, the use of social data for informing decisions can be highly
controversial, on both ethical and legal grounds. Regulation is necessary, but as in similar areas, often
lags far behind the technology itself. This highlights the need for transparency and accountability in
how, when, and to what purpose, social data is used (Ghalme et al., 2021; Jagadeesan et al., 2021;
Bechavod et al., 2022; Barsotti et al., 2022b).

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
This research was supported by the Israel Science Foundation (grant No. 278/22).

R EFERENCES
Saba Ahmadi, Hedyeh Beyhaghi, Avrim Blum, and Keziah Naggita. On classification of strategic
  agents who can both game and improve. arXiv preprint arXiv:2203.00124, 2022.
Douglas Almond, Joseph J Doyle Jr, Amanda E Kowalski, and Heidi Williams. Estimating marginal
  returns to medical care: Evidence from at-risk newborns. The quarterly journal of economics, 125
  (2):591–634, 2010.
Uri Alon and Eran Yahav. On the bottleneck of graph neural networks and its practical implications.
  In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2021. URL https://openreview.net/
  forum?id=i80OPhOCVH2.
Flavia Barsotti, Rüya Gökhan Koçer, and Fernando P Santos. Can algorithms be explained without
  compromising efficiency? the benefits of detection and imitation in strategic classification. In
  Proceedings of the 21st International Conference on Autonomous Agents and Multiagent Systems,
  pp. 1536–1538, 2022a.
Flavia Barsotti, Ruya Gokhan Kocer, and Fernando P. Santos. Transparency, detection and imitation
  in strategic classification. In Lud De Raedt (ed.), Proceedings of the Thirty-First International
  Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence, IJCAI-22, pp. 67–73. International Joint Conferences
  on Artificial Intelligence Organization, 7 2022b. doi: 10.24963/ijcai.2022/10. URL https://doi.org/
  10.24963/ijcai.2022/10. Main Track.
   9
       https://www.motherjones.com/politics/2013/09/lenders-vet-borrowers-social-media-facebook/


                                                     10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Yahav Bechavod, Chara Podimata, Steven Wu, and Juba Ziani. Information discrepancy in strategic
  learning. In Kamalika Chaudhuri, Stefanie Jegelka, Le Song, Csaba Szepesvari, Gang Niu, and
  Sivan Sabato (eds.), Proceedings of the 39th International Conference on Machine Learning,
  volume 162 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pp. 1691–1715. PMLR, 17–23 Jul
  2022.

Aleksandar Bojchevski and Stephan Günnemann. Adversarial attacks on node embeddings via graph
  poisoning. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 695–704, 2019.

Shaked Brody, Uri Alon, and Eran Yahav. How attentive are graph attention networks? In Inter-
  national Conference on Learning Representations, 2022. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=
  F72ximsx7C1.

Michael M. Bronstein, Joan Bruna, Yann LeCun, Arthur Szlam, and Pierre Vandergheynst. Geometric
 deep learning: Going beyond euclidean data. IEEE Signal Processing Magazine, 34(4):18–42,
 2017. doi: 10.1109/MSP.2017.2693418.

Michael Brückner and Tobias Scheffer. Nash equilibria of static prediction games. In Advances in
 neural information processing systems, pp. 171–179, 2009.

Michael Brückner and Tobias Scheffer. Stackelberg games for adversarial prediction problems. In
 Proceedings of the 17th ACM SIGKDD International Conference on Knowledge Discovery and
 Data Mining (KDD), pp. 547–555, 2011.

Michael Brückner, Christian Kanzow, and Tobias Scheffer. Static prediction games for adversarial
 learning problems. The Journal of Machine Learning Research, 13(1):2617–2654, 2012.

Adriana Camacho and Emily Conover. Manipulation of social program eligibility. American
 Economic Journal: Economic Policy, 3(2):41–65, 2011.

Adriana Camacho and Emily Conover. Effects of subsidized health insurance on newborn health in a
  developing country. Economic Development and Cultural Change, 61(3):633–658, 2013.

Yatong Chen, Jialu Wang, and Yang Liu. Strategic recourse in linear classification. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2011.00355, 2020.

Andrew Estornell, Sanmay Das, Yang Liu, and Yevgeniy Vorobeychik. Unfairness despite awareness:
  Group-fair classification with strategic agents. In Thirty-fifth Conference on Neural Information
  Processing Systems (NeurIPS), StratML workshop, 2021.

Ben Finkelshtein, Chaim Baskin, Evgenii Zheltonozhskii, and Uri Alon. Single-node attack for
  fooling graph neural networks. arXiv preprint arXiv:2011.03574, 2020.

Chen Gao, Yu Zheng, Nian Li, Yinfeng Li, Yingrong Qin, Jing Piao, Yuhan Quan, Jianxin Chang,
  Depeng Jin, Xiangnan He, and Yong Li. Graph neural networks for recommender systems:
  Challenges, methods, and directions. ArXiv, abs/2109.12843, 2021.

Ganesh Ghalme, Vineet Nair, Itay Eilat, Inbal Talgam-Cohen, and Nir Rosenfeld. Strategic classi-
  fication in the dark. In Proceedings of the 38th International Conference on Machine Learning
 (ICML), 2021.

Justin Gilmer, Samuel S Schoenholz, Patrick F Riley, Oriol Vinyals, and George E Dahl. Neural
  message passing for quantum chemistry. In International conference on machine learning, pp.
  1263–1272. PMLR, 2017.

Ian J. Goodfellow, Jonathon Shlens, and Christian Szegedy. Explaining and harnessing adversarial
  examples. In Yoshua Bengio and Yann LeCun (eds.), 3rd International Conference on Learning
  Representations, ICLR 2015, San Diego, CA, USA, May 7-9, 2015, Conference Track Proceedings,
  2015. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/1412.6572.

Marco Gori, Gabriele Monfardini, and Franco Scarselli. A new model for learning in graph domains.
 In Proceedings. 2005 IEEE International Joint Conference on Neural Networks, 2005., 2005.


                                               11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Michael Großhans, Christoph Sawade, Michael Brückner, and Tobias Scheffer. Bayesian games for
 adversarial regression problems. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 55–63,
 2013.
William L. Hamilton, Zhitao Ying, and Jure Leskovec. Inductive representation learning on large
 graphs. In NIPS, 2017.
Moritz Hardt, Nimrod Megiddo, Christos Papadimitriou, and Mary Wootters. Strategic classification.
 In Proceedings of the 2016 ACM conference on innovations in theoretical computer science, pp.
 111–122, 2016.
Moritz Hardt, Meena Jagadeesan, and Celestine Mendler-Dünner. Performative power. arXiv preprint
 arXiv:2203.17232, 2022.
Keegan Harris, Hoda Heidari, and Steven Z Wu. Stateful strategic regression. Advances in Neural
  Information Processing Systems, 34:28728–28741, 2021.
Lily Hu, Nicole Immorlica, and Jennifer Wortman Vaughan. The disparate effects of strategic
  manipulation. In Proceedings of the Conference on Fairness, Accountability, and Transparency
  (FAT*), pp. 259–268, 2019.
Meena Jagadeesan, Celestine Mendler-Dünner, and Moritz Hardt. Alternative microfoundations for
 strategic classification. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 4687–4697. PMLR,
 2021.
Thomas N. Kipf and Max Welling. Semi-supervised classification with graph convolutional networks.
  In International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR), 2017.
Tosca Lechner and Ruth Urner. Learning losses for strategic classification. In Thirty-fifth Conference
  on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS), Workshop on Learning in Presence of
  Strategic Behavior, 2021.
David S Lee and Thomas Lemieux. Regression discontinuity designs in economics. Journal of
  economic literature, 48(2):281–355, 2010.
Sagi Levanon and Nir Rosenfeld. Strategic classification made practical. In Proceedings of the 38th
  International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML), 2021.
Sagi Levanon and Nir Rosenfeld. Generalized strategic classification and the case of aligned
  incentives. In Proceedings of the 39th International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML),
  2022.
Jintang Li, Tao Xie, Chen Liang, Fenfang Xie, Xiangnan He, and Zibin Zheng. Adversarial attack on
   large scale graph. IEEE Transactions on Knowledge and Data Engineering, 2021.
Qimai Li, Zhichao Han, and Xiao-Ming Wu. Deeper insights into graph convolutional networks for
  semi-supervised learning. Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, 32(1),
  Apr. 2018. URL https://ojs.aaai.org/index.php/AAAI/article/view/11604.
Yujia Li, Daniel Tarlow, Marc Brockschmidt, and Richard S. Zemel. Gated graph sequence neural
  networks. In Yoshua Bengio and Yann LeCun (eds.), 4th International Conference on Learning
  Representations, ICLR 2016, San Juan, Puerto Rico, May 2-4, 2016, Conference Track Proceedings,
  2016. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/1511.05493.
Lydia T Liu, Nikhil Garg, and Christian Borgs. Strategic ranking. In International Conference on
  Artificial Intelligence and Statistics, pp. 2489–2518. PMLR, 2022.
Chinmay Maheshwari, Chih-Yuan Chiu, Eric Mazumdar, Shankar Sastry, and Lillian Ratliff. Zeroth-
  order methods for convex-concave min-max problems: Applications to decision-dependent risk
  minimization. In International Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Statistics, pp. 6702–6734.
  PMLR, 2022.
Justin McCrary. Manipulation of the running variable in the regression discontinuity design: A
  density test. Journal of econometrics, 142(2):698–714, 2008.


                                                 12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


John P Miller, Juan C Perdomo, and Tijana Zrnic. Outside the echo chamber: Optimizing the
  performative risk. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 7710–7720. PMLR,
  2021.
Smitha Milli, John Miller, Anca D. Dragan, and Moritz Hardt. The social cost of strategic classifica-
  tion. In Proceedings of the Conference on Fairness, Accountability, and Transparency (FAT*), pp.
  230–239, 2019.
Federico Monti, Davide Boscaini, Jonathan Masci, Emanuele Rodola, Jan Svoboda, and Michael M.
  Bronstein. Geometric deep learning on graphs and manifolds using mixture model cnns. In
  Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), July
  2017.
Helena Skyt Nielsen, Torben Sørensen, and Christopher Taber. Estimating the effect of student aid
  on college enrollment: Evidence from a government grant policy reform. American Economic
  Journal: Economic Policy, 2(2):185–215, 2010.
Franco Scarselli, Marco Gori, Ah Chung Tsoi, Markus Hagenbuchner, and Gabriele Monfardini. The
  graph neural network model. IEEE transactions on neural networks, 20(1):61–80, 2008.
Prithviraj Sen, Galileo Namata, Mustafa Bilgic, Lise Getoor, Brian Galligher, and Tina Eliassi-Rad.
  Collective classification in network data. AI Magazine, 29(3):93, Sep. 2008.
Ravi Sundaram, Anil Vullikanti, Haifeng Xu, and Fan Yao. PAC-learning for strategic classification.
  In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 9978–9988. PMLR, 2021.
Christian Szegedy, Wojciech Zaremba, Ilya Sutskever, Joan Bruna, Dumitru Erhan, Ian J. Goodfellow,
  and Rob Fergus. Intriguing properties of neural networks. In Yoshua Bengio and Yann LeCun
  (eds.), 2nd International Conference on Learning Representations, ICLR 2014, Banff, AB, Canada,
  April 14-16, 2014, Conference Track Proceedings, 2014. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/1312.6199.
Petar Veličković, Guillem Cucurull, Arantxa Casanova, Adriana Romero, Pietro Liò, and Yoshua
  Bengio. Graph attention networks. In International Conference on Learning Representations,
  2018. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=rJXMpikCZ.
Yue Wang, Yongbin Sun, Ziwei Liu, Sanjay E. Sarma, Michael M. Bronstein, and Justin M. Solomon.
  Dynamic graph cnn for learning on point clouds. ACM Trans. Graph., 38(5), oct 2019. ISSN
  0730-0301. doi: 10.1145/3326362. URL https://doi.org/10.1145/3326362.
Yanhao Wei, Pinar Yildirim, Christophe Van den Bulte, and Chrysanthos Dellarocas. Credit scoring
  with social network data. Marketing Science, 35(2):234–258, 2016.
Felix Wu, Amauri Souza, Tianyi Zhang, Christopher Fifty, Tao Yu, and Kilian Weinberger. Sim-
  plifying graph convolutional networks. In International conference on machine learning, pp.
  6861–6871. PMLR, 2019.
Zonghan Wu, Shirui Pan, Fengwen Chen, Guodong Long, Chengqi Zhang, and S Yu Philip. A
  comprehensive survey on graph neural networks. IEEE transactions on neural networks and
  learning systems, 32(1):4–24, 2020.
Keyulu Xu, Weihua Hu, Jure Leskovec, and Stefanie Jegelka. How powerful are graph neu-
  ral networks? In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2019. URL https:
  //openreview.net/forum?id=ryGs6iA5Km.
Xiao Zang, Yi Xie, Jie Chen, and Bo Yuan. Graph universal adversarial attacks: A few bad actors ruin
  graph learning models. In Zhi-Hua Zhou (ed.), Proceedings of the Thirtieth International Joint
  Conference on Artificial Intelligence, IJCAI-21, pp. 3328–3334. International Joint Conferences on
  Artificial Intelligence Organization, 8 2021.
Hanrui Zhang and Vincent Conitzer. Incentive-aware PAC learning. In Proceedings of the AAAI
  Conference on Artificial Intelligence, 2021.
Xiang Zhang and Marinka Zitnik. Gnnguard: Defending graph neural networks against adversarial
  attacks. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 33:9263–9275, 2020.


                                                13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Jie Zhou, Ganqu Cui, Shengding Hu, Zhengyan Zhang, Cheng Yang, Zhiyuan Liu, Lifeng Wang,
   Changcheng Li, and Maosong Sun. Graph neural networks: A review of methods and applications.
   AI Open, 1:57–81, 2020.
Tijana Zrnic, Eric Mazumdar, Shankar Sastry, and Michael Jordan. Who leads and who follows in
  strategic classification? Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 34, 2021.
Daniel Zügner and Stephan Günnemann. Adversarial attacks on graph neural networks via meta
  learning. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2019.
Daniel Zügner, Amir Akbarnejad, and Stephan Günnemann. Adversarial attacks on neural networks
  for graph data. In Proceedings of the 24th ACM SIGKDD International Conference on Knowledge
  Discovery & Data Mining, 2018.


                                               14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


A     A NALYSIS
A.1    H ITCHHIKING

Here we provide a concrete example of hitchhiking, following Fig. 1 (E). The example includes three
nodes, i, j, k, positioned at:
                                xk = −3,               xi = −2.1          xj = −0.5,
and connected via edges k→j, and j→i. Edge weights w     eji = 0.6 and w  eii = 0.4; w
                                                                                     ekj = 1/3 and
w
ejj = 2/3; and w  ekk = 1. The example considers a threshold classifier hb with b = 0, and unit-scale
costs (i.e., β = 1) inducing a maximal moving distance of d = 2.
We show that i cannot invest effort to cross and obtain ŷi = 1; but once j moves (to obtain ŷj = 1),
this results in i also being classified positively (without moving). Initially (at round t = 0), node
embeddings are:
                                                                         4
                              ϕk = −3         , ϕi = −1.14      , ϕj = −
                                                                         3
and all points are classified negatively, ŷk = ŷi = ŷj = −1. Notice that i cannot cross the decision
boundary even if she moves the maximal cost-feasible distance of d = 2:
            (0)           (0)            (0)                     (0)                          1
       ϕ(xi       + 2; xi− ) = w
                               eii (xi         + 2) + w
                                                      eji xj           = 0.4(−2.1 + 2) + 0.6(− ) = −0.34 < 0
                                                                                              2
                                  (1)          (0)                                     (1)   (0)
Hence, i doesn’t move, so xi = xi . Similarly, k cannot cross, so xk = xk . However, j can
cross by moving to 1.5 (at cost 2) in order to get ŷj = 1:
         (1)                                   (0)
       xj      = 1.5 = −1/2 + 2 = xj + 2
            (1)     (1)           (1)           2 (1) 1
                                                     (0)                  (1)
    ⇒ ϕ(xj ; xj− ) = w
                     ejj xj + w
                              ekj xk =            x + (−3) = 0 ⇒ ŷj = 1
                                                3 j      3
After j moves, i is classified positively (and so does not need to move):
            (1)     (1)          (1)                 (1)                       3                (2)
       ϕ(xi ; xi− ) = w
                      eii xi            +w
                                         eji xj            = 0.4(−2.1) + 0.6     = 0.06 > 0 ⇒ ŷi = 1
                                                                               2

A.2    C ASCADING BEHAVIOR

We give a constructive example (for any n) which will be used to prove Propositions 3 and 4. The
construction is modular, meaning that we build a small ‘cyclic’ structure of size 3, such that for any
given n, we simply replicate this structure roughly n/3 times, and include two additional ‘start’ and
‘finish’ nodes. Our example assumes a threshold classifier hb with b = 0, and scale costs cβ with
β = 1.5 inducing a maximum moving distance of dβ = 3.
Let n. We construct a graph of size n + 2 as follows. Nodes are indexed 0, . . . , n + 1. The graph
has bi-directional edges between each pair of consecutive nodes, namely (i, i + 1) and (i + 1, i)
for all i = 0, . . . , n, except for the last node, which has only an outgoing edge (n + 1, n), but no
incoming edge. We set uniform normalized edge weights, i.e., wij = 1/3 and wii = 1/3 for all
1 ≤ i, j ≤ n, and w0,0 = w0,1 = 1/2 and wn+1,n+1 = wn+1,n = 1/2. The initial features of each
node are defined as:

                                              2    if i mod 3 = 1
                 x0 = −1,             xi =                            ∀i = 1, . . . , n + 1       (11)
                                              −4 o.w.
Figure 4 (A) illustrates this for n = 3. Note that while the graph creates a ‘chain’ structure, the
positioning of node features is cyclic (starting from n = 1): 2, −4, −4, 2, −4, −4, 2, . . . etc.
We begin with a lemma showing that in our construction, each node i = 1, . . . , n moves precisely at
round t = i.
Lemma 1. At every round 1 ≤ t ≤ n:
                                        (t)                                    (t)
    (1) node i = t moves, with xi = 5 if k mod 3 = 1, and xi = −1 otherwise
                                            (t)  (t−1)
    (2) all nodes j > t do not move, i.e., xj = xj


                                                                15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


(A)                               𝑥#                                                    (B)
                                                   𝑥$



      𝑥&                                                           raw 𝑥!
                                                                   modified 𝑥!"
                                                                   emb. 𝜙! , 𝑦#! = 1


                                                                                                             …
      𝑥%                                                           emb. 𝜙! , 𝑦#! = −1
                                                                   graph edge
                                                                   move (w/o graph)
                                                   𝑥'              effective radius

      −4    −3         −2         −1   0     1      2          3      4           5           −4   −3   −2   −1   0   1    2


Figure 4: Cascading behavior. The construction for Propositions 3 and 4, for: (A) n = 3, which
includes one copy of the main 3-node module (light blue box), and (B) for any n > 3, by replicating
the module in sequence (note |V | = n + 2).


Note that (1) (together with Prop. 1) implies that for any round t, all nodes i < t (which have already
moved at the earlier round t′ = i) do not move again. Additionally, (2) implies that all j > t remain
                                  (t)   (0)
in their initial position, i.e., xj = xj . Finally, notice that the starting node x0 has ϕ0 = 0.5,
                 (0)
meaning that ŷ0 = 1, and so does not move at any round.

Proof. We begin with the case for n = 3.
  • Round 1: Node i = 1 can cross by moving the maximal distance of 3:
                            (0)              (0)       1   (0)    1          1
                 w
                 e1,1 (x1 + 3) + w
                                 e0,1 x0 + w
                                           e2,1 x2 =     (2 + 3) + (−1) + (−4) = 0                                        (12)
                                                       3          3          3
      However, nodes 2,3 cannot cross even if they move the maximal feasible distance:
                  (0)                  (0)    1     (0)     1       1
           w
           e2,2 (x2 + 3) + w
                           e1,2 x1 + w
                                     e3,2 x3 =  (−4 + 3) + (2) + (−4) = −1 < 0                                            (13)
                                              3             3       3
              (0)             (0)        (0)  1             1         1
       w
       e3,3 (x3 + 3) + we2,3 x2 + we4,3 x4 = (−4 + 3) + (−4) + (2) = −1 < 0                                               (14)
                                              3             3         3
  • Round 2: Node i = 2 can cross by moving the maximal distance of 3:
                            (1)              (1)      1    (1)      1       1
                 w
                 e2,2 (x2 + 3) + w
                                 e1,2 x1 + w
                                           e3,2 x3 =    (−4 + 3) + (5) + (−4) = 0                                         (15)
                                                      3             3       3
    However, node 3 cannot cross even if it moves the maximal feasible distance:
              (1)             (1)           (1)  1            1          1
       e3,3 (x3 + 3) + w
       w                e2,3 x2 + w e4,3 x4 = (−4 + 3) + (−4) + (2) = −1 < 0                                              (16)
                                                 3            3          3
  • Round 3: Node i = 3 can cross by moving the maximal distance of 3:
                            (2)              (2)           (2)     1           1      1
                 w               e2,3 x2 + w
                 e3,3 (x3 + 3) + w         e4,3 x4 =                 (−4 + 3) + (−1) + (2) = 0                            (17)
                                                                   3           3      3
Fig. 4 (A) illustrates this procedure for n = 3.
Next, consider n > 3. Due to the cyclical nature of feature positioning and the chain structure of our
graph, we can consider what happens when we sequentially add nodes to the graph. By induction, we
can show that:
                                                                    (t−1)
  • n mod 3 = 1: Consider round t = n. Node n has xn           = 2, and two neighbors: n − 1, who
                                              (t−1)                                    (t−1)
    after moving at the previous round has xn−1 = −1; and n + 1, who has a fixed xn+1 = −4.
    Thus, it is in the same configuration as node i = 1, and so its movement follows Eq. (12).
                                                                   (t−1)
  • n mod 3 = 2: Consider round t = n. Node n has xn          = −4, and two neighbors: n − 1, who
                                               (t−1)                                  (t−1)
    after moving at the previous round has xn−1 = 5; and n + 1, who has a fixed xn+1 = −4.
    Thus, it is in the same configuration as node i = 2, and so its movement follows Eq. (15).


                                                          16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                                               (t−1)
    • n mod 3 = 0: Consider round t = n. Node n has xn          = −4, and two neighbors: n − 1, who
                                                 (t−1)                                     (t−1)
      after moving at the previous round has xn−1 = −1; and n + 1, who has a fixed xn+1 = 2.
      Thus, it is in the same configuration as node i = 2, and so its movement follows Eq. (17).
Fig. 4 (B) illustrates this idea for n > 3.


We now proceed to prove the propositions.
Proposition 3: The proposition follows immediately from Lemma 1; the only detail that remains to
be shown is that node n + 1 does not move at all. To see this, note that since it does not have any
incoming edges, its embedding depends only on its own features, xn+1 . If n + 1 mod 3 = 1, we
have xn+1 = 2, and so ŷn+1 = 1 without movement. Otherwise, xn+1 = −4, meaning that it is too
far to cross.
Proposition 4: Fix n and k ≤ n. Consider the same construction presented above for a graph of
size k + 2 Then, add n − k nodes identical nodes: for each k < j ≤ n, add an edge k→j, and
set xj = xk − 6. We claim that all such nodes will move exactly at round k. Consider some node
k < j ≤ n. Since xk moves only at round k (following Lemma 1), j does not move in any of the
first t ≤ k rounds:

        (0)             (0)    1    (0)     1 (0)   1   (0)   1 (0)
 w
 ej,j (xj +3)+w
              ek,j xk =          (−xk −6+3)+ (xk ) = (−xk −3)+ (xk ) = −1.5 < 0 (18)
                               2            2       2         2
                                                         (0)
At the end of round t = k, node k has a value of xk + 3. This enables j to cross by moving the
maximal distance of 3:
        (k)              (k)    1    (0)         1 (k)   1   (0)     1 (0)
 w
 ej,j (xj + 3) + w
                 ek,j xk =        (−xk − 6 + 3) + (xk ) = (−xk − 3) + (xk + 3) = 0 (19)
                                2                2       2           2
As this applies to all such j, we get that n − k nodes move at round k, which concludes our proof.
Note the graph is such that, for b = 0, without strategic behavior the graph is useful for prediction
(increases accuracy from 66% to 100%), so that a learner that is unaware of (or does not account for)
strategic behavior is incentivized to utilize the graph. However, once strategic behavior is introduced,
naïvely using the graph causes performance to drop to 0%.


B     O PTIMIZATION

B.1    P ROJECTION

We prove for 2-norm-squared costs. Correctness holds for 2-norm-costs since the argmin is the same
(squared over positives is monotone). Calculation of xi ’s best response requires solving the following
equation:

                   min
                    ′
                       c(x′i , xi ) s.t θ⊤ ϕ(x′i ; x−i ) + b = 0
                    x
                   min
                    ′
                       ∥x′i − xi ∥22   s.t θ⊤ ϕ(x′i ; x−i ) + b = 0
                    x

To solve for x′ , we apply the Lagrange method. Define the Lagrangian as follows:

                  L(x′i , λ) = ∥x′i − xi ∥22 + λ[θ⊤ ϕ(x′i ; x−i ) + b]

Next, to find the minimum of L, derive with respect to x′i , and compare to 0:

                  2(x′i − xi ) + λθw eii = 0
                               λw
                                eii
                  x′i = xi −        θ
                                2


                                                    17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Plugging x′i into the constraint gives:
                                  λw
                                   eii      X
                   θ ⊤ [w
                        eii (xi −      θ) +   w
                                              eij xj ] + b = 0
                                   2
                                               j̸=i
                                           2
                                      λw
                   θ⊤ [ϕ(xi ; x−i ) −
                                         eii
                                             θ] + b = 0
                                         2
                                               2
                                           λw
                   θ⊤ ϕ(xi ; x−i ) + b =
                                             eii
                                                 ∥θ∥22
                                             2
                     θ⊤ ϕ(xi ; x−i ) + b
                   2                      =λ
                         ∥θ∥22 w 2
                                eii
Finally, plugging λ into the expression for x′i obtains:
                                 θ⊤ ϕ(xi ; x−i ) + b
                   x′i = xi −                        θ
                                     ∥θ∥22 weii

B.2   G ENERALIZED COSTS

Here we provide a formula for computing projections in closed form for generalized quadratic costs:
                                            1
                                 c(x, x′ ) = (x′ − x)⊤ A(x′ − x)
                                            2
for positive-definite A. As before, the same formula holds for generalized 2-norm costs (since the
argmin is the same). Begin with:
              min
               ′
                  c(x′i , xi ) s.t θ⊤ ϕ(x′i ; x−i ) + b = 0
               x
                    1 ′
              min     (xi − xi )⊤ A(x′i − xi ) s.t θ⊤ ϕ(x′i ; x−i ) + b = 0
               x′ 2
As before, apply the Lagrangian method:
             1 ′
                (x − xi )⊤ A(x′i − xi ) + λ[θ⊤ ϕ(x′i ; x−i ) + b]
             2 i
Derivation w.r.t. to x′i :
             1 ⊤ ′
                [A (xi − xi ) + A(x′ − x)] + λθw   eii = 0
             2
             (A⊤ + A)x′i = (A⊤ + A)xi − 2λθw       eii
Since the matrix (A⊤ + A) is PD, we can invert to get:
              x′i = xi − 2λ(A⊤ + A)−1 θw
                                       eii
Plugging x′i in the constrain:
                                                              X
              θ⊤ [w
                  eii (xi − 2λ(A⊤ + A)−1 θw
                                          eii ) +                    w
                                                                     eij xj ] + b = 0
                                                              j̸=i

              θ⊤ [ϕ(xi ; x−i ) − 2λ(A⊤ + A)−1 w 2
                                              eii θ] + b = 0
              θ⊤ ϕ(xi ; x−i ) + b = 2λθ⊤ (A⊤ + A)−1 θw 2
                                                     eii
Since (A⊤ + A)−1 is also PD, we get θ⊤ (A⊤ + A)−1 θ > 0, and hence:
                θ⊤ ϕ(xi ; x−i ) + b
                                      =λ
              2θ⊤ (A⊤ + A)−1 θw     2
                                  eii
Finally, pluging in λ:
                            θ⊤ ϕ(xi ; x−i ) + b
              x′i = xi −                        (A⊤ + A)−1 θw
                                                            eii
                           θ (A⊤ + A)−1 θw
                            ⊤                e2  ii

                         θ⊤ ϕ(xi ; x−i ) + b
            x′i = xi − ⊤ ⊤                    (A⊤ + A)−1 θ
                        θ (A + A)−1 θw    eii
Setting A = I recovers Eq. (7).


                                                         18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                             Table 2: Real data – statistics and experimental details
                          |V |      |E|        ℓ ntrain n∗test negative positive                %{y = 1}
                                                                   classes     classes          (train / test)
         Cora          2,708       5,728     1,433        640    577    0,2,3        1,4,5,6    44% / 36%
         CiteSeer      3,327       4,552     3,703        620    721    0,2,3        1,4,5      50% / 49%
         Pubmed       19,717      44,324       500        560    941    1,2          0          21% / 18%


B.3        I MPROVING NUMERICAL STABILITY BY ADDING A TOLERANCE TERM

Theoretically, strategic responses move points precisely on the decision boundary. For numerical
stability in classifying (e.g., at test time), we add a small tolerance term, tol, that ensures that points
are projected to lie strictly within the positive halfspace. Tolerance is added as follows:

                                   min
                                    ′
                                       c(x′i , xi ) s.t    θ⊤ ϕ(xi ; x−i ) + b ≥ tol                             (20)
                                    x

This necessitates the following adjustment to Eq. (7):
                                                            θ⊤ ϕ(xi ; x−i ) + b − tol
                                projh (xi ; x−i ) = xi −                              θ                          (21)
                                                                     ∥θ∥22 w
                                                                           eii
However, blindly applying the above to Eq. (8) via:
                                                       θ⊤ ϕ(xi ; x−i ) + b − tol

                  proj+
                      h (x i ; x −i ) = x i − min   0,                             θ                             (22)
                                                                ∥θ∥22 w
                                                                      eii
is erroneous, since any user whose score is lower than tol will move—although in principal she
shouldn’t. To correct for this, we adjust Eq. (8) by adding a mask that ensures that only points in the
negative halfspace are projected:
                                                                ⊤
                                      ⊤                         θ ϕ(xi ; x−i ) + b − tol
         projh (xi ; x−i ) = xi − 1{θ ϕ(xi ; x−i ) + b < 0} ·                             θ        (23)
                                                                         ∥θ∥22 w
                                                                               eii


C         A DDITIONAL EXPERIMENTAL DETAILS

Data. We experiment with three citation network datasets: Cora, CiteSeer, and Pubmed Sen et al.
(2008). Table 2 provides summary statistics of the datasets, as well as experimental details.
Splits. All three datasets include a standard train-validation-test split, which we adopt for our use.10
For our purposes, we use make no distinction between ‘train’ and ‘validation’, and use both sets for
training purposes. To ensure the data is appropriate for the inductive setting, we remove from the test
set all nodes which can be influenced by train-set nodes—this ranges from 6%-43% of the test set,
depending on dataset (and possibly setting; see Sec. D.2.1). In Table 2, the number of train samples
is denoted ntrain , and the number of inductive test samples is denoted n∗test (all original transductive
test sets include 1,000 samples).
Binarization. To make the data binary (original labels are multiclass), we enumerated over possible
partitions of classes into ‘negative’ and ‘positive’, and chose the most balanced partition. Experi-
menting with other but similarly-balanced partitions resulted in similar performance (albeit at times
less distinct strategic movement). The exception to this was PubMed (having only three classes), for
which the most balanced partition was neither ‘balanced’ nor stable, and so here we opted for the
more stable alternative. Reported partitions and corresponding negative-positive ratios (for train and
for test) are given in Table 2.
Strategic responses. At test time, strategic user responses are computed by simulating the response
dynamics in Sec. 3.1 until convergence.
    10
         Note that nodes in these sets do not necessarily account for all nodes in the graph.


                                                            19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                          positive                                                      0.90                                       neg
                                                                                                                                          0.5
                                                                                                                                                                                            T=0                    T=1
              0.8         negative                                                                                                                                              0.8


                                                                                                                                                                     accuracy
                                                                                                                                   pos
                                     T=                                                 0.85                                              0.4


                                                                                                                                           % change classification
              0.6                                                                       0.80                                                                                    0.6

 % change y
                                                                                        0.75                                              0.3


                                                                             accuracy
              0.4                                                                       0.70                                                                                          1.0    0.5    0.0      0.5   1.0        1.5
                                                                                                            +5                                                                              T=0                          T=
                                                                                                                                          0.2
                           T=1
                                                                                        0.65                 4                                                                  0.8


                                                                                                                                                                     accuracy
              0.2                                                                       0.60                 3
                                                                                                                                          0.1                                   0.6
                                                                                        0.55                 2
              0.0                                                                       0.50               T=1                                                                  0.4
                    1.5      1.0     0.5     0.0   0.5     1.0   1.5   2.0                                                                0.0                                         1.0    0.5    0.0      0.5   1.0        1.5
                                                                                               0.5   0.0      0.5      1.0   1.5    2.0
                                           threshold (b)                                                     threshold (b)                                                                         threshold (b)


Figure 5: Synthetic data: relations between movement and accuracy. All results use α = 0.7.
(Left:) The relative number of points that move for every threshold b, per class, and comparing one
round (T = 1) to convergence (T = ∞). (Center:) Accuracy for every threshold b, after one round
(T = 1) and at convergence (T = ∞). For each optimal b, bars show the relative number of points
(per class) that obtain ŷ = 1 due to strategic behavior. (Right:) Accuracy for T = 1 (top) and T = ∞
(bottom), relative to the non-strategic benchmark (T = 0), and as a result of strategic movement of
negative points (red arrows; decrease accuracy) and positive points (green arrows; improve accuracy).



D                   A DDITIONAL EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS

D.1                 E XPERIMENTS ON SYNTHETIC DATA

In this section we explore further in depth the relation between user movement and classification
performance, using our synthetic setup in Sec. 5.1 (all examples discussed herein use α = 0.7).
From a predictive point of view, graphs are generally helpful if same-class nodes are well-connected.
This is indeed the case in our construction (as can be seen by the performance of the benchmark
method with non-extreme α > 0 values). From a strategic perspective, however, connectivity
increases cooperation, since neighboring nodes can positively influence each other over time. In our
construction, cooperation occurs mostly within classes, i.e., negative points that move encourage
other negative points to move, and similarly for positive points.
Movement trends. Fig. 5 (left) shows how different threshold classifiers hb induce different degrees
of movements. The plot shows the relative number of points (in percentage points) whose predictions
changed as a result of strategic behavior, per class (red: y = −1, green: y = 1) and over time: after
one round (T = 1, dashed lines), and at convergence (T = ∞, solid lines). As can be seen, there is a
general trend: when b is small, mostly negative points move, but as b increases, positive points move
instead. The interesting point to observe is the gap between the first round (T = 1) and final round
(T = ∞). For negative points, movement at T = 1 peaks at b1 ≈ −0.25, but triggers relatively little
consequent moves. In contrast, the peak for T = ∞ occurs at a larger b∞ ≈ 0.15. For this threshold,
though less points move in the first round, these trigger significantly more additional moves at later
rounds—a result of the connectivity structure within the negative cluster of nodes (blue arrows). A
similar effect takes place for positive nodes.
The importance of looking ahead. Fig. 5 (center) plots for a range of thresholds b the accuracy
of hb at convergence (T = ∞; orange line), and after one round (T = 1; gray line). The role of the
latter is to illustrate the outcomes as ‘perceived’ by a myopic predictive model that considers only one
round (e.g., includes only one response layer ∆); ˜ the differences between the two lines demonstrate
the gap between perception (based on which training chooses a classifier ĥ) and reality (in which
the classifier ĥ is evaluated). As can be seen, the mypoic approach leads to an under-estimation of
the optimal b∗ ; at b1 ≈ 0.5, performance for T = 1 is optimal, but is severely worse under the true
T = ∞, for which optimal performance is at b∞ ≈ 1.15.
The figure also gives insight as to why this happens. For both b1 and b∞ , the figure shows (in bars)
the relative number of points from each class who obtain ŷ = 1 as a result of strategic moves. Bars
are stacked, showing the relative number of points that moved per round T (darker = earlier rounds;
lightest = convergence). As can be seen, at b1 , the myopic models believes that many positive
points, but only few negative points, will cross. However, in reality, at convergence, the number of
positive points that crossed is only slightly higher than that of negative points. Hence, the reason for
the(erroneous) optimism of the myopic model is that it did not correctly account for the magnitude of


                                                                                                                 20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                            Cora                       CiteSeer                       PubMed
           90                              80
                                                                         90
           80                              75                            80
                                                                         70
           70                              70                                         Naive
Accuracy

                                                                         60
                                                                                      Robust (ours)
                                           65                            50           Non-strategic (bench)
           60
                                           60                            40
           50                                                            30
                                           55                            20
                0       1          2   3        0    1           2   3        1          2                3
                                                      #layers (K)

           Figure 6: Accuracy for varying number of SGC layers (K). Note test sets may vary across K.



correlated moves of negative points, which is expressed over time. In contrast, note that at b∞ , barely
any negative points cross.
How movement affects accuracy. An important observation about the relation between movement
and accuracy is that for any classifier h, any negative point that moves hurts accuracy (since y = −1
but predictions become ŷ = 1), whereas any positive point that moves helps accuracy (since y = 1
and predictions are now ŷ = 1). Fig. 5 (right) shows how these movements combine to affect
accuracy. The figure compares accuracy before strategic behavior (T = 0; dashed line) to after one
response round (T = 1; solid line, top plot) and to convergence (T = ∞; solid line, lower plot). As
can be seen, for any b, the difference between pre-strategic and post-strategic accuracy amounts to
exactly the degradation due to negative points (red arrows) plus the improvement of positive points
(green arrows).
Note, however, the difference between T = 1 and T = ∞, as they relate to the benchmark model
(T = 0, i.e., no strategic behavior). For T = 1 (top), across the range of b, positive and negative
moves roughly balance out. A result of this is that curves for T = 0 and T = 1 are very much similar,
and share similar peaks in terms of accuracy (both have ≈ 0.89). One interpretation of this is that
if points were permitted to move only one round, the optimal classifier can completely recover the
benchmark accuracy by ensuring that the number of positive points the moves overcomes the number
of negative points. However, for T = ∞ (bottom), there is a skew in favor of positive points (green
arrows). The result of this is that for the optimal b, additional rounds allow positive points to move in
a way that obtains slightly higher accuracy (0.91) compared to the benchmark (0.89). This is one
possible mechanism underlying our results on synthetic data in Sec. 5.1, and later for our results on
real data in Sec. 5.2.



D.2             E XPERIMENTS ON REAL DATA

D.2.1               E XTENDING NEIGHBORHOOD SIZE

One hyperparameter of SGC is the number ‘propagation’ layers, K, which effectively determines the
graph distance at which nodes can influence others (i.e., the ‘neighborhood radius’). Given K, the
embedding weights are defined as W f = D− 21 AK D− 12 where A is the adjacency matrix and D is the
diagonal degree matrix. For K = 0, the graph is unused, which results in a standar linear classifier
over node features. Our results in the main body of the paper use K = 1.
Fig. 6 shows results for an increasing K (we set T = 3, d = 0.25 as in our main results). Results are
mixed: for PubMed, higher K seems to lead to less drop in accuracy for naïve and less recovery for
our approach; for Cora and CiteSeer, results are unstable. Note however that this may likely be a
product of our inductive setup: since varying K also changes the effective test set (since to preserve
inductiveness, larger K often necessitates removing more nodes), test sets vary across conditions and
decrease in size, making it difficult to directly compare result across different K.


                                                      21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


D.2.2    S TRATEGIC IMPROVEMENT

Our main results in Sec. 5.2 show that for CiteSeer, our strategically-aware approach outperforms the
non-strategic benchmark (similarly to our synthetic experiments). Here we show that these results are
robust. Fig. 7 provides higher-resolution results on CiteSeer for max distances d ∈ [0, 0.22] in hops
of 0.01. All other aspects the setup match the original experiment. As can be seen, our approach
slightly but consistently improves upon the benchmark until d ≈ 0.17.

                                                                   CiteSeer
                                           80.0
                                           77.5
                                           75.0

                                Accuracy
                                           72.5
                                           70.0
                                           67.5          Naive
                                           65.0          Robust (ours)
                                                         Non-strategic (bench)
                                           62.5
                                                  0.00    0.05 0.10 0.15 0.20
                                                           max moving distance (d)

  Figure 7: Accuracy on CiteSeer for increasing max distance d (focused and higher-resolution).


D.3     N ODE CENTRALITY AND INFLUENCE

In this experiment we set to explore the role played by central nodes in the graph in propagating
the influence of strategic behavior. Since the embedding of a node i is partly determined by its
in-neighbors, broadly we would expect that nodes have high out-degree would be highly influential:
as ‘anchors’ that prevent others from moving if they themselves do not, and as ‘carriers’ which either
push neighbors over the boundary—or at least promote the closer to it—if they do move.
Experimental setup. To study the role of such nodes, we preform the following experiment. First,
we order the nodes by decreasing out-degree, so that the potentially more influential nodes appear
first in the ranking. Then, for each q ∈ {0, 10, 20, ..., 100}, we disconnect nodes in the q th percentile,
i.e., remove all edges emanating from the top-q% ranked nodes. For each such condition, we examine
learning and its outcomes, and compare performance to a control condition in which nodes are
ordered randomly. The difference in performance and other learning outcomes provides us with a
measure of the importance of high-degree nodes.
Results. Figure 8 shows results for all methods (naïve, robust (ours), and the non-strategic
benchmark) and across all three datasets (Cora, CiteSeer, and Pubmed). In all conditions, we vary on
the x-axis the portion of nodes that remain connected, where at zero (left end) we get an empty graph,
and at 100 (right end) we get the original graph. Note that the y-axis varies in scale across plots.
First, consider Cora. In terms of accuracy (upper plots), results show that on the benchmark (evaluated
in a non-strategic environment, in which users do not move), the general trend is that more edges
help improve performance. However, the gain in performance is much more pronounced for high-
degree nodes. Interestingly, for the naïve method (which operates on strategically modified data, but
does not anticipate updates), the trend is reversed: user utilize edges in a way that is detrimental
to performance—and more so when high-degree nodes remain, making them a vulnerability. Our
robust approach is also sensitive to the addition of edges, but to a much lesser degree (the drop is
performance is minor); moreover, which nodes are disconnected appears to make little difference,
which we take to mean that our approach can counter the dominant role of central nodes.
The lower plots, which describe the portion of users that moves and the portion of users that crossed,
provides some explanation as to how this is achieved. For the naïve approach, nearly half of all
user move—and all users that move, also cross. This occurs faster (in terms of the portion of nodes
removed) in the degree condition. In our robust approach, note that the number of nodes that move is
halved, and of those, not all cross, which demonstrates how are learning objective, which anticiaptes
strategic behavior, can act to prevent it.


                                                                 22
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


   Figure 8: The effect of node centrality on performance and strategic behavior across datasets.


For CiteSeer and PubMed, the general trend in accuracy is reversed for the non-strategic benchmark,
and for the naïve approach, begins with a gap, which closes at some point (sooner in CiteSeer).
Despite these differences, the qualitative behavior of our robust classifier is similar to Cora, and
achieves fairly stable accuracy (with a mild negative slope) in both conditions and for both datasets.
As in citeseer, movement and crossing behavior is similar, in that for the naïve approach a considerable
portion of users move and cross (with a gap between conditions in PubMed); and in that our robust
approach greatly reduces the number of users that move, and even more so the number users that cross.


                                                  23
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


E     A DDITIONAL ANALYTIC RESULTS
E.1     P ERFORMANCE GAPS : ROBUST LEARNING VS . THE NON - STRATEGIC BENCHMARK

When learning a robust classifier on strategic data, intuitively we may hope that its performance
approaches that of the optimal classifier on non-strategic data, which we may think of as a target
upper bound. A natural question to then ask is - can we always reach this upper bound and close the
performance gap? Here we answer this question in the negative, by showing a simple example where
the optimal classifier on non-strategic data achieves perfect accuracy, but the optimal classifier on
strategic data achieves only 0.66 accuracy. We then show that by introducing a mild change—namely
slightly shifting the features of one node—the performance gap closes entirely. This, combined with
our result from the previous Sec. D.2.2 showing that the gap can also be negative, highlights how the
gap in performance greatly depends on the structure of the input (i.e., the graph, features, and labels),
and in a way which can be highly sensitive even to minor changes.

E.1.1    L ARGE GAP
Our first example in which the best obtainable gap is 0.33 is shown in Figure 9 (Left). The example
has three nodes described by one-dimensional features x1 = 1.2, x2 = −1, x3 = −1 and with labels
y1 = 1, y2 = −1, y3 = −1. We use the standard cost function so that maximal distance to move is
dβ = 2, and use uniform edge weights. Since x ∈ R, classifiers are simply threshold functions on the
real line, defined by a threshold parameter b ∈ R.
First, we demonstrate that for non-strategic data, there exists a ‘benchmark’ classifier that achieves
perfect accuracy. Let b = 0. Node embeddings are:

                        x1 + x2    1−1
                 ϕ1 =           =          =0=b
                           2         2
                        x1 + x2 + x3      1−1−1           1
                ϕ2 =                  =            =− <0=b
                             3               3            3
                        x2 + x3    −1 − 1
                ϕ3 =            =           = −1 < 0 = b
                           2           2
This give predictions ŷ1 = +1 = y1 , ŷ2 = −1 = y2 , ŷ3 = −1 = y3 , which are all correct.
Next. we prove that there is no robust classifier capable of achieving perfect accuracy on strategic
data. Suppose by contradiction that such a classifier exists, denoted b. For x2 to move in the first
round, the following conditions must hold:
                        x1 + x′2 + x3
                                      = b,       1 + x′2 − 1 = 3b,       x′2 = 3b
                             3
Since x2 moves at most distance 2, it moves in the first round only if − 31 < b ≤ 13 . However, if
it does move - it ends up getting an incorrect prediction. In addition, in this case x3 can also get
a positive prediction (either in the first round or in the next round, depending on whether b > 0),
in which case the accuracy is 13 . Thus, we get that 13 < b (note that for b < − 13 x2 is classified as
positive which is wrong).
Next, we look at the behavior of x1 in the first round. Conditions for movement are:

                          x′1 + x2
                                   = b,     x′1 − 1 = 2b,     x′1 = 2b + 1
                              2
Here x1 gets negative classification if b > 0. If b > 1, then x1 does not move, since the distance
required is larger than 2. Thus, x1 does move (beyond the classifier) and gets the correct prediction
only if 0 < b ≤ 1.
However, considering now the second round of movement for x2 (which only occurs if b > 13 since
for 0 < b ≤ 13 x2 moves at the first round), we get the conditions:
                     x′1 + x′2 + x3
                                    = b,      2b + 1 + x′2 − 1 = 3b,        x′2 = b
                           3


                                                   24
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                             Large gap                                                No gap
               optimal non-strategic   optimal robust                  optimal non-strategic   optimal robust
                     (acc=1)                    2
                                           (acc= )                           (acc=1)               (acc=1)
                                                3
                     (𝑏 = 0)             (𝑏 = 1.1)                           (𝑏 = 0)             (𝑏 = 1.1)


                                                                                                                raw 𝑥𝑖
                                                                                                                Modified Δ(𝑥𝑖 )
         𝑥2        𝜙2                                             𝑥2       𝜙2
                                                                                                                emb. 𝜙𝑖 , 𝑦ො𝑖 = 1
                                                                                                                emb. 𝜙𝑖 , 𝑦ො𝑖 = −1
                        𝜙1               𝑥1                                          𝜙1                 𝑥1
                                                                                                                graph edge


         𝑥3                                                       𝑥3

         −1              0                1                       −1             0                 1    1.2                   3


Figure 9: An example of how a small change in features leads to a large decrease in the performance
of the robust model (Left:) An optimal robust classifier achieves an accuracy of 1. (Right) The
optimal robust classifier achieves an accuracy of 23 (there is no movement in that case).


This means that for all 0 < b ≤ 1, x2 moves and gets an incorrect prediction. This occurs either
for x1 or for x2 . Consequently, there is no b that achieves an accuracy of 1, which contradicts the
assumption.
The optimal accuracy of any robust classifier for this example is 23 , which is achieved by any b > 1.
In this case, none of the nodes move, and x1 is classified negatively, whereas its true label is positive.

E.1.2    N O GAP
We now give a nearly identical example, shown in Figure 9 (Right), in which the gap becomes zero.
We use the same example as before, but set x1 = 1 (instead of x1 = 1.2). We begin by showing that
there does exist a classifier which achieves perfect accuracy on non-strategic data. Let b = 0, then
embeddings are now:
                      x1 + x2    1.2 − 1
                 ϕ1 =          =         = 0.1 > 0 = b
                         2          2
                      x1 + x2 + x3    1.2 − 1 − 1       4
               ϕ2 =                 =              =−     <0=b
                            3              3           15
                      x2 + x3    −1 − 1
               ϕ3 =            =         = −1 < 0 = b
                         2          2
(note that since all nodes are connected in the graph, changing x1 requires us to recompute all
embeddings). Predictions now become:

                             ŷ1 = +1 = y1 ,            ŷ2 = −1 = y2 ,         ŷ3 = −1 = y3
which are all correct.
Next, we show that there also exists a classifier which achieves perfect accuracy no strategic data.
Let b = 1.1. In the first round, x1 moves, and flips its predicted label:
                 x′1 + x2    x1 + 2 + x2      x1 + 2 + x2       3.2 − 1
          ϕ1 =            =                =                 =          = 1.1 = b
                     2            2                 2              2
Here, even if the other nodes move to the fullest extent, they do not have sufficient influence to revert
this prediction:
                   x1 + x′2 + x3   1.2 + −1 + 2 − 1
              ϕ2 =               =                  = 0.4 < 1.1 = b
                        3                  3
                   x2 + x′3    −1 − 1 + 2
              ϕ3 =          =             = 0 < 1.1 = b
                      2            2


                                                             25
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Thus, we get
                       ŷ1 = +1 = y1 ,            ŷ2 = −1 = y2 ,         ŷ3 = −1 = y3
which are also all correct.

E.2   S TRATEGIC BEHAVIOR OF CLIQUES

Here we give a result that considers graph structure. In particular, we consider cliques, and show that
for uniform weights, either all nodes move together—or none do.
Proposition 6. Consider n nodes which are all fully connected, i.e., form a clique, and assume
uniform edge weights. Then for any dimension d, any assignment of features x1 , . . . , xn ∈ Rd , and
for any classifier h, either (i) all n nodes move in the first round, or (ii) none of the nodes move at all.

Proof. Consider the case in which at least one node i moves in the first round. Denote by z the
                                                               (1)  (0)
change in xi made in order to cross the classifier, i.e., z = xi − xi . Note that in order for xi to
move, the following conditions must be satisfied:
                                                              (1)   (0)
                              ||z||2 ≤ 2,             θT ϕ(xi , x−i ) + b = 0
We now show that every other node t, if it moves a distance of z, then it can also cross the classifier
in the first round:
                                        (1)    P      (0)
                         (1)  (0)     xi + j̸=i xj
                     ϕ(xi ; x−i ) =
                                                n
                                            (0)       P        (0)
                                          xi + z + j̸=i xj
                                      =
                                                     n
                                                Pn     (0)
                                          z + j=1 xj
                                      =
                                                  n
                                            (0)       P        (0)
                                          xt + z + j̸=t xj
                                      =
                                                     n
                                            (1)   P        (0)
                                          xt + j̸=t xj              (1)   (0)
                                      =                        = ϕ(xt ; x−t )
                                                   n
                        (1)   (0)           (1)    (0)                     (1)   (0)
Hence, we get that ϕ(xi ; x−i ) = ϕ(xt ; x−t ), and thus θT ϕ(xt , x−t ) + b = 0, which indicates
that xt can also cross the classifier in the first round.


E.3   G RAPH DIAMETER AND THE SPREAD OF INFORMATION

Since nodes that move can influence outcomes for their neighbors, intuitively we might expect that
the diameter of the graph would be an upper bound on the reach of such influence. Here we give a
negative result which shows that influence can far exceed the diameter.
Proposition 7. Let G be a graph with diameter d, then the number of update rounds is not bounded
by d + c, for any constant c.

Proof. We prove by giving an example in which the number of rounds until convergence, T , is
roughly twice the diameter.
We use the same example as in Sec. A.2, but with the following small changes: (i) we add edge from
xn to xn+1 ; (ii) we add a new node, xn+2 = −8, and connect it with bidirectional edges to x0 and
xn+1 ; and (iii) we set the weight of every edge to be 13 . We denote by G the original graph from Sec.
A.2, and by G′ the graph with the above changes applied. By construction, G′ is a circular graph
with n + 3 nodes; hence, its diameter is ⌊ n+3
                                             2 ⌋.
We claim that the changes made to G′ do not affect the behavior of nodes, i.e., in both G and G′ , in
each round t, the same nodes move and in the same manner. Note that our construction in Sec. A.2
contains ‘modules’ of size 3 that are connected sequentially, together with start and end nodes, to


                                                         26
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                                                 …
                       −8                −4   −3      −2         −1    0   1   2


Figure 10: Circular cascading example. The diameter is ⌊ n+3
                                                          2 ⌋, but the number of movement rounds
is n.


form a graph of size n + 2. To show that the node we add in this construction does not cause the final
nodes to move, it suffices to consider whether xn+1 can cross—we will show that it cannot, which
implies that xn+2 and x0 will not cross either.
In the first round, we saw that in G, x1 moves, but for all 2 ≤ i ≤ n, xi does not move. Since there is
no change in the features of these nodes or the edge weights, this behavior also occurs in G′ . Note x0
does not move at the first round:
                (0)               (0)           (0)     1              1     1           4
         e0,0 (x0 + 3) + w
         w                 e1,0 x1 + w  en+2,0 xn+2 = (−1 + 3) + 2 + (−8) = − < 0
                                                        3              3     3           3
Next, we show that xn+2 does not move in the first round either.
          (0)                (0)                           (0)        1       1          1     4
 w
 e0,n+2 x0 + w                     en+1,n+2 xn+1 ≤
             en+2,n+2 (xn+2 + 3) + w                                    (−1) + (−8 + 3) + 2 = − < 0
                                                                      3       3          3     3
Next, we show that xn+1 does not move:
           (0)                     (0)                                1       1         1        7
w
en+2,n+1 xn+2 + w                     en,n+1 x(0)
                en+1,n+1 (xn+1 + 3) + w       n ≤                       (−8) + (2 + 3) + (−4) = − < 0
                                                                      3       3         3        3

In the second round, a node can potentially move only if one of its neighbours moved in the first
round. As in G, x2 moves in G′ as well. We now show that x0 does not move:
                 (1)               (1)         (1)          1           1   1        1
       w
       e0,0 (x0 + 3) + w
                       e1,0 x1 + w
                                 en+2,0 xn+2 =                (−1 + 3) + 5 + (−8) = − < 0
                                                            3           3   3        3

For each round t, let 3 ≤ t ≤ n correspond to the node xt which moves in G′ as it moves in G. We
now show that in round n + 1 there is no movement. In round n, xn is the only one that moves. Thus,
the only nodes that might move are its neighbors, xn−1 and xn+1 . Since xn−1 has already moved at
round n − 1, it will not move again (Prop. 1). This leaves xn+1 , which we now show does not move
either:
           (n)                 (n)                          1         1          1           4
wen+2,n+1 xn+2 + w en+1,n+1 (xn+1 + 3) + w  en,n+1 x(n)
                                                     n ≤ (−8) + (2 + 3) + (−1) = − < 0
                                                            3         3          3           3

This concludes that while the diameter of the graph is ⌊ n+3
                                                          2 ⌋, the number of rounds in n.



                                                     27
