Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


A G ENERALIZED E IGEN G AME W ITH E XTENSIONS TO
D EEP M ULTIVIEW R EPRESENTATION L EARNING
 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                                 A BSTRACT

             Generalized Eigenvalue Problems (GEPs) encompass a range of interesting di-
             mensionality reduction methods. Development of efficient stochastic approaches
             to these problems would allow them to scale to larger datasets. Canonical Cor-
             relation Analysis (CCA) is one example of a GEP for dimensionality reduction
             which has found extensive use in problems with two or more views of the data.
             Deep learning extensions of CCA require large mini-batch sizes, and therefore
             large memory consumption, in the stochastic setting to achieve good performance
             and this has limited its application in practice. Inspired by the Generalized Heb-
             bian Algorithm, we develop an approach to solving stochastic GEPs in which
             all constraints are softly enforced by Lagrange multipliers. Then by considering
             the integral of this Lagrangian function, its pseudo-utility, and inspired by recent
             formulations of Principal Components Analysis and GEPs as games with differen-
             tiable utilities, we develop a game-theory inspired approach to solving GEPs. We
             show that our approaches share much of the theoretical grounding of the previous
             Hebbian and game theoretic approaches for the linear case but our method permits
             extension to general function approximators like neural networks for certain GEPs
             for dimensionality reduction including CCA which means our method can be used
             for deep multiview representation learning. We demonstrate the effectiveness of
             our method for solving GEPs in the stochastic setting using canonical multiview
             datasets and demonstrate state-of-the-art performance for optimizing Deep CCA.


1       I NTRODUCTION
A Generalised Eigenvalue Problem (GEP) is defined by two symmetric1 matrices A, B ∈ Rd×d .
They are usually characterised by the set of solutions to the equation
                                                  Aw = λBw                                          (1)

with λ ∈ R, w ∈ Rd , called (generalised) eigenvalue and (generalised) eigenvector respectively.
Note that by taking B = I we recover the standard eigenvalue problem. We shall only be con-
cerned with the case where B is positive definite to avoid degeneracy; in this case one can find
a basis of eigenvectors spanning Rd . Without loss of generality, take w1 , . . . , wd such a basis of
eigenvectors, with decreasing corresponding eigenvalues λ1 ≥ · · · ≥ λd . The following variational
characterisation Stewart & Sun (1990) provides a useful alternative, iterative definition: wk solves
                 max w⊤ Aw        subject to w⊤ Bw = 1, w⊤ Bwj = 0 for j = 1, . . . , k 9 1.        (2)
                 w∈Rd

There is also a simpler (non-iterative) variational characterisation for the top-k subspace (that
spanned by {w1 , . . . , wk }), namely
                              max trace(W ⊤ AW )             subject to W ⊤ BW = Ik                 (3)
                            W ∈Rd×k

again see Stewart & Sun (1990); the drawback of this characterisation is it only recovers the subspace
and not the individual eigenvectors. We shall see that these two different characterisations lead to
different algorithms for the GEP.
    1
        or, more generally, Hermitian Stewart & Sun (1990)


                                                        1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Many classical dimensionality reduction methods can be viewed as GEPs including but not lim-
ited to Principal Components Analysis (Hotelling, 1933), Partial Least Squares Haenlein & Kaplan
(2004), Fisher Discriminant Analysis Mika et al. (1999), and Canonical Correlation Analysis (CCA)
(Hotelling, 1992).
Each of the problems above is defined at a population level, using population values of the matrices
A, B, usually functionals of some appropriate covariance matrices. The practical challenge is the
sample version: to estimate the population GEP where we only have estimates of A, B through
some finite number of samples (zn )N
                                   n=1 ; classically, one just solves the GEP with A, B estimated by
plugging in the relevant sample covariance matrices.
However for very large datasets, the dimensionality of the associated GEPs makes it memory and
compute intensive to compute solutions using existing full-batch algorithms; these are usually vari-
ants of the singular value decomposition where successive eigenvalue eigenvector pairs are calcu-
lated sequentially by deflation Mackey (2008) and so cannot exploit parallelism over the eigenvec-
tors.
This work was motivated in particular by CCA, a classical method for learning representations of
data with two or more distinct views: a problem known as multiview (representation) learning. Mul-
tiview learning methods are useful for learning representations of data with multiple sets of features,
or ‘views’. CCA identifies projections or subspaces in at least two different views that are highly
correlated and can be used to generate robust low-dimensional representations for a downstream pre-
diction task, to discover relationships between views, or to generate representations of a view that is
missing at test time. CCA has been widely applied across a range of fields such as Neuroimaging
(Krishnan et al., 2011), Finance (Cassel et al., 2000), and Imaging Genetics (Hansen et al., 2021).
Deep learning functional forms are often extremely effective for modelling extremely large datasets
as they have more expressivity than linear models and scale better than kernel methods. While PCA
has found a natural stochastic non-linear extension in the popular autoencoder architecture (Kramer,
1991), applications of Deep CCA (Andrew et al., 2013) have been more limited because estimation
of the constraints in the problem outside the full batch setting are more challenging to optimize. In
particular, DCCA performs badly when its objective is maximized using stochastic mini-batches.
This is unfortunate as DCCA would appear to be well suited to a number of multiview machine
learning applications as a number of successful deep multiview machine learning (Suzuki & Matsuo,
2022) and certain self-supervised learning approaches (Zbontar et al., 2021) are designed around
similar principals to DCCA; to maximize the consensus between non-linear models of different
views Nguyen & Wang (2020).
Recently, a number of algorithms have been proposed to approximate GEPs Arora et al. (2012), and
CCA specifically Bhatia et al. (2018), in the ‘stochastic’ or ‘data-streaming’ setting; these can have
big computational  savings. Typically, the computational complexity of classical GEP algorithms
is O (N + k)d2 ; by exploiting parallelism (both between eigenvectors and between samples in
a mini-batch), we can reduce this down to O (dk) (Arora et al., 2016). Stochastic algorithms also
introduce a form of regularisation which can be very helpful in these high-dimensional settings.
A key motivation for us was a recent line of work reformulating top-k eigenvalue problems as games
(Gemp et al., 2020; 2021), later extended to GEPs in Gemp et al. (2022). We shall refer to these
ideas as the ‘Eigengame framework’. Unfortunately, their GEP extension is very complicated, with
3 different hyperparameters; this complication is needed because they constrain their estimates to
lie on the unit sphere, which is a natural geometry for the usual eigenvalue problem but not natural
for the GEP. By replacing this unit sphere constraint with a Lagrange multiplier penalty, we obtain
a much simpler method (GHA-GEP) with only a single hyperparameter; this is a big practical im-
provement because the convergence of the algorithms is mostly sensitive to step-size (learning rate)
parameter Li & Jordan (2021), and it allows a practitioner to explore many more learning rates for
the same computational budget. We also propose a second class of method (δ-EigenGame) defined
via optimising explicit utility functions, rather than being defined via updates, which enjoys the
same practical advantages and similar performance. These utilities give unconstrained variational
forms for GEPs that we have not seen elsewhere in the literature and may be of independent interest;
their key practical advantage is that they only contain linear factors of A, B so we can easily obtain
unbiased updates for gradients. The other key advantage of these utility-based methods is that they


                                                  2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


can easily be extended to use deep learning to solve problems motivated by GEPs. In particular we
propose a simple but powerful method for the Deep CCA problem.


1.1    N OTATION

We have collected here some notational conventions which we think may provide a helpful reference
for the reader. We shall always have A, B ∈ Rd . We denote (estimates to or dummy variables for)
the ith generalised eigenvectors by wi ; and denote CCA directions ui ∈ Rp , vi ∈ Rq . The number
of directions we want to estimate will be k. For stochastic algorithms, we denote batch-size by b.
We use ⟨·, ·⟩ for inner products; implicitly we always take Euclidean inner product over vectors and
Frobenius or ‘trace’ inner product for matrices.


2     A C ONSTRAINT-F REE A LGORITHM FOR GEP S

Our first proposed method solves the general form of the generalized eigenvalue problem in equation
(2) for the top-k eigenvalues and their associated eigenvectors in parallel. We are thus interested in
both the top-k subspace problem and the top-k eigenvectors themselves. Our method extends the
Generalized Hebbian Algorithm to GEPs, and we thus refer to it as GHA-GEP.
In the full-batch version of our algorithm, each eigenvector estimate has updates with the form


                                    Penalty              Variance Penalty     Orthogonality Penalty
                 Reward   zX         }|       { Reward                       z      }|         {
                   z}|{                          z}|{ z        }|          { X
      ∆GHA-GEP                  B ŵj ŵj Aŵi = Aŵi − B ŵi ŵi⊤ Aŵi −
                                        ⊤
                                                                               B ŵj ŵj⊤ Aŵi

       i       = Aŵi −                                                                               (4)
                          j≤i                                               j<i
                                Penalty
                 Rewardz  }|     {
                z}|{ X
              = Aŵi −   B ŵj Γij                                                                    (5)
                          j≤i



where ŵj is our estimator to the eigenvector associated with the j th largest eigenvalue and in the
stochastic setting, we can replace  A and B with their unbiased estimates Â and B̂. We will use
the notation Γij = ŵj⊤ Aŵi to facilitate comparison with previous work in Appendix A. Γij has


a natural interpretation as Lagrange  multiplier for the constraint wi⊤ Bwj = 0; indeed, Chen et al.
                      ⊤

(2019) prove that ŵj Aŵi is the optimal value of the corresponding Lagrange multiplier for their
GEP formulation; we summarise this derivation in Appendix C.2 for ease of reference. We also label
the terms as rewards and penalties to facilitate discussion with respect to the EigenGame framework
in Appendix A.3 and recent work in self-supervised learning in Appendix E.
Proposition 2.1 (Unique stationary point). Given exact parents and assuming the top-k generalized
eigenvalues of A and B are distinct and positive, the only stable stationary point of the iteration
defined by (5) eigenvector wi (up to sign).


2.1    D EFINING U TILITIES AND P SEUDO -U TILITIES WITH L AGRANGIAN F UNCTIONS

Now observe that our proposed updates can be written as the gradients of a Lagrangian pseudo-utility
function:
                                                                                X
          PU GHA-GEP
             i       (wi |wj<i , Γ) = 21 ŵi⊤ Aŵi + 21 Γii (1 − ŵi⊤ B ŵi ) −   Γij ŵj⊤ B ŵi . (6)
                                                                            j<i


We show how this result is closely related to the pseudo-utility functions in Chen et al. (2019) and
suggests an alternative pseudo-utility function for the work in Gemp et al. (2021) in Appendix C.3
which, unlike the original work, does not require stop gradient operators.


                                                    3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


If we plug in the relevant wi and wj terms into Γ, we obtain the following utility function:
                                                                         X ⊤
          Uiδ (wi ; wj<i ) = 12 ŵi⊤ Aŵi + 12 ŵi⊤ Aŵi 1 − ŵi⊤ B ŵi − ŵi Aŵj ŵj⊤ B ŵi
                                                                                   j<i
                                                                                X
                            = (ŵi⊤ Aŵi ) − 12 (ŵi⊤ Aŵi )(ŵi⊤ B ŵi ) −           (ŵi⊤ Aŵj )(ŵj⊤ B ŵi )       (7)
                                                                                j<i

A remarkable fact is that this utility function actually defines a solution to the GEP problem! We
prove the following consistency result in Appendix B.1.
Proposition 2.2 (Unique stationary point). Assuming the top-i generalized eigenvalues of the GEP
(2) are positive and distinct. Then the unique maximizer of the utility in (7) for exact parents is
precisely the ith eigenvector (up to sign).
An immediate corollary is:
Corollary 2.1. The top-k generalized eigenvectors form the unique, strict Nash equilibrium of ∆-
EigenGame
Furthermore, the penalty terms in the utility function (6) have a natural interpretation as a projection
deflation as shown in appendix C.5.
This utility function allows us to formalise ∆-EigenGame, whose solution corresponds to the top-k
solution of equation (2).
Definition 2.1. Let ∆-EigenGame be the game with players i ∈ {1, ..., k}, strategy space ŵi ∈ Rd ,
where d is the dimensionality of A and B, and utilities Uiδ defined in equation (7
Next note that it is easy to compute the derivative
          ∂Uiδ (wi ; wj<i )
   ∆δi =                                                                                                              (8)
                 ∂wi
                                                                   X
        = 2Aŵi − {Aŵi (ŵi⊤ B ŵi ) + (ŵi⊤ Aŵi )B ŵi } −             {Aŵj (ŵj⊤ B ŵi ) + (ŵj⊤ Aŵi )B ŵj }
                                                                    j<i
                                    X
        = ∆GHA-GEP
           i       + {Aŵi −              Aŵj (ŵj⊤ B ŵi )}
                                    j≤i
This motivates an alternative algorithm for the GEP which we call δ-EigenGame (where, consistent
with previous work, we use upper case for the game and lower case for its associated algorithm).

2.2   S TOCHASTIC /DATA - STREAMING VERSIONS

This paper is motivated by cases where the algorithm only has access to unbiased sample estimates
of A and B. These estimates, denoted Â and B̂, are therefore random variables. A nice property of
both our proposed GHA-GEP and δ-EigenGame is that A and B appear as multiplications in both
of their updates (as opposed to as divisors). This means that we can simply substitute them for our
unbiased estimates at each iteration. For the GHA-GEP algorithm this gives us updates based on
stochastic unbiased estimates of the gradient

                                                         X
                                 ˆ GHA-GEP =Âŵi −
                                 ∆                              B̂ ŵj ŵj⊤ Âŵi .                                   (9)
                                   i
                                                          j≤i

Which we can use to form algorithm 1.
Likewise we can form stochastic updates for δ-EigenGame

                                                                  X
 ∆δi = 2Âŵi − {Âŵi (ŵi⊤ B̂ ŵi ) + (ŵi⊤ Âŵi )B̂ ŵi } −         {Âŵj (ŵj⊤ B̂ ŵi ) + (ŵj⊤ Âŵi )B̂ ŵj } (10)
                                                                  j<i

Which give us algorithm 2.
Furthermore, the simplicity of the form of the updates means that, in contrast to previous work, our
updates in the stochastic setting require only one hyperparameter - the learning rate.


                                                         4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Algorithm 1 A Sample Based Generalized Hebbian Algorithm for GEP
    Input: data stream Zt consisting of b samples from zn . Learning rate (ηt )t . Number of time steps
    T . Number of eigenvectors to compute k.
    Initialise: (ŵi )K
                      i=1 with random uniform entries
    for t = 1 to T do
       Construct independent unbiased estimates Â and B̂ from Zt
       for i = 1 to k do
         ŵi ← ŵi + ηt ∆ ˆ GHA-GEP {As defined in (9)}
                            i
       end for
    end for

Algorithm 2 A Sample Based δ-EigenGame for GEP
    Input: data stream Zt consisting of b samples from zn . Learning rate (ηt )t . Number of time steps
    T . Number of eigenvectors to compute k.
    Initialise: (ŵi )K
                      i=1 with random uniform entries
    for t = 1 to T do
       Construct independent unbiased estimates Â and B̂ from Zt
       for i = 1 to k do
         ŵi ← ŵi + ηt ∆δi {As defined in (10)}
       end for
    end for


2.3    C OMPLEXITY AND I MPLEMENTATION

For the GEPs we are motivated by, and in particular for CCA, Â and B̂ are low rank matrices
(specifically, they have at most rank b where b is the mini-batch size). This means that, like previous
variants of EigenGame, our algorithm has a per-iteration cost of O(bdk 2 ). We can similarly leverage
parallel computing in both the eigenvectors (players) and data to achieve a theoretical complexity of
O(dk).
A particular benefit of our proposed form is that we only require one hyperparameter which makes
hyperparameter tuning particularly efficient. This is particularly important as prior work has demon-
strated that methods related to the stochastic power method are highly sensitive to the choice of
learning rate Li & Jordan (2021). Indeed, by using a decaying learning rate the user can in principle
run our algorithm just once to a desired accuracy given their computational budget. This is in con-
trast to recent work proposing an EigenGame solution to stochastic GEPs (Gemp et al., 2022) which
requires three hyperparameters.

3     A PPLICATION TO CCA AND E XTENSION TO F OR D EEP CCA

Previous EigenGame approaches have not been extended to include deep learning functions. Gemp
et al. (2020) noted that the objectives of the players in α-EigenGame were all generalized inner
products which should extend to general function approximators. However, it was unclear how to
translate the constraints in previous EigenGame approaches to the neural network setting. In con-
trast, we have shown that our work is constraint free but can still be written completely as generalized
inner products for certain GEPs and, in particular, dimensionality reduction methods like CCA.

3.1    C ANONICAL C ORRELATION A NALYSIS

Suppose we have vector-valued random variables X, Y ∈ Rp , Rq respectively. Then CCA
(Hotelling, 1992) defines a sequence of pairs of ‘canonical directions’ (ui , vi ) ∈ Rp+q by the it-
erative maximisations
      max        Cov(u⊤ X, v ⊤ Y )   subject to Cov(u⊤ X) = Cov(v ⊤ Y ) = 1,                       (11)
    u∈Rp ,v∈Rq

                                              Cov(u⊤ X, u⊤           ⊤    ⊤
                                                         j X) = Cov(v Y, vj Y ) = 0 for j < i.



                                                   5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Now write Cov(X) = ΣXX , Cov(Y ) = ΣY Y , Cov(X, Y ) = ΣXY . It is straightforward to show
(Borga (1998)) that CCA corresponds to a GEP with


               0    ΣXY                           ΣXX            0                    u
      A=                        ,      B=                                 ,       w=     ,              d = p + q.   (12)
            ΣY X     0                             0         ΣY Y                     v

For the sample version of CCA, suppose we have observations (xn , yn )N    n=1 , which have been pre-
processed to have mean zero. Then the classical CCA estimator solves the GEV above with covari-
ances replaced by sample covariances Anderson (2003). To define our algorithm in the stochastic
case, suppose that at time step t we define Ât , B̂t by plugging sample covariances of the mini-batch
at time t.

3.2   δ-E IGEN G AME FOR CCA

We defined CCA by maximising correlation between linear functionals of the two views of data;
we can extend this to DCCA by instead considering non-linear functionals defined by deep neural
networks. Consider neural networks f, g which respectively map X and Y to a d dimensional
subspace. We will refer to the k th dimension of these subspaces using fk (X) and gk (X) where
f (X) = [f1 (X), ..., fd (X)] and g(X) = [g1 (X), ..., gd (X)]. Deep CCA finds f and g which
maximize Corr(fi (X), gi (Y )) subject to orthogonality constraints.
To motivate an algorithm, note that (7) is just a function of the inner products

                          ⟨ŵi , Aŵj ⟩ = Cov(u⊤     ⊤            ⊤     ⊤
                                               i X, vj Y ) + Cov(vi Y, uj X)

                          ⟨ŵi , B ŵj ⟩ = Cov(u⊤     ⊤           ⊤     ⊤
                                                i X, uj X) + Cov(vi Y, vj Y )


So replacing u⊤                    ⊤
              i X with fi (X) and vi Y with gi (Y ), and using the short-hand


                            Ãij = Cov(fi (X), gj (Y )) + Cov(gi (Y ), fj (X))                                       (13)
                            B̃ij = Cov(fi (X), fj (X)) + Cov(gi (Y ), gj (Y ))                                       (14)

we obtain the objective
                                                                                     X
                         Uiδ (fi , gi |fj<i , gj<i ) = 2Ãii − Ãii B̃ii − 2                Ãij B̃ij                (15)
                                                                                     j<i



Next observe by symmetry of matrices Ã, B̃ that if we sum the first k utilities we obtain
                         k
                         X             k
                                       X               k
                                                       X                         k X
                                                                                 X
               Uksum =         Uiδ =         2Ãii −         Ãii B̃ii − 2                 Ãij B̃ij
                         i=1           i=1             i=1                       i=1 j<i
                                                         k
                                                         X
                                    = 2 trace(Ã) −                  Ãij B̃ij
                                                        i,j=1

                                    = 2 trace(Ã) − trace(ÃB̃ ⊤ ) = trace Ã(2Ik − B̃)                              (16)


The key strength of this covariance based formulation is that we can obtain a full-batch algorithm
by simply plugging in the sample covariance over the full batch; and obtain a mini-batch update by
plugging in sample covariances on the mini-batch. We define DCCA-EigenGame in algorithm 3,
where we slightly abuse notation: we write mini-batches in matrix form Xt ∈ Rp×b , Yt ∈ Rq×b and
use short hand f (Xt ), f (Yt ) to denote applying f, g to each sample in the mini-batch.


                                                             6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Algorithm 3 DCCA EigenGame

    Input: Stream of data with mini-batch size b Xt ∈ Rb×p , Yt ∈ Rb×q ) , neural networks f (X),
    g(Y ) parameterized by θ̂ and ψ̂, learning rate η
    for t = 1 to T do
      Construct unbiased
                                  Ã and B̃ from f (Xt ) and g(Yt )
                          estimates
      U ← trace Ã(2Ik − B̃)
      ∇˜ f ← ∂U , ∇˜ g ← ∂U
              ∂f          ∂g
                      ˜ f , ψ̂t+1 ← ψ̂t + η ∇
      θ̂t+1 ← θ̂t + η ∇                     ˜g
    end for


We have motivated a loss function for SGD by a heuristic argument. We now give a theoretical result
justifying the choice. Recall the top-k variational characterisation of the GEP in (3) was hard to use
in practice because of the constraints; we can use this to prove that the form above characterises the
GEP.
Proposition 3.1 (Subspace characterisation). The top-k subspace for the GEP (1) can be charac-
terised by
                               max trace W ⊤ AW (2 Ik − W ⊤ BW )

                                                                                                  (17)
                               W ∈Rd×k

We prove this result in Appendix B.3. We also provide an alternative derivation of the utility of (16)
from the paper of Wang et al. (2015c) in Appendix C.1.

4     R ELATED W ORK
In particular we note the contemporaneous work in Gemp et al. (2022), termed γ-EigenGame, which
directly addresses the stochastic GEP setting we have described in this work using an EigenGame-
inspired approach. Since their method was designed around the Rayleigh quotient form of GEPs,
it takes a different and more complicated form and requires additional hyperparameters in order to
remove bias from the updates in the stochastic setting due to their proposed utility function contain-
ing random variables in denominator terms. It also isn’t clear that their updates are the gradients of
a utility function. Meng et al. (2021) developed an algorithm, termed RSG+, for streaming CCA
which stochastically approximates the principal components of each view in order to approximate
the top-k CCA problem, in effect transforming the data so that B = I to simplify the problem.
Arora et al. (2017) developed a Matrix Stochastic Gradient method for finding the top-k CCA sub-
space. However, the efficiency of this method depends on mini-batch samples of 1 and scales poorly
to larger mini-batch sizes. While there have also been a number of approaches to the top-1 CCA
problem (Li & Jordan, 2021; Bhatia et al., 2018), the closest methods in motivation and performance
to our work on the linear problem are γ-EigenGame, SGHA, and RSG+.
The original DCCA (Andrew et al., 2013) was defined by the objective

                                                      −1/2     −1/2
                                  max tracenorm(Σ̂XX Σ̂XY Σ̂Y Y )                                (18)

and demonstrated strong performance in multiview learning tasks when optimized with the full batch
L-BFGS optimizer (Liu & Nocedal, 1989). However when the objective is evaluated for small mini-
                                  −1/2      −1/2
batches, the whitening matrices Σ̂XX and Σ̂Y Y are likely to be ill-conditioned, causing gradient
estimation to be biased.
Wang et al. (2015b) observed that despite the biased gradients, the original DCCA objective could
still be used in the stochastic setting for large enough mini-batches, a method referred to in the
literature as stochastic optimization with large mini-batches (DCCA-STOL). Wang et al. (2015c)
developed a method which adaptively approximated the covariance of the embedding for each view
in order to whiten the targets of a regression in each view. This mean square error type loss can then
be decoupled across samples in a method called non-linear orthogonal iterations (DCCA-NOI). To
the best of our knowledge this method is the current state-of-the-art for DCCA optimisation using
stochastic mini-batches.


                                                  7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Figure 1: CCA with stochastic mini-batches: proportion of correlation captured with respect to
Scipy ground truth b yGHA-GEP and δ-EigenGame vs prior work. The maximum value is 1.


Figure 2: CCA with stochastic mini-batches: proportion of correlation captured with respect to
Scipy ground truth by GHA-GEP and δ-EigenGame vs prior work. The maximum value is 1.


5     E XPERIMENTS

In this section we replicate experiments from recent work on stochastic CCA and Deep CCA in
order to demonstrate the accuracy and efficiency of our method.


5.1   S TOCHASTIC S OLUTIONS TO CCA

In this section we compare GHA-GEP and δ-EigenGame to previous methods for approximating
CCA in the stochastic setting. We optimize for the top-8 eigenvectors for the MediaMill, Split
MNIST and Split CIFAR datasets, replicating Gemp et al. (2022); Meng et al. (2021) with double
the number of components and mini-batch size 128 and comparing our method to theirs. We use the
Scipy (Virtanen et al., 2020) package to solve the population GEPs as a ground truth value and use
the proportion of correlation captured (PCC) captured by the learnt subspace as compared to this
population ground truth (defined in Appendix F.2).
Figure 1 shows that for all three datasets, both GHA-GEP and δ-EigenGame exhibit faster con-
vergence on both a per-iteration basis compared to prior work and likewise in terms of runtime in
figure 2. They also demonstrate comparable or higher PCC at convergence. In these experiments
δ-EigenGame was found to outperform GHA-GEP. These results were broadly consistent across
mini-batch sizes from 32 to 128 which we demonstrate in further experiments in Appendix G.1.
The strong performance of GHA-GEP and δ-EigenGame is likely to be because their updates adap-
tively weight the objective and constraints of the problem and are not constrained arbitrarily to the
unit sphere. We further explore the shape of the utility function in Appendix C.4.


5.2   S TOCHASTIC S OLUTIONS TO D EEP CCA

In this section we compare DCCA-EigenGame and DCCA-SGHA to previous methods for opti-
mizing DCCA in the stochastic setting. We replicated an experiment from Wang et al. (2015c) and
compare our proposed methods to DCCA-NOI and DCCA-STOL. Like previous work, we use the
total correlation captured (TCC) of the learnt subspace as a metric (defined in Appendix F.1).


                                                 8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Figure 3: Total correlation captured by the 50 latent dimensions in the validation data. The maximum
value is 50. The top row show results for mini-batch size 20 and the bottom row show results for
mini-batch size 100


In all three datasets, figure 3 shows that DCCA-EigenGam finds higher correlations in the validation
data than all methods except DCCA-STOL with n = 500 with typically faster convergence in early
iterations compared to DCCA-NOI.

6   C ONCLUSION
We have presented two novel algorithms for optimizing stochastic GEPs. The first, GHA-GEP was
based on extending the popular GHA and we showed how it could be understood as optimising
a Lagrangian psuedo-utility function. The second, δ-EigenGame, was developed by swapping the
Lagrange multipliers to give a proper utility function which allowed us to define the solution of a
GEP with ∆-EigenGame. Our proposed methods have simple and elegant forms and require only
one choice of hyperparameter, making them extremely practical and both demonstrated comparable
or better runtime and performance as compared to prior work.
We also showed how this approach can also be used to optimize Deep CCA and demonstrated
state-of-the-art performance when using stochastic mini-batches. We believe that this will allow
researchers to apply DCCA to a much wider range of problems.
In future work, we will apply δ-EigenGame to other practically interesting GEPs like Generalized
CCA for more than two views and Fisher Discriminant Analysis. We will also explore the extensions
of other GEPs to the deep learning case in order to build principled deep representations.

R EFERENCES
T. W. Anderson. An introduction to multivariate statistical analysis. Wiley series in probability and
   statistics. Wiley-Interscience, Hoboken, N.J, 3rd ed edition, 2003. ISBN 978-0-471-36091-9.
Galen Andrew, Raman Arora, Jeff Bilmes, and Karen Livescu. Deep canonical correlation analysis.
  In International conference on machine learning, pp. 1247–1255. PMLR, 2013.
Raman Arora, Andrew Cotter, Karen Livescu, and Nathan Srebro. Stochastic optimization for pca
  and pls. In 2012 50th Annual Allerton Conference on Communication, Control, and Computing
  (Allerton), pp. 861–868. IEEE, 2012.
Raman Arora, Poorya Mianjy, and Teodor Marinov. Stochastic optimization for multiview repre-
  sentation learning using partial least squares. In International Conference on Machine Learning,
  pp. 1786–1794. PMLR, 2016.


                                                 9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Raman Arora, Teodor Vanislavov Marinov, Poorya Mianjy, and Nati Srebro. Stochastic approxima-
  tion for canonical correlation analysis. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 30,
  2017.

Igor Babuschkin, Kate Baumli, Alison Bell, Surya Bhupatiraju, Jake Bruce, Peter Buchlovsky,
  David Budden, Trevor Cai, Aidan Clark, Ivo Danihelka, Claudio Fantacci, Jonathan Godwin,
  Chris Jones, Tom Hennigan, Matteo Hessel, Steven Kapturowski, Thomas Keck, Iurii Kemaev,
  Michael King, Lena Martens, Vladimir Mikulik, Tamara Norman, John Quan, George Papa-
  makarios, Roman Ring, Francisco Ruiz, Alvaro Sanchez, Rosalia Schneider, Eren Sezener,
  Stephen Spencer, Srivatsan Srinivasan, Wojciech Stokowiec, and Fabio Viola. The DeepMind
  JAX Ecosystem, 2020. URL http://github.com/deepmind.

Randall Balestriero and Yann LeCun. Contrastive and non-contrastive self-supervised learning re-
  cover global and local spectral embedding methods. arXiv preprint arXiv:2205.11508, 2022.

Adrien Bardes, Jean Ponce, and Yann LeCun. Vicreg: Variance-invariance-covariance regularization
  for self-supervised learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2105.04906, 2021.

Kush Bhatia, Aldo Pacchiano, Nicolas Flammarion, Peter L Bartlett, and Michael I Jordan. Gen-
  oja: Simple & efficient algorithm for streaming generalized eigenvector computation. Advances
  in neural information processing systems, 31, 2018.

Lukas Biewald. Experiment tracking with weights and biases, 2020. URL https://www.
  wandb.com/. Software available from wandb.com.

Magnus Borga. Learning Multidimensional Signal Processing. PhD thesis, 1998. URL http:
 //urn.kb.se/resolve?urn=urn:nbn:se:liu:diva-54341. Publisher: Linköping
 University Electronic Press.

Vivek S. Borkar. Stochastic approximation: a dynamical systems viewpoint / Vivek S. Borkar. Cam-
  bridge University Press ; Hindustan Book Agency, Cambridge : New Delhi, 2008. ISBN 978-0-
  521-51592-4.

Claes M Cassel, Peter Hackl, and Anders H Westlund. On measurement of intangible assets: a study
  of robustness of partial least squares. Total Quality Management, 11(7):897–907, 2000.

Zhehui Chen, Xingguo Li, Lin Yang, Jarvis Haupt, and Tuo Zhao. On constrained nonconvex
  stochastic optimization: A case study for generalized eigenvalue decomposition. In The 22nd
  International Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Statistics, pp. 916–925. PMLR, 2019.

Ian Gemp, Brian McWilliams, Claire Vernade, and Thore Graepel. Eigengame unloaded: When
  playing games is better than optimizing, 2021.

Ian Gemp, Charlie Chen, and Brian McWilliams. The generalized eigenvalue problem as a nash
  equilibrium. arXiv preprint arXiv:2206.04993, 2022.

Ian M. Gemp, Brian McWilliams, Claire Vernade, and Thore Graepel. Eigengame: PCA as a
  nash equilibrium. CoRR, abs/2010.00554, 2020. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2010.
  00554.

Michael Haenlein and Andreas M Kaplan. A beginner’s guide to partial least squares analysis.
 Understanding statistics, 3(4):283–297, 2004.

Justine Hansen, Ross Markello, Jacob Vogel, Jakob Seidlitz, Danilo Bzdok, and Bratislav Misic.
  Mapping gene transcription and neurocognition across human neocortex. Nature Human Be-
  haviour, 5:1–11, 09 2021. doi: 10.1038/s41562-021-01082-z.

Harold Hotelling. Analysis of a complex of statistical variables into principal components. Journal
  of educational psychology, 24(6):417, 1933.

Harold Hotelling. Relations between two sets of variates. In Breakthroughs in statistics, pp. 162–
  190. Springer, 1992.

                                                10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Diederik P Kingma and Jimmy Ba. Adam: A method for stochastic optimization. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:1412.6980, 2014.

Mark A Kramer. Nonlinear principal component analysis using autoassociative neural networks.
 AIChE journal, 37(2):233–243, 1991.

Anjali Krishnan, Lynne Williams, Anthony McIntosh, and Hervé Abdi. Partial least squares (pls)
  methods for neuroimaging: A tutorial and review. NeuroImage, 56:455–75, 05 2011. doi: 10.
  1016/j.neuroimage.2010.07.034.

Alex Krizhevsky, Geoffrey Hinton, et al. Learning multiple layers of features from tiny images.
  2009.

Harold J. Kushner, George Yin, and Harold J. Kushner. Stochastic approximation and recursive
  algorithms and applications. Number 35 in Applications of mathematics. Springer, New York,
  2003. ISBN 978-0-387-00894-3.

Yann LeCun, Corinna Cortes, and Chris Burges. Mnist handwritten digit database, 2010.

Chris Junchi Li and Michael I Jordan. Nonconvex stochastic scaled-gradient descent and generalized
  eigenvector problems. arXiv preprint arXiv:2112.14738, 2021.

Dong C Liu and Jorge Nocedal. On the limited memory bfgs method for large scale optimization.
  Mathematical programming, 45(1):503–528, 1989.

Lester Mackey. Deflation methods for sparse pca. Advances in neural information processing
  systems, 21, 2008.

Zihang Meng, Rudrasis Chakraborty, and Vikas Singh. An online riemannian pca for stochastic
  canonical correlation analysis. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 34:14056–
  14068, 2021.

Sebastian Mika, Gunnar Ratsch, Jason Weston, Bernhard Scholkopf, and Klaus-Robert Mullers.
  Fisher discriminant analysis with kernels. In Neural networks for signal processing IX: Proceed-
  ings of the 1999 IEEE signal processing society workshop (cat. no. 98th8468), pp. 41–48. Ieee,
  1999.

Nam D Nguyen and Daifeng Wang. Multiview learning for understanding functional multiomics.
  PLoS computational biology, 16(4):e1007677, 2020.

Adam Paszke, Sam Gross, Francisco Massa, Adam Lerer, James Bradbury, Gregory Chanan, Trevor
  Killeen, Zeming Lin, Natalia Gimelshein, Luca Antiga, Alban Desmaison, Andreas Kopf, Edward
  Yang, Zachary DeVito, Martin Raison, Alykhan Tejani, Sasank Chilamkurthy, Benoit Steiner,
  Lu Fang, Junjie Bai, and Soumith Chintala. Pytorch: An imperative style, high-performance
  deep learning library. In H. Wallach, H. Larochelle, A. Beygelzimer, F. d'Alché-Buc, E. Fox, and
  R. Garnett (eds.), Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 32, pp. 8024–8035. Curran
  Associates, Inc., 2019.

Terence D Sanger. Optimal unsupervised learning in a single-layer linear feedforward neural net-
  work. Neural networks, 2(6):459–473, 1989.

Suhail M. Shah. Stochastic Approximation on Riemannian manifolds, November 2017. URL
  http://arxiv.org/abs/1711.10754. arXiv:1711.10754 [math].

G. W. Stewart and Ji-Guang Sun. Matrix Perturbation Theory. ACADEMIC PressINC, July 1990.
  ISBN 978-1-4933-0199-7.       URL https://books.google.co.uk/books/about/
  Matrix_Perturbation_Theory.html?id=bIYEogEACAAJ&redir_esc=y.
  Google-Books-ID: bIYEogEACAAJ.

Masahiro Suzuki and Yutaka Matsuo. A survey of multimodal deep generative models. Advanced
 Robotics, 36(5-6):261–278, feb 2022. doi: 10.1080/01691864.2022.2035253. URL https:
 //doi.org/10.1080%2F01691864.2022.2035253.


                                                11
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Pauli Virtanen, Ralf Gommers, Travis E Oliphant, Matt Haberland, Tyler Reddy, David Cournapeau,
  Evgeni Burovski, Pearu Peterson, Warren Weckesser, Jonathan Bright, et al. Scipy 1.0: funda-
  mental algorithms for scientific computing in python. Nature methods, 17(3):261–272, 2020.

Weiran Wang, Raman Arora, Karen Livescu, and Jeff Bilmes. On deep multi-view representation
 learning. In International conference on machine learning, pp. 1083–1092. PMLR, 2015a.

Weiran Wang, Raman Arora, Karen Livescu, and Jeff A Bilmes. Unsupervised learning of acous-
 tic features via deep canonical correlation analysis. In 2015 IEEE International Conference on
 Acoustics, Speech and Signal Processing (ICASSP), pp. 4590–4594. IEEE, 2015b.

Weiran Wang, Raman Arora, Karen Livescu, and Nathan Srebro. Stochastic optimization for deep
 cca via nonlinear orthogonal iterations. In 2015 53rd Annual Allerton Conference on Communi-
 cation, Control, and Computing (Allerton), pp. 688–695. IEEE, 2015c.

Svante Wold, Arnold Ruhe, Herman Wold, and WJ Dunn, Iii. The collinearity problem in linear
  regression. the partial least squares (pls) approach to generalized inverses. SIAM Journal on
  Scientific and Statistical Computing, 5(3):735–743, 1984.

Jure Zbontar, Li Jing, Ishan Misra, Yann LeCun, and Stéphane Deny. Barlow twins: Self-supervised
  learning via redundancy reduction. arXiv preprint arXiv:2103.03230, 2021.


A     C OMPARISON TO P REVIOUS W ORK

A.1    G ENERALIZED H EBBIAN A LGORITHM

Our update is closely related to the Generalized Hebbian Algorithm (GHA) (Sanger, 1989) for solv-
ing the PCA problem with updates:

                                             X                            X
                         ∆GHA                      ŵj ŵj⊤ Aŵi = Aŵi −

                          i   = Aŵi −                                      ŵj Γij                           (19)
                                             j≤i                             j≤i


which was originally designed to be solved sequentially rather than in parallel. Note that for GEPs
where B = Id like PCA, our proposed method collapses exactly to GHA.

A.2    S TOCHASTIC G ENERALIZED H EBBIAN A LGORITHM

To understand how our method extends GHA to generalized eigenvalue problems we consider the
Stochastic Generalized Hebbian Algorithm (SGHA) (Chen et al., 2019)2 . SGHA is derived from the
min-max Lagrangian form of (3):


                              max L(W, Γ) = − tr W ⊤ AW + Γ, W ⊤ BW − Ik

                     min                                                                                      (20)
                  W ∈Rd×k Γ∈Rk×k


Where W is a matrix that captures the top-k subspace (but not necessarily the top-k eigenvectors)
and Γ is a Lagrange multiplier that enforces the constraint in (2) along with the B-orthogonality
                                                                                                of
each eigenvector. By solving for the KKT conditions of equation (20), we have Γ = W ⊤ AW and
the authors propose to combine the primal and dual updates into a single step to give symmetrical
updates for each eigenvector:

                                           X                             X
                      ∆SGHA                     B ŵj ŵj⊤ Aŵi = Aŵi −

                       i    = Aŵi −                                       B ŵj Γij                          (21)
                                            j                                  j

   2
     Though the authors called this SGHA, it is rather different to the original proposal, because it is a subspace
method rather than an iterative one


                                                        12
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Where we highlight in red the key difference between our method and SGHA: that there is no
hierarchy imposed on eigenvectors, so method can only recover top-k subspace; this is in contrast to
our proposal, all eigengame methods, and indeed the original GHA method. As noted by Gemp et al.
(2020), imposing a hierarchy often appears to improve the stability of the algorithm in experiments
and has the additional benefit of returning ordered eigenvectors.


A.3   µ-E IGEN G AME

Finally, our method is closely related to µ-EigenGame Gemp et al. (2021) - though this is only
defined for the B = Id case. Their method restricts estimates to lie on the unit sphere, using
Riemannian optimization tools to update in directions defined by
                                          X                            X
                       ∆µi = Aŵi −             ŵj ŵj⊤ Aŵi = Aŵi −

                                                                         ŵj Γij                (22)
                                          j<i                              j<i


where we again highlight in red the difference compared to our proposal: µ-EigenGame however
does not have the j = i term in its penalty (and therefore does not use the Γii Lagrange multipliers
associated with the unit variance constraint ŵi⊤ ŵi = 1).


B     P ROOFS AND FURTHER THEORETICAL ANALYSIS

B.1   ∆- EIGENGAME T HEORY

We recall proposition 2.2:
Proposition 2.2 (Unique stationary point). Assuming the top-i generalized eigenvalues of the GEP
(2) are positive and distinct. Then the unique maximizer of the utility in (7) for exact parents is
precisely the ith eigenvector (up to sign).



Proof. For ease of reading the proofs in this appendix, we slightly change notation, and index the
normalised solutions to the GEV with superscripts:

                             ⟨w(i) , Bw(i) ⟩ = 1,      ⟨w(i) , Aw(i) ⟩ = λ(i) ∀i,

while we continue to index our estimates with subscripts. We can write our estimates in this basis to
                             P (p)
define the coefficients ŵi = p νi w(p) . Next define

                                                       (p)
                                                X
                                      mi =           (νi )2
                                                 p
                                                     (j)             (j)
                                      (j)      (ν )2     (ν )2
                                     zi     = P i (p) = i
                                                       2   mi
                                                p (νi )

                         (j)
so that the vector zi = (zi )j takes values in the simplex. Then we have:

                                                               (j)
                                    ⟨ŵi , Aw(j) ⟩ = λ(j) νi
                                    ⟨ŵi , Bw(j) ⟩ = νij
                                                                (p)
                                                      X
                                      ⟨ŵi , Aŵi ⟩ =    λ(p) (νi )2
                                                           p
                                                      X (p)
                                     ⟨ŵi , B ŵi ⟩ =  (νi )2 = mi
                                                           p



                                                       13
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Consider the utility function for player i:
                                                                                             X
        ui (ŵi |v̂j<i ) = 2⟨ŵi , Aŵi ⟩ − ⟨ŵi , B ŵi ⟩⟨ŵi , Aŵi ⟩ − 2                   ⟨ŵi , B ŵj ⟩⟨ŵj , Aŵi ⟩
                                                                                             j<i
                                                 (p)                                                        (p)
                               X                               X                             X                        X (p)
                                         (p)
                        =2           λ         (νi )2 − 2               λ   (j)    j 2
                                                                                  (ν ) − (           λ(p) (νi )2 )(    (νi )2 )
                                p                              j<i                               p                    p
                                            (j)                               (p)
                               X                              X                             X (p)
                        =2           λ(j) (νi )2 − (                   λ(p) (νi )2 )(        (νi )2 )
                               j≥i                             p                             p
                                                              (j)                              (j)
                                                 X                                 X
                        = (2mi − m2i )                  λ(j) zi − m2i                    λ(j) zi
                                                 j≥i                               j<i

                                                       (j)
Which is maximized when mi = 1 zi                             = δij , which implies that νii = ±1 and νij = 0 for
j ̸= i.

Note that in the previous lemma, the utility function took a simple form when we chose the true
generalised eigenvectors as a basis; indeed, when using coefficients with respect to the basis, the
utility only depended on the generalised eigenvalues and not the basis itself. This simple form
shows how our utility interacts naturally with the geometry of the GEV problem. We will now
analyse the corresponding simple form of the update steps.

B.2   GHA-GEP T HEORY

We recall proposition 2.1:
Proposition 2.1 (Unique stationary point). Given exact parents and assuming the top-k generalized
eigenvalues of A and B are distinct and positive, the only stable stationary point of the iteration
defined by (5) eigenvector wi (up to sign).

                     (j)
Proof. Let w(j) , νi , ωij be defined as in the proof of proposition 2.2. Then the update
                                               X
             ∆δi = Aŵi − B ŵi ŵi⊤ Aŵi −         B ŵj ŵj⊤ Aŵi

                                                                   j<i
                                    X
                                                      ŵj⊤ Aŵi

                    = Aŵi −              B ŵj
                                    j≤i
                                                                                             !                             !
                                     (p)                                       (p)                               (q) (q)
                        X                                 X X                                        X
                    =          λ(p) νi Bw(p) −                                νj Bw(p)                     λ(q) νi νj
                           p                                 j≤i        p                              q
                                                                                                           !
                                          n                                                                 o
                                                 (p)
                        X                            X (p)                         X           (q) (q)
                                    (p)
                    =          Bw          λ(p) νi −  νj                                 λ(q) νi νj
                           p                                  j≤i                   q
                                                                                                                  (p)
If we define the diagonal matrix Λ = diag({λ }p ) and the vector νi = (νi )dp=1 then we can
                                                                       (p)

rewrite:                                           !
                                           (q) (q)
                                  X
                                     λ(q) νi νj      = νi⊤ Λνj .
                                                  q
                                           (p)
Now by orthonormality of the w , we can equate coefficients and combine to vector form to obtain
the update step for the coefficient vectors, which we shall notate by
                                             X
                            ∆(ν)i = Λνi −        νj (νj⊤ Λνi )
                                                             j≤i
                                                                             
                                                             X
                                               = I −              νj νj⊤  Λνi
                                                             j≤i
                                                                             
                                                             X
                                               = I −              νj νj⊤  Λνi − νi (νi⊤ Λνi )                                   (23)
                                                             j<i



                                                                       14
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Only now do we consider the assumption of exact parents. This corresponds to the coefficient
vectors νj = ej ∀j < i where ej is the jth unit vector ((ej )k = δjk ). Then
                                   

                         X                  0(i−1)×(i−1)         0(i−1)×(i−1)
                   I −      νj νj⊤  =
                                           0(d−i+1)×(i−1) I(d−i+1)×(d−i+1)
                            j<i

So if we write λ̄i = νi⊤ Λνi the update equations for our coefficients become:
                                         (p)             (p)
                                  ∆(ν)i        = −λ̄i νi        for p < i                          (24)
                                      (p)               (p)
                                  ∆(ν)i = (λ(p) − λ̄i )νi               for p ≥ i                  (25)
So if we observe the qualitative behaviour:

        • For p < i the coefficients are shrunk towards zero (for sufficiently small step sizes)
        • For p ≥ i the coefficients grow/decay depending on their generalised eigenvalue. The
          larger the eigenvalue, the more the components grow / the less they shrink. So over time
          only the ith component will be selected.
        • The overall magnitude of the solution shrinks faster when λ̄i is large.

                                                                  (p)
A stationary point of the iteration therefore requires νi = 0 for p < i. Then for each p ≥ i we
                                 (p)                    (i)
must have either λ̄i = λ(p) or νi = 0. Furthermore, νi grows at a faster rate than any of the other
components, so provided this was non-zero at initialisation, it will be extracted uniquely. Finally, if
 (p)                  (i)                                                         (i)
νi = 0∀p ̸= i but νi ̸= 0 then we must have λ(i) = λ̄i and also λ̄i = λ(i) (νi )2 ; so combining
             (i)
with we get νi = ±1, as required.

B.2.1    D ISCUSSION OF CONTINUOUS DYNAMICS
In particular note that in the continuous time case above with exact parents, we can write the solu-
         d
tions to dt νi (t) = ∆(ν)i with ∆(ν)i as in (24,25) as
                                                              Z t
                        νi (t) = νi (0) exp 1{p≥i} λ t −
                          (p)       (p)                 (p)
                                                                   λ̄i (s)ds
                                                                            s=0
           (i)
So when zi (0) ̸= 0 (hopefully this is almost sure), the trajectories on the simplex satisfy
                    (j)           (j)
                   zi (t)       zi (0)
                    (i)
                            =     (i)
                                         exp 2(1{p≥i} λ(p) − λ(i) )t → 0 as t → ∞
                   zi (t)       zi (0)
and we do indeed select the correct coefficient vector at an exponential rate. Note that in particular
this equation for trajectory on the simplex is decoupled from the trajectory of the norm mi of the
coefficients.
Of course, we are really interested in the case of in-exact parents. We can provide a heuristic
argument similar to one of Gemp et al. (2021). Note that the updates for wi only depend on it’s
parents wj<i , and one can show that an O(ϵ) error in the parents propagates to an O(ϵ) direction in
the child gradient. We know w1 will converge very fast to an arbitrary accuracy; then the gradient
for w2 will be very close to that corresponding to exact parents, so will quickly converge to that a
similar order of accuracy; then the gradient of w3 will be close to that for exact parents and so on.

B.2.2    E XTENDING TO STOCHASTIC CASE
The real case of interest is the discrete time case with mini-batches. Gemp et al. (2021) claim that
their algorithm converges almost surely provided the step-size sequence ηt satisfies
                                        ∞
                                        X                       ∞
                                                                X
                                               ηt = ∞,                ηt2 < ∞                      (26)
                                        t=1                     t=1


                                                           15
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Their key tool is a result on Stochastic Approximation (SA) on Riemannian manifolds Shah (2017).
This result extends the now-classical ODE method for analysis of SA schemes to Riemannian man-
ifolds, mostly drawing on the presentation of Borkar (2008). One key difficulty of applying the
literature on SA schemes is obtaining stability bounds (saying that the estimates never get too big);
this becomes trivial when considering updates on compact manifolds like the unit sphere, which
is why Gemp et al. (2021) are able to apply their SA tool ‘out-of-the-box’. In our case, because
we do not restrict to the unit sphere, we are able to apply more classical results on SA, for example
Kushner et al. (2003), however, we would need to prove the corresponding stability estimates. These
should hold intuitively because the variance penalty term should keep estimates small, but they are
technically difficult. We note that obtaining such stability estimates has attracted a lot of theoretical
attention, but in practice they are often unnecessary because only a bounded subset of the parameter
space is physically sensible. This applies to our GEP: it only makes sense to consider vectors w with
wT Bw ≤ 1; and though B is unknown in general, we may well be able to lower bound its eigenval-
ues, giving a bounded parameter space of interest. We could modify our algorithm to project onto
this bounded subset of parameter space. The theory of Kushner et al. (2003) can be applied to such
a case of projected SA; indeed this theory has the added advantage of requiring weaker conditions
on the step-sizes, namely only that
                                       ∞
                                       X
                                             ηt = ∞,      ηt → 0
                                       t=1

Note such step-size schedules with slower decay is sometimes observed to give better empirical
results in other SA problems Kushner et al. (2003).
We now point out what we understand to be a technical oversight in the proof of almost sure con-
vergence in Gemp et al. (2021). They proof that wi converges a.s. to true value given fixed exact
parents wj<i appears valid; as does the conclusion that wi converges a.s. to a corresponding opti-
mum given fixed inexact parents; and also does their statement that if parents are close to correct
then the corresponding optimum is close to correct. However, this does not say anything about
convergence of wi when the parents are inexact and varying; in particular the arguments of Shah
(2017) do not apply in this case. We believe that it would be possible to fix this oversight by con-
sidering a suitable coupling of solution paths starting from an ϵ-covering of a neighbourhood of the
true solution. Alternatively, it may be possible to apply the result of Shah (2017) to the combined
estimates (w1 , . . . , wk ). Similar analysis will be needed for GEP-GHA because we also propose
parallel updates for computational speed.
We next note that this SA literature also applies to our δ-eigengame algorithm, whose updates are
unbiased estimates to the gradient of the utilities Uiδ . In this case, analysis may be more straightfor-
ward because we can also apply other existing literature on stochastic gradient descent.
We have not yet had time to make the discussion above more rigorous; we plan to do so in fu-
ture work. Our algorithms fit very naturally into the well-studied SA framework, and we expect
this literature to contain useful intuition and suggestions for implementation, as well as theoretical
guarantees.

B.3   S UBSPACE CHARACTERISATION

We recall proposition 3.1:
Proposition 3.1 (Subspace characterisation). The top-k subspace for the GEP (1) can be charac-
terised by
                           max trace W ⊤ AW (2 Ik − W ⊤ BW )

                                                                                          (17)
                             W ∈Rd×k


Proof. Let the objective function be h(W ). Firstly note that because B is assumed positive definite,
h becomes negative for sufficiently large values of W , in particularly outside some compact set C.
Second, note that for small W , h is positive. Therefore any maximizer must be in C. Next note
that h is a composition of the trace (a linear map) with matrix polynomial so is differentiable, and in
particular continuous; so the maximum on C is attained. Further, at any maximizer W , the derivative
h′ (W ) is zero. We now compute it:
                        h′ (W ) = 2AW (W ⊤ BW − 2I) + 2BW (W ⊤ AW )


                                                   16
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Setting to zero, left multiplying by W ⊤ , and using the previous notation Ã = W ⊤ AW, B̃ =
W ⊤ BW gives
                                        B̃ Ã + ÃB̃ = 2Ã
and so (B̃ − I)Ã + Ã(I − B̃) = 0 so S := (B̃ − I)Ã is skew-symmetric (using that A, B are both
symmetric). But then right multiplying by Ã−1 gives
                                            symmetric     skew-symmetric
                                               z }| {        z }| {
                                               B̃ − I =      S Ã−1
So in fact we must have both sides equal to zero and therefore B̃ = I. But then by the arguments
at the start of the proof, we see that any maximizer of h must in fact have W ⊤ BW = I; so (17) is
indeed equivalent to (3) and any maximizer recovers the top-k subspace.

We now indulge in some vague intuition: a key strength of this unconstrained formulation is that it is
straightforward to transform with respect to arbitrary changes of basis; therefore one can do analysis
in the basis of generalised eigenvectors. By contrast, the orthogonality constraint in (3) only permits
orthogonal changes of basis. This may give intuition to why µ-eigengame only works in the B = I
case but our approach is effective for general GEPs.

C     F URTHER CONNECTIONS TO P REVIOUS W ORK
C.1   R ELATIONSHIP TO PREVIOUS DCCA FORMULATIONS

In Wang et al. (2015c), DCCA is formalised as
                max               trace(U ⊤ F G⊤ V )       subject to U ⊤ F F ⊤ U = V ⊤ GG⊤ V = Ik
       f,g,U ∈Rdx ×k ,V ∈Rdy ×k

where F = (f (x1 ), . . . , f (xN )) , G = (g(y1 ), . . . , g(yn )) are matrices whose columns are images
of the training data under functions f, g defined by neural networks in some class of functions F, G
with input and output dimensions (p, dx ), (q, dy ) respectively. Observe that this optimisation is
really targeting the population problem
                  max                  trace(U ⊤ Σf g V )        subject to U ⊤ Σf f U = V ⊤ Σ⊤
                                                                                              gg V = Ik
      f ∈F ,g∈G,U ∈Rdx ×k ,V ∈Rdy ×k

Where Σf f = Var(f (X)), Σf,g = Cov(f (X), g(Y )), Σgg = Var(g(Y )). We now abuse notation
to write Rk (f (X), g(Y )) to correspond to the sum of the first k canonical correlations of the pair of
random variables f (X), g(Y ). It is well known that if we fix f, g in the above then the optimisation
problem defines the top-k subspace for CCA. So we can write the optimisation as
                                            max Rk (f (X), g(X))
                                         f ∈F ,g∈G

But then using proposition 3.1, this optimisation is also equivalent to
                                                trace W ⊤ Af g W (2 Ik − W ⊤ Bf g W )

                              max                                                                         (27)
                   f ∈F ,g∈G,W ∈R(dx +dy )×k

where we define

                              0     Σf g                         Σf f    0
                Af g =                     ,       Bf g =                     ,      d = p + q.
                             Σgf     0                            0     Σgg
We have now almost recovered the form of (16), the only difference is that there is an optimisation
over W in the above. To finish the derivation we follow Wang et al. (2015c) and define the augmented
function classes:
         F̃ = {f˜ = U ⊤ f : f ∈ F, U ∈ Rdx ×k },             G̃ = {g̃ = V ⊤ g : g ∈ G, V ∈ Rdy ×k }
For any W ∈ R(dx +dy )×k there exist unique U ∈ Rdx ×k , V ∈ Rdy ×k with W ⊤ = (U ⊤ , V ⊤ ). Also
for f˜ = U ⊤ f, g̃ = V ⊤ g it follows from definition of covariance that
                      U ⊤ Σf f U = Σf˜f˜,       U ⊤ Σf g U = Σf˜g̃ ,       V ⊤ Σgg V = Σg̃g̃


                                                        17
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


so indeed we can write (27) as

                                    max trace Af˜g̃ (2 Ik − Bf˜g̃ )                                           (28)
                                  f ∈F̃ ,g∈G̃

which precisely matches our objective in (16).
We now comment on this analysis: the definition from Wang et al. (2015c) proposes DCCA to
find a pair of low-dimensional feature maps under which the two sets of data are highly correlated.
Intuitively, this analysis says that if we take a sufficiently expressive class of neural networks, we
only need to consider a k dimensional latent space to recover the top-k subspace of ‘deep canonical
directions’. Note also that one only needs to apply a k-dimensional classical CCA to recover the
top-k directions from this subspace. Finally, we warn that in general these directions may be highly
non-unique, and that many of the nice properties of CCA are dependent on the structure of Euclidean
space and do not hold for DCCA.

C.2   D ERIVATION OF SGHA ALGORITHM FROM C HEN ET AL . (2019)

The Lagrangian function in Chen et al. (2019) corresponding to (3) is given as:


                            L(W, Γ) = tr W ⊤ AW − Γ, W ⊤ BW − I

                                                                                                              (29)
Differentiating with respect to W gives
                                           2AW − 2BW Γ = 0
                        T
Left multiplying by W       and using the constraint W T BW = Ik shows that at any stationary point
we have
                                                Γ = W T AW                                                    (30)
They then plug this value of Γ into a gradient descent step for W to obtain an update direction:
                                ∆SGHA (W ) = −AW − BW (W T AW )
(where we follow their exposition and drop the factor of 2 at this point). Note that this technique of
plugging in the optimal dual variable is non-standard to our knowledge. The algorithm needs their
theoretical results for more concrete justification.

C.3   P SEUDO -U TILITIES IN P REVIOUS W ORK

Recall we defined the pseudo-utility of GHA-GEP to be

                                                                                    X
           PU GHA-GEP
              i       (wi |wj<i , Γ) = ŵi⊤ Aŵi + Γii (1 − ŵi⊤ B ŵi ) − 2                 Γij ŵj⊤ B ŵi   (31)
                                                                                       j<i


is closely related to expressions in previous work. Consider first SGHA. The Lagrangian function
in Chen et al. (2019) is given above in (29).
Considering a single ‘player’ this utility can be written:

                                                                             X
                 PU SGHA
                    i    (wi , Γ) = ŵi⊤ Aŵi + Γii (1 − ŵi⊤ B ŵi ) −            Γij ŵj⊤ B ŵi             (32)
                                                                               j


We can also write the updates of µ-EigenGame Gemp et al. (2021) as a Lagrangian pseudo-utility.
Note that this is a slightly different expression to that given by the authors.

                                                                  X
                             PU µi (wi |wj<i , Γ) = ŵi⊤ Aŵi −         Γij ŵj⊤ ŵi                          (33)
                                                                  j<i


                                                    18
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


C.4    U TILITY S HAPE

Lemma C.1. Let ŵi = m(cos (θi ) wi + sin (θi ) ∆i ) where ŵi⊤ B ŵi = m, then:



           Ui (ŵi , wj<i ) = Ui (mwi , wj<i ) − sin2 (θi )(Ui (mwi , wj<i ) − Ui (m∆i , wj<i ))                (34)


We will show that this result follows from similar logic to Gemp et al. (2020) once the scaling factor
m is accounted for.


                     Pd
Proof. Let ∆i =         l=1 pl wl , ∥p∥ = 1. Decomposing the utility function for player i we have:



                                                                      X
Ui (ŵi , wj<i ) = 2⟨ŵi , Aŵi ⟩ − ⟨ŵi , B ŵi ⟩⟨ŵi , Aŵi ⟩ − 2    ⟨ŵi , Bw(j) ⟩⟨w(j) , Aŵi ⟩             (35)
                                                                      j<i

                = (2m − m2 )(cos2 (θi )λii + sin2 (θi )⟨∆i , λ∆i ⟩)
                     X
                − 2m    ⟨cos (θi ) wi + sin (θi ) ∆i , Awj ⟩ ⟨cos (θi ) wi + sin (θi ) ∆i , Bwj ⟩               (36)
                        j<i

                = (2m − m2 )(cos2 (θi )λii + sin2 (θi )⟨∆i , λ∆i ⟩)
                     X
                − 2m    sin2 (θi ) ⟨∆i , Awj ⟩ ⟨∆i , Bwj ⟩                                                      (37)
                        j<i

                 = (2m − m2 )λii
                − (2m − m2 ) sin2 (θi )λii + sin2 (θi )((2m − m2 )⟨∆i , A∆i ⟩
                     X
                − 2m    ⟨∆i , Awj ⟩ ⟨∆i , Bwj ⟩                                                                 (38)
                        j<i

                 = (2m − m2 )λii
                                                                                       X
                − sin2 (θi )((2m − m2 )λii + (2m − m2 )⟨∆i , A∆i ⟩ − 2m                      ⟨∆i , Awj ⟩ ⟨∆i , Bwj ⟩)
                                                                                       j<i
                                                                                                                (39)
                                              2
                 = ui (mwi , wj<i ) − sin (θi )(Ui (mwi , wj<i ) − Ui (m∆i , wj<i ))                            (40)


C.5    U TILITY AS A PROJECTION DEFLATION


                                           projection deflation
                                      z X}|        {
                                   ⊤
                            δ
                           Ui = 2ŵi [I − B ŵj ŵj ]Aŵi − ŵi⊤ B ŵi ŵi⊤ Aŵi
                                                  ⊤
                                                                                                                (41)
                                               j<i



Analogously      to the previous work in α-EigenGame (Gemp et al., 2020), the matrix [I −
                ⊤
P
  j≤i B ŵ j ŵj ] has a natural interpretation as a projection deflation.


                                                            19
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


D     V ECTORIZED δ-E IGEN G AME

Algorithm 4 Vectorized δ-EigenGame
    Input: data stream Zt consisting of b samples from zn , learning rate η
    for t = 1 to T do
      Construct independent unbiased estimates Â and B̂ from Zt
      Rewards ← 2AŴ
      Penalties ← B Ŵ triu(Ŵ ⊤ AŴ )
      ∇˜ ← Rewards - Penalties
      Ŵ ′ ← Ŵ + ηt ∇˜
    end for


Where triu returns a matrix with the entries below the main diagonal set to zero.

E     A CONNECTION TO SELF - SUPERVISED LEARNING METHODS
Reorganizing our update equation (5), we find that the intuition of our method can also be understood
as three terms encouraging variance in A, penalizing variance in B, and discouraging covariance.

                                         Variance Penalty    Orthogonality Penalty
                               Reward                   z      }|         {
                               z}|{ z       }|        { X
                         ∆δi = Aŵi − B ŵi ŵi⊤ Aŵi −   B ŵj ŵj⊤ Aŵi

                                                                                                 (42)
                                                            j<i

The motivation is similar to that in recent work in self-supervised learning (Zbontar et al., 2021)
and in particular the VICReg method in Bardes et al. (2021). Recent work has shown links between
several self-supervised learning approaches and classical spectral embedding methods (Balestriero
& LeCun, 2022), some of which could be represented by GEPs. Like CCA, many self-supervised
learning approaches are based on finding a function which is invariant to an image and its augmented
version i.e. the learnt representations of both are correlated.

F     E XPERIMENT D ETAILS
F.1    T OTAL C ORRELATION C APTURED (TCC)

This is the sum of the canonical correlations of the learnt representation (i.e. the sum of the top-k
canonical correlations of X and Y ).

F.2    P ROPORTION OF C ORRELATION C APTURED (PCC)

This is the sum of the canonical correlations of the learnt representation as a proportion of the sum
of the canonical correlations of the learnt representation using the population ground truth (i.e. the
sum of the top-k canonical correlations of X and Y ).

F.3    S TOCHASTIC CCA

The latter two datasets are formed from left and right halves of the canonical datasets (LeCun et al.,
2010; Krizhevsky et al., 2009). With the same initialization for all methods, we trained for 10 epochs
on each dataset with a mini-batch size of 128 and illustrate the models with the best performance in
the validation set.

F.4    S TOCHASTIC CCA H YPERPARAMETERS

Learning rate was tuned from η = (10−1 , 10−2 , 10−3 , 10−4 , 10−5 ) and γ-EigenGame parameter γ
was tuned from the same range. We used Jax (Babuschkin et al., 2020) to optimize the linear CCA


                                                    20
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


models using the Jaxline framework. We used WandB (Biewald, 2020) for experiment tracking to
develop insights for this paper.

F.5   D EEP CCA

We use two variants of paired MNIST datasets. The first is identical to the split MNIST dataset
in the previous section. The second harder problem is closely related to an experiment by Wang
et al. (2015a). Their ‘noisy’ paired MNIST data takes two different digits with the same class. The
first is rotated randomly while the second has additive gaussian noise. Finally, we use the X-Ray
Microbeam (XRMB) dataset from Arora et al. (2016). For all of the datasets, we use two encoders
with 50 latent dimensions and two hidden layers with size 800 and leaky ReLu activation functions,
a similar architecture to that used in Wang et al. (2015c). We compare our proposed method to
DCCA-NOI at mini-batch sizes of 20 and 100 and DCCA-STOL with mini-batch size 100 and 500
(DCCA-STOL cannot be used for mini-batch sizes less than the number of latent dimensions).

F.6   DCCA H YPERPARAMETERS

We trained for 30 epochs on each dataset with mini-batch sizes of 20 and 100. Learning rate was
tuned from η = (10−1 , 10−2 , 10−3 , 10−4 , 10−5 ) and the DCCA-NOI parameter ρ was tuned be-
tween 0 and 1. We use PyTorch (Paszke et al., 2019) with the Adam optimizer (Kingma & Ba,
2014).


G     A DDITIONAL E XPERIMENTS

G.1   S TOCHASTIC CCA WITH SMALLER MINI - BATCH SIZES

In this section we repeat the experiments described in the main text with smaller mini-batch sizes
(64 and 32).
Results for mini-batch sizes 32 and 64 are broadly similar to those in the main text for mini-batch
size 128. In the MNIST data we can see again that there is a tradeoff between speed of convergence
in early iterations and the quality of the solution.


Figure 4: CCA with stochastic mini-batches of size 64 (top) and 32 (bottom): proportion of corre-
lation captured with respect to Scipy ground truth by δ-EigenGame vs prior work. The maximum
value is 1.


                                                21
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


G.2     PARTIAL L EAST S QUARES


The Partial Least Squares (PLS) Wold et al. (1984) problem can also be formulated as a similar
GEP but with B replaced by the identity matrix. PLS is equivalent to finding the singular value
decomposition (SVD) of the covariance matrix X ⊤ Y . It has an interpretation as a (infinitely) ridge
regularised CCA where the covariance matrices ΣXX and ΣY Y are replaced by identity matrices;
this corresponds to assuming no collinearity between variables.


G.2.1    PLS WITH STOCHASTIC MINI - BATCHES


In this experiment we compare our method to the Stochastic Power method Arora et al. (2016),
γ-EigenGame, and SGHA for the stochastic PLS problem.
For these experiments we use the Proportion of Variance captured (PV). This is the sum of the
singular values of the learnt representation using each stochastic optimisation method as a proportion
of the sum of the singular values of the learnt representation using the population ground truth (i.e.
the sum of the top-k singular values of the covariance matrix X ⊤ Y ).
Figure 5 shows that all of the methods perform similarly in terms of variance captured across the
datasets. While the stochastic power method is very fast to converge in the MNIST and CIFAR data,
it solutions can be suboptimal. The performance of δ-EigenGame is arguably more suprising for the
PLS problem because both the Stochastic Power method and γ-EigenGame explicitly enforce the
constraints at each iteration whereas δ-EigenGame only enforces the constraint via penalty terms.


Figure 5: PLS with stochastic mini-batches: proportion of variance captured with respect to Scipy
ground truth by δ-EigenGame vs prior work. The maximum value is 1.


                                                 22
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Figure 6: PLS with stochastic mini-batches of size 64 (top) and 32 (bottom): proportion of variance
captured with respect to Scipy ground truth by δ-EigenGame vs prior work. The maximum value is
1.


                                                23
