Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


L ONG - HORIZON V IDEO P REDICTION
USING A DYNAMIC L ATENT H IERARCHY

 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                             A BSTRACT

         The task of video prediction and generation is known to be notoriously difficult,
         with the research in this area largely limited to short-term predictions. Though
         plagued with noise and stochasticity, videos consist of features that are organised
         in a spatiotemporal hierarchy, different features possessing different temporal dy-
         namics. In this paper, we introduce Dynamic Latent Hierarchy (DLH) – a deep
         hierarchical latent model that represents videos as a hierarchy of latent states that
         evolve over separate and fluid timescales. Each latent state is a mixture distri-
         bution with two components, representing the immediate past and the predicted
         future, causing the model to learn transitions only between sufficiently dissimi-
         lar states, while clustering temporally persistent states closer together. Using this
         unique property, DLH naturally discovers the spatiotemporal structure of a dataset
         and learns disentangled representations across its hierarchy. We hypothesise that
         this simplifies the task of modeling temporal dynamics of a video, improves the
         learning of long-term dependencies, and reduces error accumulation. As evidence,
         we demonstrate that DLH outperforms state-of-the-art benchmarks in video pre-
         diction, is able to better represent stochasticity, as well as to dynamically adjust its
         hierarchical and temporal structure. Our paper shows, among other things, how
         progress in representation learning can translate into progress in prediction tasks.


1   I NTRODUCTION

Video data is considered to be one of the most difficult modalities for generative modelling and
prediction, characterised by high levels of noise, complex temporal dynamics, and inherent stochas-
ticity. Even more so, modelling long-term videos poses a significant challenge due to the problem of
sequential error accumulation, largely restricting the research in this topic to short-term predictions.
Deep learning has given rise to generative latent-variable models with the capability to learn rich
latent representations, allowing to model high-dimensional data by means of more efficient, lower-
dimensional states (Kingma & Welling, 2014; Higgins et al., 2022; Vahdat & Kautz, 2020; Rasmus
et al., 2015). Here, of particular interest are hierarchical latent models, which possess a higher de-
gree of representational power and expressivity. Employing hierarchies has so far proved to be an
effective method for generating high-fidelity visual data, as well as concurrently producing more
meaningful and disentangled latent representations in both static (Vahdat & Kautz, 2020) and tem-
poral (Zakharov et al., 2022) datasets.
Unlike images, videos possess a spatiotemporal structure, in which a collection of spatial fea-
tures adhere to the intrinsic temporal dynamics of a dataset – often evolving at different and fluid
timescales. For instance, consider a simplistic example shown in Figure 1, in which the features of
a video sequence evolve within a strict temporal hierarchy: from the panda continuously changing
its position to the background elements being static over the entire duration of the video.
Discovering such a temporal structure in videos complements nicely the research into hierarchical
generative models, which have been shown capable of extracting and disentangling features across a
hierarchy of latent states. Relying on this notion of inherent spatiotemporal organisation of features,
several hierarchical architectures have been proposed to either enforce a generative temporal hier-
archy explicitly (Saxena et al., 2021), or discover it in an unsupervised fashion (Kim et al., 2019;
Zakharov et al., 2022). In general, these architectures consist of a collection of latent states that


                                                    1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Figure 1: Videos can be viewed as a collection of features organised in a spatiotemporal hierarchy.
This graphic illustrates a sequence of frames, in which the components of the video possess different
temporal dynamics (white circles indicate feature changes). Notice the irregularities in their dynam-
ics – the panda continuously changes its position, the airplane is seen only for a few timesteps, while
the background remains static throughout. Similar to this, our model learns hierarchically disentan-
gled representations of video features with the ability to model their unique dynamics.

transition over different timescales, which has been shown to benefit long-term predictions (Saxena
et al., 2021; Zakharov et al., 2022).
Building upon these notions, we propose an architecture of a hierarchical generative model for
long-horizon video prediction – Dynamic Latent Hierarchy (DLH). The principle ideas underly-
ing this work are two-fold. First, we posit that learning disentangled hierarchical representations
and their separate temporal dynamics increases the model’s expressivity and breaks down the prob-
lem of video modelling into simpler sub-problems, thus benefiting prediction quality. As such, our
model is capable of discovering the appropriate hierarchical spatiotemporal structure of the dataset,
seamlessly adapting its generative structure to a dataset’s dynamics. Second, the existence of a
spatiotemporal hierarchy, in which some features can remain static for an arbitrary period of time
(e.g. background in Fig. 1), implies that predicting the next state at every timestep may introduce
unnecessary accumulation of error and computational complexity. Instead, our model learns to
transition between states only if a change in the represented features has been observed (e.g. air-
plane in Fig. 1). Conversely, if no change in the features has been detected, the model clusters
such temporally-persistent states closer together, thus building a more organised latent space. Our
contributions are summarised as follows:
        • A novel architecture of a hierarchical latent-variable generative model employing temporal
          Gaussian mixtures (GM) for representing latent states and their dynamics;
        • Incorporation of a non-parametric inference method for estimating the discrete posterior
          distribution over the temporal GM components;
        • The resulting superior long-horizon video prediction performance, emergent hierarchical
          disentanglement properties, and improved stochasticity representation.

2     DYNAMIC L ATENT H IERARCHY
We propose an architecture of a hierarchical latent model for video prediction – Dynamic Latent
Hierarchy. DLH consists of a hierarchy of latent states that evolve over different and flexible
timescales. Each latent state is a mixture of two Gaussian components that represent the immediate
past and the predicted future in a single belief state. Using this formalisation, the model dynamically
assigns every newly inferred posterior state to one of these clusters, and thus implicitly learns the
temporal hierarchy of the data in an unsupervised fashion.

2.1   G ENERATIVE MODEL

We consider sequences of observations, {o1 , ..., oT }, modelled by a hierarchical generative model
with a joint distribution in the form (Fig. 2),
          T
          Y                            T
                                       Y                     N
                                                             Y
                pθ (ot ,⃗st ,⃗et ) =         pθ (ot |⃗st )       pθ (snt | ent , sn<t , s>n
                                                                                         t   )pθ (ent |sn<t ),   (1)
          t=1                          t=1                   n=1
                                                                           |{z}  |{z}   |{z}
                                                                        indicator temporal hierarchical



                                                                   2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023



  a                                   b                                         c


                                                                                d


Figure 2: (a) Generative model of DLH. (b) Inference models of DLH. (c) Architectural components
of DLH, showing the deterministic variables that correspond to bottom-up, top-down, and temporal
information. (d) Example of a two-level DLH model rolled-out over three timesteps.


where snt ∼ N (·, ·) is a diagonal Gaussian latent state, ent ∼ Ber(·) is the corresponding Bernoulli
variable at a hierarchical level n and timestep t, ⃗s = {s1 , ..., sN } and ⃗e = {e1 , ..., eN } denote
collections of all variables in a hierarchy, and θ are the parameters of the model. Notice that each
state snt is conditioned on all of the hierarchical states above, past states in the same level, and an
indicator variable ent .
One of the key features of DLH is the representation of a latent state as a temporal mixture of Gaus-
sians (MoG). In particular, variables snt and ent together define a MoG, p(snt , ent ) = p(snt |ent )p(ent )1 ,
with just two components such that,
                                n
                               p(st−1 )      if ent = 0, (previous state: static prior)
               p(snt |ent ) =                                                                             (2)
                               pθ (st |s<t ) if ent = 1, (predicted state: change prior).
                                    n n


As such, at every timestep, DLH holds two prior beliefs over the state of the world: (1) it can
remain static, or (2) it can progress through time and thus change. In this view, variable ent can
be informally described as the probability of whether state snt should be updated or remain fixed at
timestep t (Fig. 3). This property allows DLH to model data as a collection of hierarchical latent
states that evolve over different and flexible timescales, determined by the indicator variable en .

2.2      I NFERENCE

In order to train the model using a variational lower bound, we must estimate the posterior distri-
bution q(snt , ent |ot ), for which we assume a mean-field factorisation q(snt )q(ent ); therefore, the two
distributions are approximated separately (Fig. 2b).

Estimating q(s) In DLH, posterior q(snt ) is assumed to be a diagonal Gaussian, amortised using a
neural network qψ (snt |s>nt , ot ) with parameters ψ, conditioned on hierarchical states above and the
latest data point ot . In line with the established procedure, the approximate posterior is trained using
the reparametrisation trick (Kingma & Welling, 2014).

Estimating q(e) Using reparametrisation tricks for discrete latent variables poses a significant
challenge for a stable training procedure of deep learning models, which can be further exacerbated
in hierarchical models (Falck et al., 2021). To avoid this, we estimate q(e) using a non-parametric
method.
Inferring distribution q(en ) can be conceptualised as a clustering problem of q(sn ) with respect to
the static and change priors of the model, with the central question being: under which temporal
mixture component in Eq. 2 is the inferred state most likely? Has the state of the world changed or
has it remained the same? As such, we formulate the approximation of p(en |sn ) as model selection
using expected likelihood ratio, where the two components of the MoG (Eq. 2) are the competing
   1
       Stripping away the hierarchical and temporal conditioning for clarity.


                                                         3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


models. Under the inferred state, q ′ (snt ) = qψ (snt |s>n
                                                         t , ot ), the expected log-likelihood ratio is,

                                                                      p′ (snt |ent = 0)
                                E[log Λ(snt )] = Eq′ (snt ) log                         ,                             (3)
                                                                      p′ (snt |ent = 1)
where p′ (snt |ent ) = pθ (snt |ent , sn<t , s>n
                                              t ) from the definition of the generative model. Assuming
the selection of the most likely component under the inferred posterior, we come to the following
selection criterion (see full derivation and further clarifications in Appendix B),
                                                         en
                                                          t =1
                   DKL [q ′ (snt )||p′ (snt |ent = 1)] ≶ DKL [q ′ (snt )||p′ (snt |ent = 0)],                         (4)
                                                         en
                                                          t =0

where the most likely component i is approximated to have a probability q(ent = i) = 1. This
approximation relates to the VaDE trick, which is similarly a non-parametric method of estimating
the posterior component variable of a MoG (Jiang et al., 2017; Falck et al., 2021). In particular, our
method can be viewed as taking a sample from the most likely component of the VaDE-estimated
q(en ) under the assumption of equal prior probabilities (see Appendix B.3). Though this method
introduces bias, in practice, we found that it performs better than the VaDE trick. We hypothesise
that this relates to a relatively fast convergence of the parametrised prior pθ (ent |·) model, which
becomes overly confident in its predictions (even before any video features have been learned), thus
irreversibly skewing the approximation of q(ent ). Nevertheless, we believe this direction of future
work may merit further investigation.

2.3   N ESTED TIMESCALES

We add a constraint on the hierarchical temporal structure of the generative model similar to Saxena
et al. (2021); Zakharov et al. (2022). In particular, q(en+1 = 1|en = 0) = 0. Enforcing this
constraint has been shown to be an effective method to promote spatiotemporal disentanglement of
features in hierarchical models, encouraging the representation of progressively slower features in
the higher levels of the model. Furthermore, to reduce the computational complexity of the model,
we block any further inference above the hierarchical level where en = 0 is inferred, such that:
                            if en−1
                                t   = 0, then ent = 0 and q(snt ) ← q(snt−1 ).                                        (5)
                                                                                 1
Lastly, to model continuously changing videos, we assume q(e = 1) = 1, which allows for the
bottom level of DLH to always be in use. It is worth noting that the proposed model constraints may
be relaxed in different implementations of DLH, which could be explored in future work.

2.4   L OWER BOUND ESTIMATION

To train the model, we derive a variational lower bound (ELBO), for which we introduce an approx-
imate posterior distribution q(⃗s,⃗e) so that
              T                T       Z X
             X                X                            pθ (ot ,⃗st ,⃗et )
                 log p(ot ) =      log        q(⃗st ,⃗et )                                    (6)
             t=1              t=1       ⃗s                   q(⃗st ,⃗et )
                                               ⃗e
                                T
                                X                                                  h    pθ (⃗st |⃗et )pθ (⃗et ) i
                            ≥       Eq(⃗st ,⃗et ) log pθ (ot |⃗st ) + Eq(⃗st ,⃗et ) log                          .    (7)
                                t=1
                                                                                             q(⃗st ,⃗et )
                                                                         n n−1
Assuming posterior factorisation of q(snt , ent ) = qψ (snt |s>n
                                                              t , ot )q(et |et ), we write the complete
formulation of the ELBO,
                    T h
                    X                               i
          LELBO =       Eqψ (⃗st ) log pθ (ot |⃗st )                                               (8a)
                      t=1
                      T X
                        N h
                      X                                             n >n                n n n        >n
                                                                                                          i
                  −             Eq(ent )qψ (sn<t ,s>n
                                                   t  ) DKL  q ψ (s  |s
                                                                    t t  , ot )||p θ (s  |e
                                                                                        t t , s   ,
                                                                                                <t ts   )            (8b)
                      t=1 n=1
                      T X
                        N h
                      X                                                              i
                                Eq(en−1 )qψ (sn ) DKL q(ent |en−1 )||pθ (ent |sn<t ) .

                  −                                           t                                                      (8c)
                                      t             <t
                      t=1 n=1



                                                            4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                                                                              Pruned


Level 2

                                                                       =
Level 1


Figure 3: Sampling MoG components can be seen as changing the generative structure of the model.
The diagram shows a two-level DLH unrolled over three timesteps – each box indicating a temporal
MoG. Bold arrows indicate the sampled component of a MoG. At n, t = 2, the model samples the
static component 0 ∼ p(e22 ), thus state s21 remains fixed before being updated to s23 (indicated by the
‘Pruned’ label on the right).


To better understand the optimisation objective and the role of a temporal Gaussian mixture from
Eq. 2, it is useful to break the down the three components of the ELBO. First, component 8a is the
likelihood of the data under the inferred posteriors q(⃗st ), which improves the quality of frame recon-
structions. Second, component 8c is the KL divergence between the posterior and prior Bernoulli
distributions over e, allowing the parametrised prior model to learn the evolution of static and change
priors over time. Lastly, component 8b regularises the latent belief space by bringing the posterior
either closer to the static or to the change component of a prior MoG. This can be seen more clearly
if we expand the expectation,
        = q(ent = 0) DKL q ′ (snt )||p′ (snt |ent = 0) +q(ent = 1) DKL q ′ (snt )||p′ (snt |ent = 1) .

                                                                                                       (9)
                       |              {z              }            |              {z                }
                             posterior ↔ static prior                       posterior ↔ change prior

Depending on the inferred posterior distribution q(ent ), the model will employ the appropriate part
of Eq. 9 in the optimisation. For example, if inferred that state snt has not changed (ent = 0), the
model will bring the new posterior and the static prior closer together, and vice versa. Ultimately,
this allows the model to naturally cluster similar temporal states together, while learning to transition
between states that are sufficiently separated in the belief space.

2.5       M ODEL COMPONENTS

DLH’s architectural implementation is similar to that of NVAE (Vahdat & Kautz, 2020) and VPR
(Zakharov et al., 2022), which employ deterministic variables for propagating information through
the model. More specifically, DLH consists of the following model components,

          Encoder,    xn+1
                       t
                              n
                           = fenc (xnt )                (10)   Posterior state,        qψ (snt |xnτ , cnt )   (13)
          Decoder,    cn−1
                       t
                                n
                            = fdec (snt , cnt )         (11)   Prior state,            pθ (snt |dnt , cnt )   (14)
          Temporal,   dnt+1 = ftem
                                n
                                   (snt , dnt )         (12)   Prior factor,           pθ (ent |dnt )         (15)

where deterministic variables xnt , cnt , dnt correspond to the bottom-up, top-down, and temporal
variable transformations, as shown in Figure 2c, and x0t and c0t correspond to the output image ot .
Variables cnt and dnt are non-linear transformations of samples from s>n
                                                                      t   and sn<t , respectively. We
use a GRU model (Cho et al., 2014) for the transition and prior factor models, convolutional layers
for the encoder and decoder, and fully-connected MLP layers for all other models.


3         R ELATED WORK

Video prediction Early works in video prediction largely focused on different variants of deter-
ministic models (Oh et al., 2015; Finn et al., 2016; Byravan & Fox, 2017; Vondrick & Torralba,
2017); however, it has been widely suggested that these models are poorly suited for capturing
stochasticity that is often present in video datasets.


                                                           5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


DLH GT
DLH GT
DLH GT


         =1   5   10   15   20   25   30   35   40   45   50   55   60   65   70   75   80   85   90   95   100

Figure 4: Open-loop video prediction given 30 context frames (not shown). GT: ground-truth se-
quence, DLH: our model’s prediction. DLH maintains the important contextual information about
the video, without significant degeneration in the reconstruction quality.



The problem of stochastic video prediction has been addressed using a variety of generative ar-
chitectures. Models autoregressive in image space (Babaeizadeh et al., 2021; Reed et al., 2017;
Weissenborn et al., 2020; Kalchbrenner et al., 2016; Denton & Fergus, 2018) demonstrate good
results but suffer from high computational complexity, particularly for long-term predictions. GAN-
based (Goodfellow et al., 2014) approaches have been popular due to their ability to produce sharp
predictions (Clark et al., 2019; Arr; Mathieu et al., 2016; Lee et al., 2018). More recently, transform-
ers (Vaswani et al., 2017) have been used to model video datasets, both in latent (Rakhimov et al.,
2020; Yan et al., 2021) and pixel space (Weissenborn et al., 2020). A fairly large category of video
architectures is based on using Variational Autoencoders (Kingma & Welling, 2014), which have
been shown to produce meaningful latent representations on image (Vahdat & Kautz, 2020; Higgins
et al., 2022) and video data (Zakharov et al., 2022). Variational autoencoders (VAE)-based models
that attempt to learn temporal dependencies in the latent space (Wu et al., 2021; Villegas et al., 2019;
Castrejon et al., 2019; Franceschi et al., 2020; Saxena et al., 2021; Yan et al., 2021; Zakharov et al.,
2022) generate good performance but generally suffer from blurry predictions, referred to as the ‘un-
derfitting problem’ (Babaeizadeh et al., 2021; Wu et al., 2021; Villegas et al., 2019). Nevertheless,
these models benefit from computational efficiency since the learning of temporal video dynamics
commonly happens in a lower-dimensional latent space. Most recently, diffusion models have been
shown to produce great performance on both short (Yang et al., 2022; Höppe et al., 2022) and long
(Harvey et al., 2022) videos.


Hierarchical generative models Hierarchical generative models have been shown to be an ef-
fective way of modelling high-dimensional data, including images (Rasmus et al., 2015; Sønderby
et al., 2016; Maaløe et al., 2019; Vahdat & Kautz, 2020; Child, 2021) and videos (Saxena et al.,
2021; Kim et al., 2019; Pertsch et al., 2020; Hsu et al., 2019; Zakharov et al., 2022), producing rich
latent representations and demonstrating strong representational power.


Temporal abstraction The topic of learning temporal abstractions from sequential data has been
harmoniously rising in popularity alongside the progress in deep and hierarchical latent models.
Temporal abstraction models often operate a number of hierarchical latent variables updating over
different timescales, with the goal of capturing the temporal features of a dataset (Chung et al., 2017;
Mujika et al., 2017; Kim et al., 2019; Saxena et al., 2021; Fountas et al., 2022; Zakharov et al.,
2022), though other models learn the relevant prediction timescales without resorting to hierarchical
methods (Chung et al., 2017; Neitz et al., 2018; Jayaraman et al., 2018; Shang et al., 2019; Kipf
et al., 2019; Pertsch et al., 2020; Zakharov et al., 2021).


Gaussian Mixtures in VAEs Our work similarly touches on the topic of VAEs with Gaussian
Mixture latent states. Generally, these models are aimed at producing meaningful structure of the
latent space, in which data points are clustered in an unsupervised fashion (Dilokthanakul et al.,
2016; Jiang et al., 2017; Falck et al., 2021). Though highly relevant conceptually, these works deal
with non-temporal data and therefore have fundamentally different formulations.


                                                          6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023

                                                                                                   a
                   Level 1 (L1)                  Level 2 (L2)                 Level 3 (L3)


KTH Action
M-MNIST


                     DML Mazes: Level rollouts                                                     b
L3
L2
L1


                                                                                                   c
L3
L2
L1


Figure 5: Hierarchical disentanglement in DLH. (A): Random samples independently drawn from
the different hierarchical levels while keeping all other levels fixed. They qualitatively illustrate
what information is contained within a particular level. In KTH, L1 and L2 tend to encode motion;
L3 encodes the general context of the frame. In M-MNIST, L1 encodes slight variations in the
position and digits; L2 represents position; L3 contains both style and digit types. (B): Rolling out
hierarchical levels in the DML Mazes under all other levels being fixed. L1 includes minor variations
in the view angle; L2 changes the position of the observer and wall shape; L3 predicts transitions
to the different parts of the maze. (C): Inferred components of the temporal MoGs at every level of
the model. Black circles indicate en = 1 (change component) inferred by DLH. L2 infers the static
component when the person’s arms are not moving (green ellipse). Similarly, L3 is static throughout
the duration of the video.

4            E XPERIMENTS
In this section, we showcase the representational properties of DLH, and their resulting impact on the
performance of the model for long-term video prediction. In particular, we demonstrate that DLH:
(a) outperforms benchmarks in long-term video prediction, (b) produces an organised hierarchical
latent space with spatiotemporal disentanglement and temporal abstraction, (c) generates coherent
videos even in datasets characterised by temporal stochasticity, and (d) dynamically regulates its
structural complexity. In the analysis probing DLH’s expressivity and representations, we emphasise
how the presented formulation of the generative model, in particular the use of temporal MoG,
naturally results in the emergent properties of the model.

4.1          DATASETS AND BENCHMARKS

Datasets To test the model’s ability in long-term video prediction, we use Moving MNIST (Sri-
vastava et al., 2016) with 300 timesteps, KTH Action (Schuldt et al., 2004) with 300 timesteps, and
DeepMind Lab (DML) Mazes (Eslami et al., 2018) with 200 timesteps. For a more detailed analysis
of the model’s properties, we use a toy Moving Ball dataset (Zakharov et al., 2022).
Benchmarks Clockwork Variational Autoencoder (CW-VAE) (Saxena et al., 2021) is a hierarchical
VAE for video prediction, in which latent variables operate over fixed-temporal schedules, similarly
subject to nested timescales. CW-VAE demonstrated state-of-the-art performance in long-term video


                                                    7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


prediction, indicating the merit of the slower-evolving context states. VTA (Kim et al., 2019) is a
two-level hierarchical model for video prediction that employs a parametrised boundary detector to
learn sub-sequences of a video and generate temporally-abstracted representations. LMC-Memory
(Lee et al., 2021) learns and stores long-term motion context for better long-horizon video predic-
tion, which has been shown to outperform other RNN-based approaches.

Metrics To evaluate stochastic video prediction, we em- Table 1: Open-loop video prediction.
ploy the standard procedure of sampling 100 condition- Stars denote <5% standard deviation.
ally generated sequences and picking the best one to re-
port (Denton & Fergus, 2018). For metrics, we use Struc-  M-MNIST        SSIM↑ PSNR↑
tural Similarity (SSIM) and Peak Signal-to-Noise Ratio    DLH (Ours)     0.78*     15.7*
(PSNR) to test the performance of a model with respect to CW-VAE         0.68*     13.11*
the ground-truth videos.                                  VTA            0.58      12.18
                                                          LMC-Memory 0.75*         13.73*
4.2 V IDEO PREDICTION AND GENERATION
                                                          KTH Action     SSIM↑ PSNR↑
Table 1 shows the evaluation of DLH and its benchmarks    DLH (Ours)     0.84*     24.7
in the task of long-horizon video prediction. As evi-     CW-VAE         0.80      22.0
dent, DLH outperforms other models across the presented   VTA            0.77      22.41
datasets. Figure 4 shows some examples of long-horizon    LMC-Memory 0.83*         23.44
open-loop rollouts. For Moving MNIST, DLH maintains
the information about the digits throughout the sequence, DML Mazes      SSIM↑ PSNR↑
while also accurately predicting their positions. For DML
Mazes, DLH correctly predicts the colours and wall po-    DLH (Ours)     0.59      14.3
sitions, without switching to a configuration of another  CW-VAE         0.44      13.71*
maze. Similarly, for KTH, our model preserves the im-     VTA            0.55      13.51*
portant contextual knowledge (e.g. background) and ac-      Parameter count: DLH (7M),
curately predicts the long sequence of arm swings. Ap-       CW-VAE (12M), VTA (3M),
pendices C.1 and C.2 include qualitative comparisons of         LMC-Memory (34M).
the models and the per-frame metric plots.

4.3   H IERARCHICAL ABSTRACTION AND DYNAMIC STRUCTURE

DLH exhibits characteristics of a model that learns temporally-abstracted and hierarchically dis-
entangled representations. Figure 5a demonstrates reconstructed frames retrieved by sampling the
different hierarchical levels of the model. Here, we observe the variations in the samples that corre-
spond to meaningful and interpretable spatiotemporal features of the videos. In Figure 5b, we show
rollouts of the model’s levels (other levels being fixed) using DML Mazes, which indicate that DLH
learns to transition between progressively slower features in the higher levels of its hierarchy.
Figure 5c demonstrates another telling qualitative evalua-    Table 2: Average number of employed
tion of DLH and its representations – the inferred compo-     levels (L̄) and the total KL loss in the
nents of en (static or change) for a given video. In par-     instances of DLH with different num-
ticular, it shows that the model continuously detects fea-    ber of hierarchical levels (Moving Ball)
ture changes in the second level of its hierarchy (L2) when
the person is moving their arms, and conversely when the       Levels         L̄          KL loss
person’s are motionless. Furthermore, it can be seen that         2      1.22 ± 0.05    41.9 ± 0.3
the the top level (L3) remains static throughout. Notably,        3      1.24 ± 0.05    42.8 ± 1.1
these results are in agreement with the random samples            4      1.32 ± 0.12    41.1 ± 1.0
shown above, and more clearly illustrate the property of          5      1.38 ± 0.07    43.1 ± 2.1
hierarchical disentanglement present in the model.
The capacity of DLH to learn the spatiotemporal representation of features along its hierarchy is
largely driven by the dynamic manipulation of its hierarchical and temporal structure (Figure 3). In-
terestingly, we observe that DLH consistently converges to similar structures even when possessing
different number of levels. Table 2 shows the average hierarchical depth employed by the model
          PT PN
(L̄ = T1 t=1 n=1 ent ) over a video length given the total number of hierarchical levels it has
(trained using the Moving Ball dataset). As evident, the models converge to similar values despite
their size differences, indicating that DLH naturally simplifies its structure and does not employ


                                                  8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


DLH
CW-VAE


Figure 6: Two randomly-selected open-loop rollouts in a stochastic Moving Ball dataset using DLH
(top) and CW-VAE (bottom) models. DLH successfully produces realistic rollouts, while CW-VAE
struggles to produce rollouts with sharp and random colour changes (frames highlighted in red).

more resources than necessary. This is similarly substantiated by the comparable magnitudes of the
total KL loss, which is commonly used to indicate the amount of information stored in the latent
states (see Appendix C.3 for a more in-depth analysis).

4.4      T EMPORAL STOCHASTICITY
Videos often contain temporal stochasticity, where features Table 3: Average predicted proba-
may change at seemingly random times. How would a gener- bility of pθ (e2 = 1) under the dif-
ative model represent such uncertainty? In the context of em- ferent levels of temporal stochastic-
ploying a Gaussian latent state, the uncertainty about the next ity (λ) in the Moving Ball dataset
state would have to be reflected in the higher variance, in or-
der to cover both possible outcomes; however, this necessarily
                                                                                 pθ (e2 = 1)
increases the chance of sampling areas of the latent space that      λ
                                                                           change          static
do not correspond to any meaningful states, harming the pre-
diction performance. In DLH, by virtue of the temporal MoG,         0.0 .97 ± 0.01 .007 ± .003
such stochasticity can be effectively captured by variable en ,     0.1 .82 ± 0.02 .074 ± .007
which decides whether the latent state sn should be updated         0.3 .73 ± 0.02 .167 ± .011
or remain fixed, alleviating the need to sample from degener-
ate regions of the latent space. To demonstrate this, we modify the Moving Ball dataset to include
random colour changes that can occur at every timestep with a probability of λ and train a two-level
DLH using it. Figure 6 shows a comparison of open-loop rollouts generated by DLH and CW-VAE,
trained on the stochastic Moving Ball with λ = 0.1. While CW-VAE struggles to generate rollouts
with consistent and sharp colour changes, DLH faces no such problems, producing sequences with
both deterministic and random colour switches. This experiment shows the important role of MoGs
in representing temporal stochasticity, and highlights the superior representational capacity of DLH.
Similarly, the behaviour of prior pθ (e2 |·) under temporal stochasticity can be more clearly under-
stood using the results in Table 3, which shows the average predicted probability of the change
component, at level 2, under the inferred posterior q(e2 ) being either change (e2 = 1) or static
(e2 = 0). More stochasticity necessarily implies the reduced ability to predict when the observed
video features would change (as would be signalled by the inferred posterior component), which
should be reflected in the average probabilities predicted by the prior component model. Indeed,
in Table 3, we observe that as the stochasticity of the dataset, λ, rises, the model becomes more
cautious in its predictions.

5        D ISCUSSION
Our work demonstrates that building generative models with better representational properties, such
as spatiotemporal and hierarchical disentanglement, translates to better predictive capabilities in
long and complex time series. Furthermore, we believe that improving the quality of latent rep-
resentations is of high importance for model-based reinforcement learning agents, where accurate
predictions of the future lead to better planning and offline credit assignment, while a hierarchical
and nested treatment of time could allow for temporally-abstract reasoning. Nevertheless, one of
the limitations facing VAE-based models, and by extension our own, is the lack of sharpness in
the predictions. Though significant progress has been made in the recent years (Babaeizadeh et al.,
2021; Wu et al., 2021), addressing this problem in DLH can be a significant next step for further
improving the performance of the model.


                                                 9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


R EFERENCES
ArrowGAN : Learning to generate videos by learning Arrow of Time | Elsevier Enhanced Reader.
Mohammad Babaeizadeh, Mohammad Taghi Saffar, Suraj Nair, Sergey Levine, Chelsea Finn, and
 Dumitru Erhan. FitVid: Overfitting in Pixel-Level Video Prediction, June 2021.
Arunkumar Byravan and Dieter Fox. Se3-nets: Learning rigid body motion using deep neural
  networks. 2017 IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA), pp. 173–
  180, 2017.
Lluis Castrejon, Nicolas Ballas, and Aaron Courville. Improved Conditional VRNNs for Video
  Prediction, April 2019.
Rewon Child. Very deep vaes generalize autoregressive models and can outperform them on images.
  ArXiv, abs/2011.10650, 2021.
Kyunghyun Cho, Bart van Merrienboer, Çaglar Gülçehre, Dzmitry Bahdanau, Fethi Bougares, Hol-
  ger Schwenk, and Yoshua Bengio. Learning phrase representations using rnn encoder–decoder
  for statistical machine translation. In EMNLP, 2014.
Junyoung Chung, Sungjin Ahn, and Yoshua Bengio. Hierarchical multiscale recurrent neural net-
  works. In International Conference on Learning Representations, ICLR, 2017.
Aidan Clark, Jeff Donahue, and Karen Simonyan. Adversarial Video Generation on Complex
  Datasets, September 2019.
Emily Denton and Rob Fergus. Stochastic Video Generation with a Learned Prior, March 2018.
Nat Dilokthanakul, Pedro A. M. Mediano, Marta Garnelo, M. J. Lee, Hugh Salimbeni, Kai Arulku-
  maran, and Murray Shanahan. Deep unsupervised clustering with gaussian mixture variational
  autoencoders. ArXiv, abs/1611.02648, 2016.
S. M. Ali Eslami, Danilo Jimenez Rezende, Frederic Besse, Fabio Viola, Ari S. Morcos, Marta
   Garnelo, Avraham Ruderman, Andrei A. Rusu, Ivo Danihelka, Karol Gregor, David P. Reichert,
   Lars Buesing, Theophane Weber, Oriol Vinyals, Dan Rosenbaum, Neil Rabinowitz, Helen King,
   Chloe Hillier, Matt Botvinick, Daan Wierstra, Koray Kavukcuoglu, and Demis Hassabis. Neural
   scene representation and rendering. Science, 360(6394):1204–1210, June 2018. doi: 10.1126/
   science.aar6170.
Fabian Falck, Haoting Zhang, Matthew Willetts, George Nicholson, Christopher Yau, and Christo-
  pher C. Holmes. Multi-facet clustering variational autoencoders. ArXiv, abs/2106.05241, 2021.
Chelsea Finn, Ian J. Goodfellow, and Sergey Levine. Unsupervised learning for physical interaction
  through video prediction. ArXiv, abs/1605.07157, 2016.
Zafeirios Fountas, Anastasia Sylaidi, Kyriacos Nikiforou, Anil K. Seth, Murray Shanahan, and War-
  rick Roseboom. A Predictive Processing Model of Episodic Memory and Time Perception. Neural
  Computation, 34(7):1501–1544, 06 2022. ISSN 0899-7667. doi: 10.1162/neco_a_01514. URL
  https://doi.org/10.1162/neco_a_01514.
Jean-Yves Franceschi, Edouard Delasalles, Mickaël Chen, Sylvain Lamprier, and Patrick Gallinari.
  Stochastic Latent Residual Video Prediction, August 2020.
Ian J. Goodfellow, Jean Pouget-Abadie, Mehdi Mirza, Bing Xu, David Warde-Farley, Sherjil Ozair,
  Aaron Courville, and Yoshua Bengio. Generative Adversarial Networks, June 2014.
William Harvey, Saeid Naderiparizi, Vaden Masrani, Christian Weilbach, and Frank Wood. Flexible
 Diffusion Modeling of Long Videos, May 2022.
Irina Higgins, Loic Matthey, Arka Pal, Christopher Burgess, Xavier Glorot, Matthew Botvinick,
   Shakir Mohamed, and Alexander Lerchner. Beta-VAE: Learning Basic Visual Concepts with a
   Constrained Variational Framework. In International Conference on Learning Representations,
   July 2022.


                                               10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Tobias Höppe, Arash Mehrjou, Stefan Bauer, Didrik Nielsen, and Andrea Dittadi. Diffusion Models
  for Video Prediction and Infilling, August 2022.
Wei-Ning Hsu, Y. Zhang, Ron J. Weiss, H. Zen, Yonghui Wu, Yuxuan Wang, Yuan Cao, Ye Jia,
 Z. Chen, Jonathan Shen, P. Nguyen, and Ruoming Pang. Hierarchical generative modeling for
 controllable speech synthesis. ArXiv, abs/1810.07217, 2019.
Dinesh Jayaraman, Frederik Ebert, Alexei A Efros, and Sergey Levine. Time-agnostic prediction:
  Predicting predictable video frames. arXiv preprint arXiv:1808.07784, 2018.
Zhuxi Jiang, Yin Zheng, Huachun Tan, Bangsheng Tang, and Hanning Zhou. Variational deep
  embedding: An unsupervised and generative approach to clustering. In IJCAI, 2017.
Nal Kalchbrenner, Aaron van den Oord, Karen Simonyan, Ivo Danihelka, Oriol Vinyals, Alex
  Graves, and Koray Kavukcuoglu. Video Pixel Networks, October 2016.
Taesup Kim, Sungjin Ahn, and Yoshua Bengio. Variational temporal abstraction. Advances in
  Neural Information Processing Systems, 32:11570–11579, 2019.
Diederik P. Kingma and Jimmy Ba.        Adam: A method for stochastic optimization.       CoRR,
  abs/1412.6980, 2015.
Diederik P. Kingma and Max Welling. Auto-Encoding Variational Bayes, May 2014.
Thomas Kipf, Yujia Li, Hanjun Dai, Vinicius Zambaldi, Alvaro Sanchez-Gonzalez, Edward Grefen-
  stette, Pushmeet Kohli, and Peter Battaglia. Compile: Compositional imitation learning and
  execution. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 3418–3428. PMLR, 2019.
Alex X. Lee, Richard Zhang, Frederik Ebert, Pieter Abbeel, Chelsea Finn, and Sergey Levine.
  Stochastic Adversarial Video Prediction, April 2018.
Sangmin Lee, Hak Gu Kim, Dae Hwi Choi, Hyung-Il Kim, and Yong Man Ro. Video predic-
  tion recalling long-term motion context via memory alignment learning. In Proceedings of the
  IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, 2021.
Lars Maaløe, Marco Fraccaro, Valentin Liévin, and Ole Winther. Biva: A very deep hierarchy of
  latent variables for generative modeling. In NeurIPS, 2019.
Michael Mathieu, Camille Couprie, and Yann LeCun. Deep multi-scale video prediction beyond
 mean square error, February 2016.
Asier Mujika, Florian Meier, and Angelika Steger. Fast-slow recurrent neural networks. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:1705.08639, 2017.
Alexander Neitz, Giambattista Parascandolo, Stefan Bauer, and Bernhard Schölkopf. Adap-
  tive skip intervals: Temporal abstraction for recurrent dynamical models. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:1808.04768, 2018.
Junhyuk Oh, Xiaoxiao Guo, Honglak Lee, Richard Lewis, and Satinder Singh. Action-Conditional
  Video Prediction using Deep Networks in Atari Games, December 2015.
Karl Pertsch, Oleh Rybkin, Jingyun Yang, Shenghao Zhou, Konstantinos Derpanis, Kostas Dani-
  ilidis, Joseph Lim, and Andrew Jaegle. Keyframing the future: Keyframe discovery for visual
  prediction and planning. In Learning for Dynamics and Control, pp. 969–979. PMLR, 2020.
Ruslan Rakhimov, Denis Volkhonskiy, Alexey Artemov, Denis Zorin, and Evgeny Burnaev. Latent
  Video Transformer, June 2020.
Antti Rasmus, Mathias Berglund, M. Honkala, H. Valpola, and T. Raiko. Semi-supervised learning
  with ladder networks. In NIPS, 2015.
Scott Reed, Aäron van den Oord, Nal Kalchbrenner, Sergio Gómez Colmenarejo, Ziyu Wang, Dan
  Belov, and Nando de Freitas. Parallel Multiscale Autoregressive Density Estimation, March 2017.


                                               11
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Vaibhav Saxena, Jimmy Ba, and Danijar Hafner. Clockwork Variational Autoencoders, February
  2021.
C. Schuldt, I. Laptev, and B. Caputo. Recognizing human actions: A local SVM approach. In
  Proceedings of the 17th International Conference on Pattern Recognition, 2004. ICPR 2004.,
  volume 3, pp. 32–36 Vol.3, August 2004. doi: 10.1109/ICPR.2004.1334462.
Wenling Shang, Alex Trott, Stephan Zheng, Caiming Xiong, and Richard Socher. Learning world
 graphs to accelerate hierarchical reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:1907.00664, 2019.
Casper Kaae Sønderby, Tapani Raiko, Lars Maaløe, Søren Kaae Sønderby, and Ole Winther. Ladder
  variational autoencoders. In NIPS, 2016.
Nitish Srivastava, Elman Mansimov, and Ruslan Salakhutdinov. Unsupervised Learning of Video
  Representations using LSTMs, January 2016.
Arash Vahdat and J. Kautz.       Nvae: A deep hierarchical variational autoencoder.       ArXiv,
  abs/2007.03898, 2020.
Ashish Vaswani, Noam Shazeer, Niki Parmar, Jakob Uszkoreit, Llion Jones, Aidan N. Gomez,
  Lukasz Kaiser, and Illia Polosukhin. Attention Is All You Need, December 2017.
Ruben Villegas, Arkanath Pathak, Harini Kannan, Dumitru Erhan, Quoc V. Le, and Honglak Lee.
  High Fidelity Video Prediction with Large Stochastic Recurrent Neural Networks, November
  2019.
Carl Vondrick and Antonio Torralba. Generating the future with adversarial transformers. 2017
  IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), pp. 2992–3000, 2017.
Dirk Weissenborn, Oscar Täckström, and Jakob Uszkoreit. Scaling Autoregressive Video Models,
  February 2020.
Bohan Wu, Suraj Nair, Roberto Martin-Martin, Li Fei-Fei, and Chelsea Finn. Greedy Hierarchical
  Variational Autoencoders for Large-Scale Video Prediction, June 2021.
Wilson Yan, Yunzhi Zhang, Pieter Abbeel, and Aravind Srinivas. VideoGPT: Video Generation
 using VQ-VAE and Transformers, September 2021.
Ruihan Yang, Prakhar Srivastava, and Stephan Mandt. Diffusion Probabilistic Modeling for Video
  Generation, May 2022.
Alexey Zakharov, Matthew Crosby, and Zafeirios Fountas. Episodic memory for subjective-
  timescale models. In ICML 2021 Workshop on Unsupervised Reinforcement Learning, 2021.
Alexey Zakharov, Qinghai Guo, and Zafeirios Fountas. Variational predictive routing with nested
  subjective timescales. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2022. URL
  https://openreview.net/forum?id=JxFgJbZ-wft.


                                               12
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


A     T RAINING AND ARCHITECTURAL DETAILS

A.1    I MPLEMENTATION AND TRAINING

For all datasets, DLH was trained with video sequences of length 100 and batch 100. We used
Adam optimiser (Kingma & Ba, 2015) with a learning rate of 0.0005 and ϵ = 0.0001. We also
find that it is beneficial to multiply the KL loss with a parameter β, which is slowly increased to
the value of 1.0 over the course of the first 10k training iterations. This promotes the model to
learn good reconstructions before being severely restricted in increasing its latent complexity. The
image reconstruction model predicts the means of a Gaussian with fixed standard deviation, which
is optimised separately for each dataset.
For this paper, we used a three-level DLH for all datasets (except for Moving Ball, where we used
just two levels). Each level possesses deterministic variables, for which we set |xn | = |dn | =
|cn | = 200, and random variables, where |sn | = 20. For encoding and decoding image data, we use
4 convolutional and 4 transposed-convolutional layers, respectively. Table 4 shows the architectural
details of all other model components, including the sizes of neural networks. The total number of
parameters of a three-level DLH is 7M, and its training takes ∼3 days on a single Tesla V100.

                           Table 4: Architecture of models from Eq.10-15.


                                       Model                    Hidden layers
                                Encoder, fnenc (xnt )            MLP [200]
                              Decoder, fndec (snt , cnt )        MLP [200]
                             Temporal, fntem (snt , dnt )        GRU [200]
                            Posterior, qψ (snt |xnτ , s>n
                                                        t )    MLP [40, 40, 40]
                           Prior state, pθ (snt |sn<t , s>n
                                                         t )   MLP [40, 40, 40]
                             Prior factor, pθ (ent |sn<t )       GRU [200]



A.2    P SEUDOCODE


Algorithm 1: Pseudocode of DLH
for {o1:T }i ∼ D do
    for t = 1 to T do
        for n = 1 to N do
            ▷ Compute the log-likelihood ratio under approximate posterior
                                    n >n
            Ep′ (s>n
                  t  |e>n
                       t  =0) qψ (st |st , ot ) using
            DKL [qψ (snt )||p′ (snt |ent = 1)] and DKL [qψ (snt )||p′ (snt |ent = 0)].
            ▷ Approximate the posterior q(ent |en−1  t  ) using Eq. 4 and the nested timescales
            constraint, q(ent = 1|en−1  t   =  0) = 0.
            if 0 ∼ q(ent ) then
                 ▷ Approximate q(e>n     t  = 1|·) = 0 and q ′ (s>n         ′ >n
                                                                 t ) ← q (st−1 )
                 ▷K ←n
                 break
        for n = K to 1 do
            ▷ Compute the state posterior qψ (snt |s>n
                                                    t , ot )

    ▷ Compute the ELBO (Eq. 8) using the inferred posteriors qψ (⃗st |ot )q(⃗e).
    ▷ Apply a gradient step on θ, ψ.


                                                      13
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


B     A PPROXIMATION OF THE POSTERIOR COMPONENT OF M O G
B.1   E XPECTED LOG - LIKELIHOOD RATIO

In Section 2.2, we propose an approximation of the posterior q(ent ) using the expected log-likelihood
ratio in Eq. 3. We can arrive at this formulation via either (a) considering the log-likelihood ratio of
the two components of the MoG, or (b) the VaDE trick from the Gaussian Mixture VAE literature
(Appendix B.3). In this section, we briefly explain the former perspective.
We start by considering the two components in the prior MoG as competing models. Their log-
likelihood ratio is defined as,
                                          D                    D
                                          Y p′ (sn |en = 0)
                                                  i
                                                              X      p′ (sn |en = 0)
                    log Λ(sn ) = log           ′  n   n
                                                            =     log ′ in n         ,                         (16)
                                          i=0
                                              p (si |e = 1)   i=0
                                                                     p (si |e = 1)
                                                                         QD p′ (sn |en =0)
where sni ∼ q ′ (sn ), D is the number of posterior samples, and Λ(sn ) = i=0 p′ (sin |en =1) . By
                                                                                    i
applying the Law of Large numbers, taking D → ∞, we can write this as an expectation with
                          ′ n
respect to the posterior q (s ),
                                                                        p′ (sn |en = 0)
                               E[log Λ(sn )] = Eq′ (sn ) log                            ,                      (17)
                                                                        p′ (sn |en = 1)
where the static and prior components, p′ (sn |en = 0) and p′ (sn |en = 1), are viewed as the compet-
ing models under the inferred posterior q ′ (sn ). This expected likelihood ratio can be computed in
terms of KL divergences, if we add and subtract the entropy of q ′ (sn ),
            E[log Λ(sn )] = Eq′ (sn ) log p′ (sn |en = 0) − Eq′ (sn ) log q ′ (sn )                            (18)
                                                ′   n    n                                 ′   n
                           − Eq′ (sn ) log p (s |e = 1) + Eq′ (sn ) log q (s )                                 (19)
                                      ′     n       ′   n     n                        ′   n       ′   n   n
                           = DKL [q (s )||p (s |e = 1)] − DKL [q (s )||p (s |e = 0)].                          (20)

Assuming minimum probability of error test, the selection of the most likely component is realised
via
                                                                                                       en =1
                 DKL [q ′ (sn )||p′ (sn |en = 1)] − DKL [q ′ (sn )||p′ (sn |en = 0)] ≶ 0.                      (21)
                                                                                                       en =0


B.2   E XPECTED LOG - LIKELIHOOD RATIO WITH HIERARCHICAL DEPENDENCIES

In DLH, posteriors are factorised hierarchically, such that
                                                        N
                                                        Y
                                          q(⃗st ) =           qψ (snt |s>n
                                                                        t , ot ).                              (22)
                                                        n=0

In turn, this implies that the expected log-likelihood ratio must be computed with respect to the
hierarchical posteriors,
                                                             p′ (sn |en = 0)
                       E[log Λ(sn )] = Eq(⃗st ) log                                                            (23)
                                                             p′ (sn |en = 1)
                                                                                    p′ (sn |en = 0)
                                      =         Eq′ (s>n )         Eq′ (snt ) log                   .          (24)
                                                | {zt }                             p′ (sn |en = 1)
                                            hierarchical context

However, this estimation implies that all hierarchical posteriors, q ′ (s>n
                                                                         t ), must first be inferred in a
top-down process, which may be computationally expensive, especially for large N . To resolve this,
we approximate the hierarchical posteriors, above the level at which the posterior component q(ent )
is being estimated, using the static priors,
                                           N
                                           Y                                  N
                                                                              Y
                          q ′ (s>n
                                t )≈                p′ (sjt |ejt = 0) =                q ′ (sjt−1 ),           (25)
                                          j=n+1                             j=n+1



                                                              14
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


which are already known. This simple assumption alleviates the need to infer all hierarchical poste-
riors before the estimation of q(ent ) and has been shown to work well in practice.
More specifically, the computational savings come from the combination of two factors: (1) approx-
imating hierarchical context using Eq. 25 during the inference of q(ent ), and (2) the nested timescales
assumption in Eq. 5 that blocks any further inference beyond the level at which ent = 0. As such,
the computations pertaining to the inference procedure are required only up to some level k, where
ekt = 0 is first inferred.

B.3   R ELATIONSHIP TO VA DE TRICK

VaDE trick is a non-parametric technique for estimating posterior p(e|s) in Gaussian Mixture VAE
models (Jiang et al., 2017; Falck et al., 2021). In particular, Falck et al. (2021) proved that an
approximate posterior distribution q(e) that minimises the KL divergence to the true posterior p(e|s)
will take the form,
                                                        exp(Eq(s) log p(e|s))
                     arg min DKL [q(e)||p(e|s)] = P                              ,                 (26)
                       q(e)                            e∈E exp(Eq(s) log p(e|s))

where K = |E| is the number of components in a Gaussian mixture p(s, e), and q(s) is an approxi-
mate posterior over s.
In DLH, the number of components in a MoG is limited to K = 2. Using Eq. 26, we can compute
the posterior odds and solve for one of the two components (e.g. q(e = 0)),
          q(e = 0)   exp(Eq(s) log p(e = 0|s))
                   =                                                                               (27)
          q(e = 1)   exp(Eq(s) log p(e = 1|s))
                        h                                            i
                   = exp Eq(s) log p(e = 0|s) − Eq(s) log p(e = 1|s)                               (28)
                        h          p(s|e = 0)p(e = 0)              p(s|e = 1)p(e = 1) i
                   = exp Eq(s) log P              (     − Eq(s) log P                              (29)
                                    ((   (p(s|e)p(e)
                                       e∈E
                                            (  ( (
                                                                     ((e∈E
                                                                            ((((
                                                                         (p(s|e)p(e)
                        h                                                             i
                   = exp Eq(s) log p(s|e = 0)p(e = 0) − Eq(s) log p(s|e = 1)p(e = 1)               (30)
                        h                                                  p(e = 0) i
                   = exp Eq(s) log p(s|e = 0) − Eq(s) log p(s|e = 1) + log                         (31)
                                                                           p(e = 1)
Adding and subtracting Eq(s) log q(s) inside the exponent,
                     h                                                   p(e = 0) i
             = exp DKL [q(s)||p(s|e = 1)] − DKL [q(s)||p(s|e = 0)] + log           .               (32)
                                                                         p(e = 1)
                             P
Finally, we use the fact that e∈E q(e) = 1 to get q(e = 0),
      q(e = 0)            h                                                   p(e = 0) i
                  = exp DKL [q(s)||p(s|e = 1)] − DKL [q(s)||p(s|e = 0)] + log            ,         (33)
   1 − q(e = 0)                                                               p(e = 1)
and solving for q(e = 0) yields,
                       h                                                             i
                                                                              p(e=0)
                    exp DKL [q(s)||p(s|e = 1)] − DKL [q(s)||p(s|e = 0)] + log p(e=1)
     q(e = 0) =           h                                                            i.          (34)
                 1 + exp DKL [q(s)||p(s|e = 1)] − DKL [q(s)||p(s|e = 0)] + log p(e=0)
                                                                                p(e=1)


Equation 34 shows the formulation of distribution q(e) in terms of the VaDE trick. We note that
under the assumption that p(e = 0) = p(e = 1) = 0.5, the formulation is a softmax function of the
difference between the KL divergences indicated in Eq. 4. As such, the proposed estimation of q(e)
may be seen as taking a sample from the most likely component in the VaDE-based distribution in
Eq. 34, under the assumption of equal prior probabilities.


                                                  15
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


C     E XTRA RESULTS
C.1       Q UALITATIVE COMPARISONS



    GT

    DLH

CWVAE

   GT
LMC-M

    DLH
    VTA
CWVAE

   GT
LMC-M

    DLH
    VTA
CWVAE

   GT
LMC-M

    DLH
    VTA
CWVAE      5   10   15   20   25   30   35   40   45   50   255 260 265 270   275 280 285   290   295 300

LMC-M
Figure  7: Qualitative comparisons of open-loop predictions using Moving MNIST. All models are
given
    GT 30 context frames (36 for CW-VAE). The figures show the first 50 and last 45 timesteps in the
   VTA
produced rollouts. The context frames are not shown here. GT denotes the ground-truth sequence.
    DLH    5   10   15   20   25   30   35   40   45   50   255 260 265 270   275 280 285   290   295 300

CWVAE

   GT
LMC-M

    DLH
    VTA
CWVAE
   GT
LMC-M
  DLH
  VTA
CWVAE

   GT
LMC-M

    DLH
    VTA
CWVAE      5   10   15   20   25   30   35   40   45   50   155 160 165 170   175 180 185   190   195 200

LMC-M

    VTA

           5   10   15   20   25   30   35   40   45   50   155 160 165 170   175 180 185   190   195 200

Figure 8: Qualitative comparisons of open-loop predictions using KTH. All models are given 30
context frames (36 for CW-VAE). The figures show the first 50 and last 45 timesteps in the produced
rollouts. The context frames are not shown here. GT denotes the ground-truth sequence.


                                                       16
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


C.2   P ER - FRAME PREDICTION EVALUATION

         Moving MNIST - SSIM               Moving MNIST - PSNR                Moving MNIST - LPIPS


             KTH - SSIM                          KTH - PSNR                            KTH - LPIPS


                               DLH       LMC-Memory           CWVAE        VTA

Figure 9: Per-frame video prediction performance against the benchmarks on the Moving MNIST
and KTH datasets. They y-axes correspond to the SSIM↑, PSNR↑, and LPIPS↓ metrics. The x-axes
correspond to the number of open-loop prediction steps.


C.3   S ELECTION OF THE NUMBER OF LEVELS

We demonstrate in more detail the ability of DLH to converge its structure and employ only the
necessary amount of resources in processing data. In Section 2.3, using the Moving Ball dataset,
we showed that irrespective of the number of levels the model possesses, it only partially uses its
latent hierarchy. In particular, we reported two metrics: the average number of levels used by the
model and the average total KL divergence. For both metrics, we reported similar values across the
instances of DLH with different total number of levels.
                 Table 5: Per-level KL divergences of DLH (Moving Ball dataset)
                  Levels    KL (L1)     KL (L2)     KL (L3)     KL (L4)     KL (L5)
                     2         35.1        6.8           -          -             -
                     3         34.7        7.8          0.3         -             -
                     4         34.3        6.5          0.2        0.1            -
                     5         36.1        6.6          0.1        0.1           0.2

Notably, the KL divergence is often used as a measure of the amount of information stored in the
latent variables of the model. By breaking down the contributions of each latent level to the total
value of the KL loss, we can get a glimpse into how DLH employs the different hierarchical levels.
Table 5 shows the average per-level KL loss of DLH. As can be observed, levels > 2 are signifi-
cantly lower, suggesting that no information is being stored in those levels, as the model naturally
‘collapses’ them. More visually, we can sample from these low-KL levels (> 2), while keeping
high-KL levels fixed (≤ 2), and vice versa, in order to see if these levels contribute to the variations
in the reconstructed images. Figures 10 and 11 show that, indeed, samples from the low-KL levels
exhibit minimum variations, while high-KL levels seem to encode most of the important informa-
tion. These results once again illustrate how DLH naturally tends to use the minimum amount of
resources necessary for modelling the data. Furthermore, this property hints at a potential method
for selecting the appropriate number of levels – by monitoring the values of the KL for models with
different number of hierarchical levels.

                                                   17
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


           (a) 3-level DLH                (b) 4-level DLH                (c) 5-level DLH
         Samples from levels: 3        Samples from levels: 3, 4     Samples from levels: 3, 4, 5
           Fixed levels: 1, 2             Fixed levels: 1, 2             Fixed levels: 1, 2

Figure 10: Samples from levels > 2. As can be seen, there are no variations in the observed
reconstructions, indicating that no information is stored in these levels. This is corroborated by the
low values of the KL divergence associated with the hierarchical levels.


          (a) 3-level DLH                 (b) 4-level DLH                (c) 5-level DLH
       Samples from levels: 1, 2       Samples from levels: 1, 2      Samples from levels: 1, 2
           Fixed levels: 3                Fixed levels: 3, 4            Fixed levels: 3, 4, 5

Figure 11: Samples from levels ≤ 2. In contrast to samples in Figure 10, we now observe high
variation in the reconstructed images, indicating that the data is primarily modelled by the bottom
two levels. This is in line with the high values of the KL divergences associated with these levels.


                                                  18
