Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


AUTO S HOT: A S HORT V IDEO DATASET AND
S TATE - OF - THE -A RT S HOT B OUNDARY D ETECTION
 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                            A BSTRACT

         The short-form videos have explosive popularity and have dominated the new social
         media trends. Prevailing short-video platforms, e.g., TikTok, Instagram Reels, and
         YouTube Shorts, have changed the way we consume and create content. For video
         content creation and understanding, the shot boundary detection (SBD) is one of
         the most essential components in various scenarios. In this work, we release a new
         public Short video sHot bOundary deTection dataset, named SHOT, consisting of
         853 complete short videos and 11,606 shot annotations, with 2,716 high quality
         shot boundary annotations in 200 test videos. Leveraging this new data wealth,
         we propose to optimize the model design for video SBD, by conducting neural
         architecture search in a search space encapsulating various advanced 3D ConvNets
         and Transformers. Our proposed approach, named AutoShot, achieves higher F1
         scores than previous state-of-the-art approaches, e.g., outperforming TransNetV2
         by 4.2%, when being derived and evaluated on our newly constructed SHOT dataset.
         Moreover, to validate the generalizability of the AutoShot architecture, we directly
         evaluate it on another three public datasets: ClipShots, BBC and RAI, and the F1
         scores of AutoShot outperform previous state-of-the-art approaches by 1.1%, 0.9%
         and 1.2%, respectively. The SHOT dataset and code will be released.


1    I NTRODUCTION
Short-form videos have been widely digested among the entire age groups all over the world. The
percentage of short videos and video-form ads has an explosive growth in the era of 5G, due to the
richer contents, better delivery and more persuasive effects of short videos than the image and text
modalities (Wang et al., 2021). This strong trend leads to a significant and urgent demand for a
temporally accurate and comprehensive video analysis in addition to a simple video classification
category. Shot boundary detection is a fundamental component for temporally comprehensive video
analysis and can be a basic block for various tasks, e.g., scene boundary detection (Rao et al., 2020;
Chen et al., 2021), video structuring (Wang et al., 2021), and event segmentation (Shou et al., 2021).
For instance, rewarded videos can be automated created of desired lengths for different platforms,
leveraging the accurate shot boundary detection in the intelligent video creation.
To accelerate the development of video temporal boundary detection, several datasets have been
collected with laboriously manual annotation. Conventional shot boundary detection datasets, e.g.,
BBC Planet Earth Documentary series (Baraldi et al., 2015a) and RAI (Baraldi et al., 2015b), only
consist of documentaries or talk shows where the scenes are relatively static. Tang et al. (2018)
further contribute a large-scale video shot database, ClipShots, consisting of different types of videos
collected from YouTube and Weibo covering more than 20 categories, including sports, TV shows,
animals, etc. Shou et al. (2021) construct a generic event boundary detection (GEBD) dataset,
Kinetics-GEBD, which defines a clip as the moment where humans naturally perceive an event. Since
the video lengths of short and conventional videos differ extensively, i.e., 90% short videos of length
less than one minute versus videos in other datasets having length of 2-60 minutes as shown in Table 1
and Fig. 1 Right, it dramatically leads to significant content, display, temporal dynamics and shot
transition differences as shown in Fig. 1 Left. A short video dataset is necessary to accelerate the
development and proper evaluation of short video based shot boundary detection.
On the other hand, several endeavors have been made to improve the accuracy of video shot boundary
detection (SBD). DeepSBD (Hassanien et al., 2017) firstly applies a deep spatio-temporal ConvNet


                                                   1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Figure 1: Left: Detecting a shot boundary can be a challenging task in short videos. The shot
transition can be a combination of several complicated gradual transitions (the first row) and a quick
transition of the subject in two shots (the second row). The visual effect of the intra-shot can vary
greatly in game videos (the third row). Right: Video and shot length (s) comparison of test sets in
ClipShots and our collected SHOT. There rarely has a video length range overlap between short
videos in SHOT and test videos in ClipShots (up). The shot lengths of short videos are within six
seconds, while the shot lengths of ClipShots can range from two seconds to 30 seconds (bottom).


to the video SBD. Deep structured model (DSM) (Tang et al., 2018) designs a cascade framework to
accelerate the speed of SBD. TransNet (Lokoč et al., 2019) uses dilated convolutional cells (Yu &
Koltun, 2016) to process a sequence of resized frames. TransNetV2 (Souček & Lokoč, 2020) incorpo-
rates techniques, e.g., convolution kernel factorization (Xie et al., 2018), batch normalization (Ioffe &
Szegedy, 2015), skip connection (He et al., 2016), and further improves F1 scores on ClipShots (Tang
et al., 2018) and BBC (Baraldi et al., 2015a).
In this work, we firstly collect a short video dataset, named SHOT, consisting of 853 short videos
with 11,606 manually shot boundary fine annotations. The 200 test videos with 2,716 shot boundary
annotations are labeled by experts with two rounds. Leveraging this new data wealth, we aim to
improve the accuracy of video shot boundary detection, by conducting neural architecture search
in a search space encapsulating various advanced 3D ConvNets (Qiu et al., 2017) and Transform-
ers (Vaswani et al., 2017). Single path one-shot SuperNet strategy (Guo et al., 2020) and Bayesian
optimization (Shahriari et al., 2015) are employed. The searched model, named AutoShot, outper-
forms TransNetV2 by 4.2% on our SHOT in terms of F1 score, and by 3.5% in terms of precision
metric with a fixed recall rate as TransNetV2, respectively. We further evaluate the searched AutoShot
architecture on ClipShots, BBC and RAI, and F1 score of AutoShot surpasses previous state-of-the-art
approaches by 1.1%, 0.9% and 1.2%, respectively. Our contributions are summarized as follows:

       • We collect a short video shot boundary detection dataset (SHOT), which consists of 853
         short videos and 11,606 shot boundary annotations. The SHOT will be released and can be
         employed to advance the development of various short video understanding tasks.

       • We design a video shot boundary detection search space encapsulating various advanced
         3D ConvNets and Transformers, and build a neural architecture search pipeline for shot
         boundary detection.

       • The searched model, named AutoShot, proves to be a highly competitive shot boundary
         detection architecture, that significantly outperforms previous state-of-the-art approaches
         not only on its derived SHOT dataset, but also on other public benchmarks.


                                                   2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


To the best of our knowledge, the collected SHOT dataset is the first dataset for short video shot
boundary detection, and AutoShot is the firstly specially designed neural architecture search method
for shot boundary detection.


2    R ELATED W ORK


Extensive efforts have been made to collect video shot boundary detection datasets (Tang et al., 2018;
Baraldi et al., 2015a;b; Chakraborty et al., 2022; Jiang et al., 2021; Rashmi & Nagendraswamy,
2021), which have significantly accelerated the development of advanced shot boundary detection
methods. A specific type of video boundary detection attempts to parse the video into pieces of
human actions, where instructional videos with human performing diverse actions are commonly
used (Kuehne et al., 2014; Stein & McKenna, 2013; Tang et al., 2019). Another widely studied type of
video boundary detection is scene boundary detection, where videos are split into several semantically
independent clips. Movies and TV episodes are commonly used for scene boundary detection, and
MovieScenes (Rao et al., 2020) and AdCuepoints (Chen et al., 2021) are two large-scale movie
datasets for scene boundary detection. Furthermore, Shou et al. (2021) collect a new benchmark,
Kinectics-GEBD, for generic event boundary detection. For video ads scene boundary detection,
Wang et al. (2021) recently collect a multi-modal video ads understanding dataset, which involves
scene boundary detection and multi-modal scene classification. However, scene boundary detection
is typically based on the pre-extracted shots and the evaluation of scene segmentation is shot-level
instead of frame-level.
The TV series and talk shows have also been used for shot boundary detection, where BBC Planet
Earth Documentary series (Baraldi et al., 2015a) and RAI (Baraldi et al., 2015b) are two commonly
used datasets consists of tens of videos having length from half an hour to one hour. ClipShots (Tang
et al., 2018) enhances the conventional shot boundary detection datasets by collecting diverse videos
from various media platforms, e.g., YouTube and Weibo, and it is one of the most challenging
large-scale shot boundary detection datasets. The shot transitions in short videos, are quite different
from that of movies as shown in Fig. 1 Right and Table 1, and it is extremely necessary that a short
video dataset is collected to advance the development of short video shot boundary detection. The
only short video dataset publicly available so far, to our best knowledge, is the SVD dataset (Jiang
et al., 2019); yet that is developed for a completely different task for near-duplicate video retrieval.
The accuracy of shot boundary detection has been improved, leveraging the aforementioned high
quality datasets and deep learning. Before the deep learning era, PySceneDetect (Castellano, 2022)
is a popular shot boundary detection library, which relies on conventional features, e.g., changes
between frames in the HSV color space. Recent progresses on video boundary detection can be
divided into two categories, scene boundary detection and shot boundary detection. Rao et al. (2020)
propose a local-to-global scene segmentation framework integrating multi-modal information across
clip, segment, and movie. Chen et al. (2021) further propose a shot contrastive self-supervised
learning to learn a shot representation that maximizes the similarity between nearby shots compared
to randomly selected shots, then apply the learned shot representation for scene boundary detection.
The scene boundary detection highly depends on the accurate shot boundary detection.
DeepSBD (Hassanien et al., 2017) predicts a likelihood of transitions in a clip of 16 frames by
the C3D network (Tran et al., 2015). DSM (Tang et al., 2018) utilizes a cascade framework to
accelerate the speed of shot boundary detection. Gygli (Gygli, 2018) constructs a fast shot bound-
ary detection without any post-processing. TransNet (Lokoč et al., 2019) uses dilated convolution
blocks (Yu & Koltun, 2016) and achieves comparable accuracy as DeepSBD without post-processing.
TransNetV2 (Souček & Lokoč, 2020) surpasses previous state-of-the-art approaches with advanced
components, e.g., skip connection (He et al., 2016), batch normalization (Ioffe & Szegedy, 2015),
kernel factorization (Xie et al., 2018), frame similarities as features and multiple classification heads.
Leveraging the progress of 3D ConvNets (Qiu et al., 2017), Transformers (Vaswani et al., 2017)
and neural architecture search (Guo et al., 2020), AutoShot automatically identifies the optimal shot
boundary detection architecture from the designed search space, which achieves better accuracy than
previous methods on the collected SHOT, ClipShots, BBC and RAI datasets.


                                                    3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


3     SHOT: S HORT V IDEO S HOT B OUNDARY D ETECTION DATASET

Short video is one of the most prevailing medias in these days because of its richer contents and more
vivid effects than its conventional counterparts, i.e., pure text and static picture medias. The easy
and affordable access to fast mobile networks in the 5G era accelerates the widespread adoption of
short video platforms, e.g., Instagram Reels, YouTube Shorts, and TikTok. With the large number of
users and video ads in these main-stream short video platforms, it is critical to advance the current
development of video temporal segmentation, especially short video shot boundary detection task,
which is a fundamental task for many following semantic understanding tasks.

3.1   C HALLENGES OF S HORT V IDEO S HOT B OUNDARY D ETECTION

A short video is typically defined as a video of length less than two minutes. The short video length
leads to a much easier spread of these videos and more popular short videos than conventional movies
of hours long. On the other hand, the short video length forces the whole events to occur in a short
time period, which causes much faster pace of events. This in turn leads to a much shorter length of a
shot in the short video as shown in Fig. 1 Right, which aggregates the difficulty of short video shot
boundary detection.
The giant difference of video lengths between the test sets in the collected SHOT dataset and
ClipShots (Tang et al., 2018) is visualized in Fig. 1 Right. Almost all the test short videos have
lengths less than 100 seconds, while almost all the test videos in the ClipShots have lengths greater
than 120 seconds. The short total video length directly leads to rapid shot transitions in the SHOT
dataset as indicated in Fig. 1 Right. Most shot lengths are within five seconds in the test set of SHOT
dataset, and the shot lengths of test set in the ClipShots can range from two seconds to 30 seconds.
The conventional shot boundary detection dataset may be inappropriate for the development of short
video shot boundary detection because of the great difference of video and shot length distributions.
Short video shot boundary detection is much more challenging and difficult as illustrated in Fig. 1
Left and Fig. 2 because the scene of the short video is much more complicated than conventional
videos. For instance, the shot transition commonly utilizes a combination of several complicated shot
gradual transitions for the persuasive effect in the short video (the first row). The second common
challenge is for vertically ternary structured videos (the second row of Fig. 2), where only the middle
part of the video changes. The uppermost and lowermost regions display the download link or brand
in the video ads. The vertically ternary structured video increases shot boundary detection difficulty
greatly due to the relatively small region change in the squeezed content region. The exaggerated
expression in the virtual scene causes false alarms in the game video shot boundary detection (the
third row). Actually, the game video takes a large proportion of video ads and short videos. Therefore,
collecting a short video dataset is nontrivial for the challenging short video shot boundary detection.

3.2   SHOT DATASET

To accelerate the study of short video related shot boundary detection, we collect 853 short videos
from one of the most widely used short video platforms. The dataset property comparison is listed in
Table 1. The total number of frames is 960,794, close to one million frames. The frame-wise shot
boundary annotation is a heavy task. The data annotation and quality control strategy are in appendix.
The cases from the SHOT dataset can be found in Fig. 1 Left, Fig. 2, and Fig. 4. The annotation
records the start and end frame numbers of each shot, which is visualized by the pink and light/white
colors in Fig. 4. All the training and testing short videos, shot boundary annotations, the evaluation
metric scripts and the explicit video-level data split will be publicly available.

4     AUTOMATED S HOT B OUNDARY D ETECTION

4.1   S HOT B OUNDARY D ETECTION S EARCH S PACE D ESIGN

We design a SuperNet based on one of the previous state-of-the-art approaches, TransNetV2 (Souček
& Lokoč, 2020), where the feature representational learning network can be considered as a sequence
of six factorized dilated deep 3D convolutional neural network (DDCNNV2) blocks. Leveraging the


                                                  4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


  Dataset         BBC      RAI     Clip.    SHOT
  Complex
                  ✗        ✗       ✗        ✓
  Grad. Trans.
  Virt. Scene     ✗        ✗       ✗        ✓
  Tern. Video     ✗        ✗       ✗        ✓
  Avg. Video
                  2945     591     237      39.5
  Len. (s)
  Avg. Shot
                  6.57     5.65    15.34    2.59
  Len. (s)

Table 1: Comparison of different short boundary
detection datasets, i.e., BBC, RAI, ClipShots and
SHOT, w.r.t. complex gradual transition, virtual
scene, ternary video, average video length and av-Figure 2: Unique challenges of short video shot
erage shot length.                                boundary detection in SHOT, e.g., a combina-
                                                  tion of complicated shot gradual transitions, verti-
                                                  cally ternary structured video, and great intra-shot
                                                  change in virtual scenes of game video.


      (a) DDCNNV2                (b) DDCNNV2A             (c) DDCNNV2B               (d) DDCNNV2C

Figure 3: Illustration of the search blocks for the first six blocks in the AutoShot. It consists of four
types of factorized 3D convolution blocks, (a) DDCNNV2 with 2D spatial convolutions followed by
1D temporal convolutions, (b) DDCNNV2A with a shared 2D spatial convolution and 1D temporal
convolutions, (c) DDCNNV2B accumulating a 2D spatial convolution and 1D temporal convolutions,
and (d) DDCNNV2C compromising between DDCNNV2A and DDCNNV2B.


advanced 3D ConvNets (Qiu et al., 2017) and Transformers (Vaswani et al., 2017), we deign a shot
boundary detection neural architecture search space. Specifically, AutoShot conducts architecture
search on seven blocks, where we add a self-attention layer number search after the sixth block. The
search blocks in the first six blocks are illustrated in Fig. 3. We firstly design four types of factorized
3D convolutions in the search space. Let x be the input for the current block, the four kinds of search
blocks can be formulated as following:
(1) DDCNNV2: We conduct the search on the number of dilated convolution branches nd , i.e., 4
and 5, and the channel number of 2D spatial convolution nc , i.e., 1, 2 and 3 times of the input
channel numbers, for the original DDCNNV2 block in the TransNetV2 as illustrated in Fig. 3a. The
DDCNNV2 can be formulated as
  h = ReLU(BN(Concat([h1 , h2 , · · · , hnd ]))), hi = (Ti · Si ) · x = Ti (Si (x)), i = 1, · · · , nd , (1)
where h is the output of the current block, Si is the 2D spatial convolution with the channel number
⌈ nndc ⌉, Ti is the 1D temporal convolution with the channel number ⌈ 4F
                                                                      nd ⌉ and dilation rate 2
                                                                                              i−1
                                                                                                  , and F
is a pre-defined channel number in Fig. 3a. The key components in DDCNNV2 are dilated temporal
1D convolutions, and factorized 3D convolutions with spatial 2D convolutions and temporal 1D
convolutions. The design enforces diverse contextual temporal feature extraction and reduces the
number of learnable parameters, which might reduce the over-fitting.
(2) DDCNNV2A: To unify the feature extractor of the spatial 2D convolutions, we can employ a
shared 2D convolution instead of multiple branches of spatial 2D convolutions, as illustrated in


                                                     5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Fig. 3b. The shared spatial 2D convolution aims to extract a unified spatial feature for the following
diverse temporal feature extractions. The DDCNNV2A can be expressed as
   h = ReLU(BN(Concat([h1 , h2 , · · · , hnd ]))), hi = (Ti · S) · x = Ti (S(x)), i = 1, · · · , nd ,   (2)
where S is a shared 2D spatial convolution with searched channel number nc .
(3) DDCNNV2B: Inspired by the design of Pseudo-3D network (Qiu et al., 2017), we construct
another two search blocks to learn various spatio-temporal representations as illustrated in Fig. 3c
and 3d. The DDCNNV2B can be given by
                      h = ReLU(BN((S + T) · x)) = ReLU(BN(S(x) + T(x))),
                                                                                                        (3)
                   T(x) = Concat([T1 (x), T2 (x), · · · , Tnd (x)]).
To ensure the channel numbers of spatial features and temporal features are equal, the channel number
of 2D spatial convolution is fixed to be four times of the current block’s input dimension number 4F .
(4) DDCNNV2C: Different from DDCNNV2B, the temporal convolution of DDCNNV2C can still
utilize the feature of spatial convolution as illustrated in Fig. 3d, which can be formulated as
                    h = ReLU(BN((S + T · S) · x)) = ReLU(BN(S(x) + T(S(x)))),
                                                                                                        (4)
              T(S(x)) = Concat([T1 (S(x)), T2 (S(x)), · · · , Tnd (S(x))]).

We further construct a 1D temporal Transformer block after six factorized convolution layers to
enhance the temporal modeling, whose input is a flattened frame-wise convolutional feature. We
conduct the number of self-attention layers search {0, 1, 2, 3, 4} in the Transformer block.
In summary, AutoShot has seven search blocks. In the first six search blocks, it conducts the channel
number search and branch/dilation number search for DDCNNV2 and DDCNNV2A. Limited by the
dimension number consistency of element-wise addition, DDCNNV2B and DDCNNV2C searches
the branch number. Consequently, we have 3 × 2 × 2 + 2 × 2 = 16 options for each search block
in the first six search blocks. The search space of AutoShot totally has (166 ) × 5 = 8.39 × 107
candidate architectures.

4.2   AUTO S HOT T RAINING AND S EARCH

After the construction of the base network for representational learning, we concatenate represen-
tations from the base network with RGB histogram similarity of raw input frame and learnable
cosine similarity of concatenated block features (Chasanis et al., 2009; Souček & Lokoč, 2020) to
construct a 4,864 dimension feature vector. Then a fully connected layer of 1,024 neurons with ReLU
activation (Nair & Hinton, 2010) is added. Next a dropout layer (Krizhevsky et al., 2012) with a
dropout rate 0.5 is used before the final two frame-wise classification heads for a single middle frame
of a transition y and all transition z.
The SuperNet training of AutoShot utilizes an efficient weight sharing strategy. The weight sharing
strategy (Guo et al., 2020; Liu et al., 2018) encodes the search space in a SuperNet, and all the
candidate architectures share the weights of the SuperNet. One shot NAS (Guo et al., 2020) decouples
the SuperNet training and architecture search, which yields a better accuracy. We also conduct two
sequential steps for SuperNet training and architecture search. We utilize a single path and uniform
sampling strategy to reduce the co-adaptation between node weights (Guo et al., 2020).
We implement a Bayesian optimization (Shahriari et al., 2015) based architecture search for AutoShot.
Bayesian optimization iterates between fitting probabilistic surrogate models and determining which
configuration to evaluate next by maximizing an acquisition function. Gaussian process with a
Hamming kernel is utilized as the surrogate function. We employ a random exploration in the
initialization to obtain a good Gaussian process model. For the acquisition function, we use probability
of feasibility (Gardner et al., 2014).
For the candidate architecture retraining, we firstly employ the same two classification, i.e., single
middle frame y of a transition and all transition z, cross-entropy losses as the SuperNet training
                                        NF
                                      N X
                                      X
                       Lretrain = −              [λ1 yi,j log ŷi,j + λ2 zi,j log ẑi,j ] ,             (5)
                                       i=1 j=1


                                                       6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


where N is the batch size in the stochastic gradient descent (SGD), NF is the pre-defined number of
frames for each training sample which is processed in each batch of training, λ1 and λ2 are trade-offs
between two classification heads, and ŷi,j and ẑi,j are two frame-wise predictions of single middle
frame of a transition and all transition, respectively.
After retraining with the plain multi-head cross-entropy classification loss in Eq. equation 5, we
further enhance the candidate networks by employing the best performing candidate network as a
teacher network in knowledge distillation (Hinton et al., 2014), and utilize weight grafting (Meng
et al., 2020) to further improve the best accuracy. The knowledge distillation is used to align candidate
networks with a desired accuracy, and the weight grafting adaptively balances the grafted information
among aligned networks, which improves the representation capability and boosts the accuracy. The
entropy-based weight grafting can be formulated as
                  NF
                N X
                X
    L(W ) = −             [λ1 ỹi,j log ŷi,j + λ2 z̃i,j log ẑi,j ] ,
                i=1 j=1                                                                               (6)
    α = A × (arctan(c × (H(WlM2 ) − H(WlM1 )))) + 0.5, WlM2 = αWlM2 + (1 − α)WlM1 ,
where ỹi,j and z̃i,j are two frame-wise predictions of single middle frame of a transition and all
transition from the teacher network, A and c are fixed hyperparameters, α is the coefficient based
on entropy to balance networks, H(·) is the entropy based on the bins of network weights WlM1 or
WlM2 , l is the layer in the network, M1 and M2 are two networks where network M2 accepts the
information from network M1 .

5    E XPERIMENTS
We conduct neural architecture search based on the evaluation metrics on the collected SHOT and
validate the effectiveness of the searched optimal architecture on SHOT, ClipShots (Tang et al., 2018),
BBC (Baraldi et al., 2015a), and RAI (Baraldi et al., 2015b). In both SuperNet training and candidate
network retraining, we construct each training sample by concatenating two shots randomly and the
number of frames NF in each training sample is set as 60. The hyperparameters λ1 , λ2 , A, c, the
number of bins in the entropy calculation and the number of grafting networks in Eq. equation 6 are
set as 5, 0.1, 0.4, 1.0, 10 and 3, respectively, which are generally followed the setting of previous
works (Souček & Lokoč, 2020; Meng et al., 2020). We use stochastic gradient descent with learning
rate 0.1, momentum 0.9, batch size 16 and the number of epochs 12. In the search, the number of
populations per epoch is 48 and the total number of epochs is 100 with 20 epochs for the initialization.
We utilize the OpenBox library (Li et al., 2021) to implement the Bayesian optimization in the search.
We use one 32 GB NVIDIA Tesla V100 GPU for both SuperNet and candidate network training, and
use eight 32 GB NVIDIA Tesla V100 GPUs to accelerate the search speed. All the code, data and
trained models will be released for the reproducibility.
Neural architecture search on SHOT We train the SuperNet on the combined training set of SHOT
and ClipShots, and conduct the search based on the evaluation metrics on the collected SHOT dataset.
For a fair comparison, we closely follow the dataset protocol and metric calculation of previous
work (Souček & Lokoč, 2020; Baraldi et al., 2015b). Additionally, we also conduct a search based on
the precision metric given a fixed recall rate 0.71 same as TransNetV2, because a higher F1 metric
cannot guarantee higher precision and recall scores simultaneously in practice. From Table 2 Left,
AutoShot outperforms TransNetV2 by 4.2% and 3.5% based on F1 and precision metrics. Note that
the F1 score of PySceneDetect (Castellano, 2022) on SHOT is less than 0.6, which is far behind
AutoShot, and it can hardly handle challenging gradual transitions. For AutoShot, we find that 54%
of missed shots are gradual transitions, and gradual transitions take 30% of shots in SHOT. Gradual
transition has no huge inter-frame difference, which is difficult to be fully detected. In the following,
we only compare AutoShot based on the F1 metric with other methods for consistency.
To compare the predictions visually, we employ video thumbnail images to clearly demonstrate the
difference. The ground truth boundary is shown in the pink or light/white color as shown in Fig. 4.
The detected boundary of AutoShot is marked as pink, cyan or light, and the detected boundary of
TransNetV2 is visualized as cyan or light. AutoShot successfully detects minor shot transitions as
shown in the pink color, where the TransNetV2 fails. For the clear transitions, both the TransNetV2
and AutoShot succeed, as shown in the light color. The false positives of both TransNetV2 and


                                                            7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Figure 4: Visual comparison of shot boundaries of ground truth (pink, light/white), TransNetV2 (cyan,
light/white), and AutoShot (pink, cyan, light/white) on four clips from SHOT dataset. AutoShot
detects minor transition, shown in the pink color. The light/white color denotes that both the
TransNetV2 and AutoShot successfully detects the shot boundary. The cyan denotes the false
positives of both TransNetV2 and AutoShot, which might require adaptively understanding of
contextual semantics across the video.


AutoShot are shown in cyan, which are hard negative shots. Reducing the false positives might
require adaptively understanding of contextual semantics across the whole video, and some false
positives are ambiguous even for human annotators.
Generalization on other datasets After obtaining the optimal network architecture from the SHOT
dataset, we validate the network generalizability on other three publicly and widely used datasets,
ClipShots (Tang et al., 2018), BBC (Baraldi et al., 2015a), and RAI (Baraldi et al., 2015b). The three
existing datasets are quite different from our SHOT dataset, as shown in the section 3. BBC Planet
Earth Documentary series (Baraldi et al., 2015a) consists of 11 episodes from the BBC educational TV
series Planet Earth. Each episode is approximately 50 minutes long, and the whole dataset contains
around 4900 shots and 670 scenes. RAI (Baraldi et al., 2015b) dataset is based on a collection of ten
randomly selected broadcasting videos from the Rai Scuola video archive, where the length of each
video is around half an hour. The ClipShots collects thousands of online conventional videos, not
short videos, from YouTube, which is a much more challenging dataset than BBC and RAI. We use
the same dataset split and protocol as previous work (Souček & Lokoč, 2020; Baraldi et al., 2015b).
From Table 2 Right, simply applying the searched AutoShot architecture to the three datasets obtains
better F1 scores than previous state-of-the-art approaches consistently, which sufficiently validates
the effectiveness and good generalizability of AutoShot. Specially, AutoShot outperforms previous
state-of-the-art approaches by 1.1%, 0.9% and 1.2% on ClipShots, BBC and RAI. Note that we
reproduce TransNetV2 based on PyTorch and obtain a F1 score of 0.776 on ClipShots, while the
original paper (Souček & Lokoč, 2020) reports 0.779 based on TensorFlow.
Effect of search space We investigate the effect of three different search spaces, i.e., AutoShot-S,
-M and -L, in Table 3 (Left). AutoShot-S only employs DDCNNV2A components in the search
space, which has six search options per block. AutoShot-M employs DDCNNV2 and DDCNNV2A
components in the search space, which has 12 search options per block. The AutoShot-L denotes
the search space defined in section 4.1, which achieves the best F1 score. The combined various
3D ConvNet variants, i.e., DDCNNV2, DDCNNV2A, B and C, in each search block improves F1


                                                  8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                                       Dataset           ClipShots     BBC       RAI
                              AutoShot      AutoShot DSMs                  0.761       0.893    0.928
    Method    TransNetV2
                              @F1           @Precision ST ConvNets         0.759       0.926    0.939
    F1             0.799        0.841         0.826 TransNet               0.735       0.929    0.943
    Prec.          0.904        0.923         0.939 TransNetV2             0.776       0.962    0.939
                                                       AutoShot            0.787       0.971    0.955

Table 2: Left: AutoShot surpasses TransNetV2 by 4.2% and 3.5% based on the F1 score and precision
metric with a fixed recall as TransNetV2. Right: the searched optimal architecture is validated on
three widely used shot boundary detection datasets. AutoShot consistently achieves the best F1
compared to DSMs (Tang et al., 2018), ST ConvNets (Hassanien et al., 2017), TransNet (Lokoč et al.,
2019) and TransNetV2 (Souček & Lokoč, 2020).

     AutoShot-        S      M          L                                              w/ KD+
                                            Method        w/o KD          w/ KD
                                                                                       weight graft
     w/o retrain    0.816   0.822    0.831
     w/ retrain     0.833   0.837    0.841 F1           0.825-0.837    0.832-0.838         0.841

Table 3: F1 scores of different search spaces (Left), knowledge distillation (KD) and weight grafting
(Right) on the collected SHOT dataset.


score in both retraining and candidate architectures after search, since the optimal blocks for different
layers vary and more search options in AutoShot permit to identify the optimal composition.
Searched architectures Specifically, the obtained architecture based on F1 score, AutoShot@F1,
is DDCNNV2{(nc =4F , nd =4), A(nc =4F , nd =5), A(nc =4F , nd =5), A(nc =4F , nd =5), (nc =12F ,
nd =5), (nc =8F , nd =5)}, which has floating-point operations (FLOPs) of 37 GMACs. The obtained
architecture based on precision metric, AutoShot@Prec., is DDCNNV2{(nc =12F , nd =4), (nc =8F ,
nd =4), B(nd =4), C(nd =4), B(nd =5), B(nd =4)}, which has FLOPs of 30 GMACs. We find that the
optimal architectures indeed employ diverse blocks and less number of operations than TransNetV2 of
41 GMACs. The search on SHOT chooses more dilated convolutional branches nd and diverse blocks,
because more dilated convolutional branches nd and diverse blocks enhances the representational
learning power for various temporal granular shot transitions, which vastly exist in short videos. This
is probably another reason that AutoShot on SHOT achieves much bigger improvement than that on
the conventional video datasets. Although the two optimal architectures use no self-attention layer,
the training of SuperNet and architectures with close F1 or precision scores utilize the self-attention.
Effect of knowledge distillation and weight grafting We ablate knowledge distillation and weight
grafting in Table 3 (Right) based on the constructed search space in section 4.1. Without knowledge
distillation in Eq. equation 5, the range of F1 scores after retraining can be 0.825-0.837. We use
the best performing, i.e., F1 score of 0.837, architecture as the teacher network, and knowledge
distillation aligns the candidate architectures with F1 score of range 0.832-0.838. Then, the weight
grafting in Eq. equation 6 further improves the best F1 score by 0.3%.

6     C ONCLUSION
In this work, we collect a new short video shot boundary detection dataset, named SHOT, which is a
quite different scenario from conventional long video based shot boundary detection. The SHOT can
significantly accelerate the development and evaluation of various short video based applications, e.g.,
intelligent creation, and video scene segmentation and understanding. Leveraging this new asset, we
propose to optimize the model design for the task of video shot boundary detection, by conducting
neural architecture search in a search space encapsulating various advanced 3D ConvNets and
Transformers. AutoShot surpasses previous best shot boundary detection method by 4.2% and 3.5%
based on the F1 and precision scores, respectively. We further validate the generalizability of the
searched optimal architecture on ClipShots, BBC and RAI. Experimental results demonstrate that,
AutoShot has a good generalizability and outperforms previous state-of-the-art approaches on the
three existing public datasets.


                                                   9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


R EFERENCES
Lorenzo Baraldi, Costantino Grana, and Rita Cucchiara. A deep siamese network for scene detection
  in broadcast videos. In Proceedings of the 23rd ACM International Conference on Multimedia, pp.
  1199–1202, 2015a.
Lorenzo Baraldi, Costantino Grana, and Rita Cucchiara. Shot and scene detection via hierarchical
  clustering for re-using broadcast video. In Proceedings of International Conference on Computer
  Analysis of Images and Patterns, pp. 801–811. Springer, 2015b.
Brandon Castellano.   Pyscenedetect.              http://www.bcastell.com/projects/
  PySceneDetect, 2022.
Saptarshi Chakraborty, Alok Singh, and Dalton Meitei Thounaojam. A novel bifold-stage shot
  boundary detection algorithm: invariant to motion and illumination. The Visual Computer, 38(2):
  445–456, 2022.
Vasileios Chasanis, Aristidis Likas, and Nikolaos Galatsanos. Simultaneous detection of abrupt cuts
  and dissolves in videos using support vector machines. Pattern Recognition Letters, 30(1):55–65,
  2009.
Shixing Chen, Xiaohan Nie, David Fan, Dongqing Zhang, Vimal Bhat, and Raffay Hamid. Shot
  contrastive self-supervised learning for scene boundary detection. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF
  Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 9796–9805, 2021.
Jacob R Gardner, Matt J Kusner, Zhixiang Eddie Xu, Kilian Q Weinberger, and John P Cunningham.
  Bayesian optimization with inequality constraints. In Proceedings of International Conference on
  Machine Learning, volume 2014, pp. 937–945, 2014.
Zichao Guo, Xiangyu Zhang, Haoyuan Mu, Wen Heng, Zechun Liu, Yichen Wei, and Jian Sun. Single
  path one-shot neural architecture search with uniform sampling. In Proceedings of European
  Conference on Computer Vision, pp. 544–560. Springer, 2020.
Michael Gygli. Ridiculously fast shot boundary detection with fully convolutional neural networks.
 In Proceedings of 2018 International Conference on Content-Based Multimedia Indexing (CBMI),
 pp. 1–4. IEEE, 2018.
Ahmed Hassanien, Mohamed Elgharib, Ahmed Selim, Sung-Ho Bae, Mohamed Hefeeda, and
 Wojciech Matusik. Large-scale, fast and accurate shot boundary detection through spatio-temporal
  convolutional neural networks. arXiv preprint arXiv:1705.03281, 2017.
Kaiming He, Xiangyu Zhang, Shaoqing Ren, and Jian Sun. Deep residual learning for image
  recognition. In Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition,
  pp. 770–778, 2016.
Geoffrey Hinton, Oriol Vinyals, and Jeff Dean. Distilling the knowledge in a neural network. In
  Proceedings of 28th International Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems Deep
  Learning Workshop, 2014.
Sergey Ioffe and Christian Szegedy. Batch normalization: Accelerating deep network training by
  reducing internal covariate shift. In Proceedings of International Conference on Machine Learning,
  pp. 448–456. PMLR, 2015.
Qing-Yuan Jiang, Yi He, Gen Li, Jian Lin, Lei Li, and Wu-Jun Li. Svd: A large-scale short
  video dataset for near-duplicate video retrieval. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International
  Conference on Computer Vision, pp. 5281–5289, 2019.
Xuekun Jiang, Libiao Jin, Anyi Rao, Linning Xu, and Dahua Lin. Jointly learning the attributes and
  composition of shots for boundary detection in videos. IEEE Transactions on Multimedia, 2021.
Alex Krizhevsky, Ilya Sutskever, and Geoffrey E Hinton. Imagenet classification with deep convolu-
  tional neural networks. In Proceedings of Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems,
  volume 25, pp. 1097–1105, 2012.


                                                10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Hilde Kuehne, Ali Arslan, and Thomas Serre. The language of actions: Recovering the syntax and
  semantics of goal-directed human activities. In Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer
  Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 780–787, 2014.
Yang Li, Yu Shen, Wentao Zhang, Yuanwei Chen, Huaijun Jiang, Mingchao Liu, Jiawei Jiang, Jinyang
  Gao, Wentao Wu, Zhi Yang, et al. Openbox: A generalized black-box optimization service. In
  Proceedings of 27th SIGKDD Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining (KDD-2021),
  2021.
Hanxiao Liu, Karen Simonyan, and Yiming Yang. Darts: Differentiable architecture search. In
  Proceedings of International Conference on Learning Representations, 2018.
Jakub Lokoč, Gregor Kovalčik, Tomáš Souček, Jaroslav Moravec, and Přemysl Čech. A framework
  for effective known-item search in video. In Proceedings of the 27th ACM International Conference
  on Multimedia, pp. 1777–1785, 2019.
Fanxu Meng, Hao Cheng, Ke Li, Zhixin Xu, Rongrong Ji, Xing Sun, and Guangming Lu. Filter
  grafting for deep neural networks. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer
  Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 6599–6607, 2020.
Vinod Nair and Geoffrey E Hinton. Rectified linear units improve restricted boltzmann machines. In
  Proceedings of International Conference on Machine Learning, 2010.
Zhaofan Qiu, Ting Yao, and Tao Mei. Learning spatio-temporal representation with pseudo-3d
  residual networks. In Proceedings of the IEEE International Conference on Computer Vision, pp.
  5533–5541, 2017.
Anyi Rao, Linning Xu, Yu Xiong, Guodong Xu, Qingqiu Huang, Bolei Zhou, and Dahua Lin. A local-
  to-global approach to multi-modal movie scene segmentation. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF
  Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 10146–10155, 2020.
BS Rashmi and HS Nagendraswamy. Video shot boundary detection using block based cumulative
  approach. Multimedia Tools and Applications, 80(1):641–664, 2021.
Bobak Shahriari, Kevin Swersky, Ziyu Wang, Ryan P Adams, and Nando De Freitas. Taking the
  human out of the loop: A review of bayesian optimization. Proceedings of the IEEE, 104(1):
 148–175, 2015.
Mike Zheng Shou, Stan W Lei, Weiyao Wang, Deepti Ghadiyaram, and Matt Feiszli. Generic event
 boundary detection: A benchmark for event segmentation. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF
 International Conference on Computer Vision, 2021.
Tomáš Souček and Jakub Lokoč. Transnet v2: An effective deep network architecture for fast shot
  transition detection. arXiv preprint arXiv:2008.04838, 2020.
Sebastian Stein and Stephen J McKenna. Combining embedded accelerometers with computer vision
  for recognizing food preparation activities. In Proceedings of the 2013 ACM International Joint
  Conference on Pervasive and Ubiquitous Computing, pp. 729–738, 2013.
Shitao Tang, Litong Feng, Zhanghui Kuang, Yimin Chen, and Wei Zhang. Fast video shot transition
  localization with deep structured models. In Proceedings of Asian Conference on Computer Vision,
  pp. 577–592. Springer, 2018.
Yansong Tang, Dajun Ding, Yongming Rao, Yu Zheng, Danyang Zhang, Lili Zhao, Jiwen Lu, and Jie
  Zhou. Coin: A large-scale dataset for comprehensive instructional video analysis. In Proceedings
  of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 1207–1216, 2019.
Du Tran, Lubomir Bourdev, Rob Fergus, Lorenzo Torresani, and Manohar Paluri. Learning spa-
  tiotemporal features with 3d convolutional networks. In Proceedings of the IEEE International
 Conference on Computer Vision, pp. 4489–4497, 2015.
Ashish Vaswani, Noam Shazeer, Niki Parmar, Jakob Uszkoreit, Llion Jones, Aidan N Gomez, Łukasz
  Kaiser, and Illia Polosukhin. Attention is all you need. In Proceedings of Advances in Neural
  Information Processing Systems, pp. 5998–6008, 2017.


                                                11
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Zhenzhi Wang, Zhimin Li, Liyu Wu, Jiangfeng Xiong, and Qinglin Lu. Overview of tencent multi-
  modal ads video understanding. In Proceedings of the 29th ACM International Conference on
  Multimedia, pp. 4725–4729, 2021.
Saining Xie, Chen Sun, Jonathan Huang, Zhuowen Tu, and Kevin Murphy. Rethinking spatiotemporal
  feature learning: Speed-accuracy trade-offs in video classification. In Proceedings of the European
  Conference on Computer Vision (ECCV), pp. 305–321, 2018.
Fisher Yu and Vladlen Koltun. Multi-scale context aggregation by dilated convolutions. In Proceed-
  ings of International Conference on Learning Representations, 2016.


                                                 12
