Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


P ERTURBATION A NALYSIS OF N EURAL C OLLAPSE
 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                             A BSTRACT

         Training deep neural networks for classification often includes minimizing the
         training loss beyond the zero training error point. In this phase of training, a вҖңneu-
         ral collapseвҖқ behavior has been observed: the variability of features (outputs of
         the penultimate layer) of within-class samples decreases and the mean features of
         different classes approach a certain tight frame structure. Recent works analyze
         this behavior via idealized unconstrained features models where all the minimiz-
         ers exhibit exact collapse. However, with practical networks and datasets, the
         features typically do not reach exact collapse, e.g., because deep layers cannot
         arbitrarily modify intermediate features that are far from being collapsed. In this
         paper, we propose a richer model that can capture this phenomenon by forcing the
         features to stay in the vicinity of a predefined features matrix (e.g., intermediate
         features). We explore the model in the small vicinity case via perturbation analy-
         sis and establish results that cannot be obtained by the previously studied models.
         For example, we prove reduction in the within-class variability of the optimized
         features compared to the predefined input features (via analyzing gradient flow
         on the вҖңcentral-pathвҖқ with minimal assumptions), analyze the minimizers in the
         near-collapse regime, and provide insights on the effect of regularization hyperpa-
         rameters on the closeness to collapse. We support our theory with experiments in
         practical deep learning settings.


1   I NTRODUCTION

Modern classification systems are typically based on deep neural networks (DNNs), whose param-
eters are optimized using a large amount of labeled training data. Their training scheme often in-
cludes minimizing the training loss beyond the zero training error point (Hoffer et al., 2017; Ma
et al., 2018; Belkin et al., 2019). In this terminal phase of training, a вҖңneural collapseвҖқ (NC) behav-
ior has been empirically observed when using either cross-entropy (CE) loss (Papyan et al., 2020)
or mean squared error (MSE) loss (Han et al., 2022).
The NC behavior includes several simultaneous phenomena that evolve as the number of epochs
grows. The first phenomenon, dubbed NC1, is decrease in the variability of the features (outputs of
the penultimate layer) of training samples from the same class. The second phenomenon, dubbed
NC2, is increasing similarity of the structure of the inter-class featuresвҖҷ means (after subtracting the
global mean) to a simplex equiangular tight frame (ETF). The third phenomenon, dubbed NC3, is
alignment of the last layerвҖҷs weights with the inter-class featuresвҖҷ means. A consequence of these
phenomena is that the classifierвҖҷs decision rule becomes similar to nearest class center in feature
space.
Many recent works attempt to theoretically analyze the NC behavior (Mixon et al., 2020; Lu &
Steinerberger, 2022; Wojtowytsch et al., 2021; Fang et al., 2021; Zhu et al., 2021; Graf et al., 2021;
Ergen & Pilanci, 2021; Ji et al., 2021; Galanti et al., 2021; Tirer & Bruna, 2022; Zhou et al., 2022;
Thrampoulidis et al., 2022; Yang et al., 2022; Kothapalli et al., 2022). The mathematical frameworks
are almost always based on variants of the unconstrained features model (UFM), proposed by Mixon
et al. (2020), which treats the (deepest) features of the training samples as free optimization variables
(disconnected from data or intermediate/shallow features). Typically, in these вҖңidealizedвҖқ models all
the minimizers exhibit вҖңexact collapseвҖқ (i.e., their within-class variability is exactly 0 and an exact
simplex ETF structure is demonstrated) provided that arbitrary (but nonzero) level of regularization
is used.


                                                   1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


However, the features of DNNs are not free optimization variables but outputs of predetermined
architectures that get training samples as input and have parameters (shared by all the samples) that
are hard to optimize. Thus, usually, the deepest features demonstrate reduced вҖңNC distance metricsвҖқ
(such as within-class variability) compared to features of intermediate layers but do not exhibit
convergence to an exact collapse. Indeed, as can be seen in any NC paper that presents empirical
results, the decrease in the NC metrics is typically finite and stops above zero at some epoch (the
margin depends on the dataset complexity, architecture, hyperparameter tuning, etc.).
In this paper, this issue is taken into account by studying a model that can force the features to stay in
the vicinity of a predefined features matrix. By considering the predefined features as intermediate
features of a DNN, the proposed model allows us to analyze how deep features progress from, or re-
late to, shallower features. We explore the model in the small vicinity case via perturbation analysis
and establish results that cannot be obtained by the previously studied UFMs. Specifically, we prove
reduction in the within-class variability of the optimized features compared to the predefined input
features. To obtain this result (for arbitrary input features), we prove monotonic decrease of within-
class variability along gradient flow on the вҖңcentral-pathвҖқ of a UFM with minimal assumptions (i.e.,
we drop the assumptions and modifications of the flow that Han et al. (2022) did to facilitate their
analysis). Next, we provide a closed-form approximation for the modelвҖҷs minimizer. Then, focusing
on the case where the input features matrix is already near collapse (e.g., the penultimate features of
a well-trained DNN), we present a fine-grained analysis of our closed-form approximation, which
provides insights on the effect of regularization hyperparameters on the closeness to collapse. We
support our theory with experiments in practical deep learning settings.

2    BACKGROUND AND P ROBLEM S ETUP
Consider a classification task with K classes and n training samples per class. Let us denote by
yk вҲҲ RK the one-hot vector with 1 in its k-th entry and by xk,i вҲҲ Rp the i-th training sample of the
k-th class. DNN-based classifiers can be typically expressed as
                                      DNNОҳ (x) = WhОё (x) + b,
                  p      d
where hОё (В·) : R вҶ’вҲ’ R (with d вүҘ K) is the feature mapping that is composed of multiple layers
(with learnable parameters Оё), and W = [w1 , . . . , wK ]вҠӨ вҲҲ RKГ—d (wkвҠӨ denotes the kth row of
W) and b вҲҲ RK are the weights and bias of the last classification layer. The networkвҖҷs parameters
Оҳ = {W, b, Оё} are usually learned by empirical risk minimization
                                    K    n
                                 1 XX
                         min            L (WhОё (xk,i ) + b, yk ) + R (Оҳ) ,
                            Оҳ   Kn  i=1
                                   k=1

where L(В·, В·) is a loss function (e.g., CE or MSE1 ) and R(В·) is a regularization term.
Following the work of Mixon et al. (2020), in order to mathematically show the emergence of
minimizers with NC structure, most of the theoretical papers have followed the вҖңunconstrained
features modelвҖқ (UFM) approach, where the features {hОё (xk,i )} are treated as free optimization
variables {hk,i }. Namely, they study problems of the form
                                    K    n
                               1 XX
                      min             L (Whk,i + b, yk ) + R (W, b, {hk,i }) .
                  W,b,{hk,i } Kn
                                  i=1
                                   k=1
One such example is the work in (Tirer & Bruna, 2022), which considered a setting with regularized
MSE loss (which shares similarity with models in the matrix factorization literature (Koren et al.,
2009; Chi et al., 2019), except the assumptions that d вүҘ K and on the specific structure of Y):
                              1                    О»W            О»H
                      min         вҲҘWH вҲ’ YвҲҘ2F +         вҲҘWвҲҘ2F +        вҲҘHвҲҘ2F ,                   (1)
                      W,H 2Kn                      2K           2Kn
where H = [h1,1 , . . . , h1,n , h2,1 , . . . , hK,n ] вҲҲ RdГ—Kn is the (organized) unconstrained features
matrix, Y = IK вҠ— 1вҠӨ   n вҲҲ R
                              KГ—Kn
                                         (where вҠ— denotes the Kronecker product) is its associated one-
hot vectors matrix, and О»W and О»H are positive regularization hyperparameters. It was shown that
   1
     Hui & Belkin (2021) have shown that training DNN classifiers with MSE loss is a powerful strategy whose
performance is similar to training with CE loss.


                                                     2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


all the (global) minimizers of this bias-free UFM exhibit an orthogonal collapse, as stated in the
following theorem.2
                                                                                     вҲҡ
Theorem 2.1 (Theorem 3.1 in (Tirer & Bruna, 2022)). Let d вүҘ K and define c := О»H О»W . If
                                      вҲ—    вҲ—
c вүӨ 1, then any global minimizer (W , H ) of Eq. 1 satisfies
                                                          вҲ—
                             hвҲ—k,1 = . . . = hвҲ—k,n =: hk , вҲҖk вҲҲ [K],
                                                                        r
                               вҲ—                 вҲ—                          О»W
                             вҲҘh1 вҲҘ22 = . . . = вҲҘhK вҲҘ22 =: ПҒ = (1 вҲ’ c)          ,
                                                                            О»H
                                           вҲ— вҠӨ
                            h вҲ—              i h вҲ—            вҲ—
                                                                i
                             h1 , . . . , hK    h1 , . . . , hK = ПҒIK ,
                                    p            вҲ—
                            wkвҲ— = О»H /О»W hk , вҲҖk вҲҲ [K].
If c > 1, then Eq. 1 is minimized by (WвҲ— , HвҲ— ) = (0, 0).

In short, the theorem states that any minimizer (WвҲ— , HвҲ— ) of Eq. 1 obeys that HвҲ— = H вҠ— 1вҠӨ   n for
              dГ—K          вҲ—        вҠӨ         вҲ—    вҲ—вҠӨ                                  вҠӨ
some H вҲҲ R        , and W H вҲқ H H вҲқ W W вҲқ IK . It is not hard to show that H H = ПҒIK
implies that
                              вҲ—
                                     вҠӨ          вҲ— вҠӨ
                                                                   1
                       H вҲ’ hG 1вҠӨ  K      H вҲ’  h   1
                                                G K    = ПҒ   I K вҲ’   1 K 1вҠӨ
                                                                          K ,
                                                                   K
         вҲ—      1
                  PK      вҲ—     1
where hG = K         k=1 hk = K H1K is the global mean. Namely, the вҖңmean-subtracted featuresвҖқ
collapse to a simplex ETF. From the structure of the problem and the theorem, we see that there
are infinitely many minimizers of Eq. 1. Indeed, as can be deduced from the proof of Theorem 2.1
in (Tirer & Bruna, 2022): Taking any (partial) orthonormal matrix p R вҲҲ R
                                                                              dГ—K
                                                                                   (i.e., RвҠӨ R =
IK ), one can
p           p construct a minimizer   for Eq. 1 simply by H = ПҒ(О»W , О»H )R вҠ— 1вҠӨ
                                                            вҲ—
                                                                                    n and W =
                                                                                              вҲ—
                            вҠӨ
   О»H /О»W ПҒ(О»W , О»H )R .
The existing literature includes other different UFM settings where all the minimizers exhibit NC
structures (e.g., see (Lu & Steinerberger, 2022; Wojtowytsch et al., 2021; Zhu et al., 2021; Fang
et al., 2021; Thrampoulidis et al., 2022)). However, as discussed in Section 1, all the previously
studied UFMs are idealized and their results deviate from the situation in practical DNN training,
where the features do not exhibit exact collapse (e.g., since deep layers cannot arbitrarily modify
intermediate features that are far from being collapsed) and the setting of the hyperparameters affects
the distance from NC structure.
In this paper, we consider a different model with the goal of better analyzing the real-world вҖңnear
collapseвҖқ situation where вҖңexact NCвҖқ cannot be reached. Motivated by Eq. 1, we consider the
following model
                            1                    О»W             О»H               ОІ
  min f (W, H; H0 ) =           вҲҘWH вҲ’ YвҲҘ2F +         вҲҘWвҲҘ2F +          вҲҘHвҲҘ2F +        вҲҘH вҲ’ H0 вҲҘ2F ,
  W,H                     2Kn                    2K            2Kn             2Kn
                                                                                                (2)
where H0 вҲҲ RdГ—Kn is an input features matrix, which is fixed, and ОІ is a positive hyperparameter
that controls the distance of H from H0 .
Let us discuss the motivation for studying this model. As before, we interpret W and H as the final
weights and deepest features of the DNN, respectively. Clearly, for H0 = 0 this model reduces
to Eq. 1 (with вҲҘHвҲҘ2F regularized by О»H + ОІ). Furthermore, when H0 is nonzero, but already a
minimizer of Eq. 1 (and thus has zero within-class variability and an orthogonal frame structure),
the following statement is straightforward.
Corollary 2.2. Let d вүҘ K, О»H О»W < 1, and let (WвҲ— , HвҲ— ) be a minimizer of Eq. 1. Then, the
minimizer of f (W, H; H0 = HвҲ— ) (in Eq. 2) is unique3 and it is given by (WвҲ— , HвҲ— ).
    2
      Note that the results in (Tirer & Bruna, 2022) are stated for О»W вҶҗвҲ’ О»K W
                                                                                and О»H вҶҗ     О»H
                                                                                          вҲ’ Kn    (i.e., their
hyperparameters absorb the factors 1/K and 1/Kn that are used here). Scaling the terms in the objective
according to the number of samples, as done in Eq. 1, agrees with what is done in practice (e.g., averaging
the squared errors over the minibatch samples rather than summing them). Our scaling also highlights the
independence of the minimizersвҖҷ properties on K and n.
    3
      Note that in both Eq. 1 and Eq. 2 the minimizer w.r.t. W is a closed-form function of H: WвҲ— (H) =
YHвҠӨ (HHвҠӨ + nО»W Id )вҲ’1 . As such, a minimizer HвҲ— of either objective uniquely implies the associated
WвҲ— = WвҲ— (HвҲ— ).


                                                      3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


That is, Eq. 2 allows us to pick one of the minimizers of Eq. 1 by H0 and transfer its orthogonal
collapse properties, which are stated in Theorem 2.1, to the minimizer of Eq. 2.
However, the usefulness of Eq. 2 comes from exploring cases with nonzero/non-collapsed H0 . In-
deed, while H can be interpreted as the deepest features of a DNN, here we interpret H0 as the
features that are obtained in a shallower layer. In this case, 1/ОІ can be understood as the complexity
of the subnetwork from H0 to H. We are particularly interested in the the large ОІ regime, ОІ вү« 1,
where H0 expresses penultimate features (only one layer before H) that significantly constrain H.
In Appendix F we review practical DNNs where the distance between the deepest and penultimate
features may be small or is even inherently small. In this paper we focus on this large ОІ regime, and
provide mathematical reasoning for the empirical NC behavior that are not captured by previously
studied UFMs, such as proving that the optimized H has smaller within-class variability than H0 ,
and analyzing how perturbations from collapse of H0 can be mitigated by the minimizer of Eq. 2.

3       D ECREASE IN W ITHIN -C LASS VARIABILITY
As discussed above, while the features matrix H represents the output of a DNNвҖҷs penultimate layer,
the input matrix H0 can be interpreted as the features of a preceding layer. Several works have
presented empirical settings where the within-class variability of the features, measured by some
вҖңNC1 metricвҖқ, decreases across depth (Papyan et al., 2020; Tirer & Bruna, 2022; Galanti, 2022).
The goal of this section is to prove such a phenomenon for the model stated in Eq. 2. The theory that
we provide shows also monotonic decrease of the within-class variability (till exact collapse) along
gradient flow on the вҖңcentral-pathвҖқ of the UFM stated in Eq. 1.
Let us begin with several definitions that will be used in this section. For a given setPof n features
                                                                                          n
for each of K classes, {hk,i }, we define the per-class and global means as hk := n1 i=1 hk,i and
         1
            P k   P n
hG := Kn      k=1   i=1 hk,i , respectively, as well as the mean features matrix H := h1 , . . . , hK .
Next, we define the within-class and between-class d Г— d covariance matrices
                                            K    n
                                       1 XX
                        ОЈW (H) :=                   (hk,i вҲ’ hk )(hk,i вҲ’ hk )вҠӨ ,
                                      Kn        i=1
                                                k=1
                                             K
                                           1 X
                             ОЈB (H) :=            (hk вҲ’ hG )(hk вҲ’ hG )вҠӨ .
                                           K
                                               k=1

The within-class variability collapse (NC1) can be expressed as ОЈW (H) вҶ’ 0 while ОЈB (H) вҶӣ 0,
where the limit takes place with increasing the training epoch, and ОЈB (H) > 0 filters de-
        cases such as  H = 0. Several papers considered in their experiments the metric
generate
 1                вҖ                     вҖ 
K Tr ОЈW (H)ОЈB (H) , where ОЈB denotes the pseudoinverse of ОЈB (Papyan et al., 2020; Han
et al., 2022; Zhu et al., 2021). Yet, we believe that considering the metric
                               Ng C 1 (H) := Tr (ОЈW (H)) /Tr (ОЈB (H))                    (3)
is more amenable for theoretical analysis while capturing the desired nondegenerate collapse behav-
ior.4 Indeed, the trace of a covariance matrix equals zero if and only if the covariance matrix is a
zero matrix (this follows from Cov2 (X, Y ) вүӨ Var(X)Var(Y )).
Recall that the minimizer w.r.t. W in Eq. 2 (and Eq. 1) has a closed-form expression that is a function
of H, which is given by WвҲ— (H) = YHвҠӨ (HHвҠӨ + nО»W Id )вҲ’1 . Thus, the optimization in Eq. 2 is
equivalent to
                                                          ОІ
                           H1/ОІ := argmin L(H) +              вҲҘH вҲ’ H0 вҲҘ2F
                                        H               2Kn

    4              1
        The metric K Tr ОЈW ОЈвҖ B was considered in (Han et al., 2022). Yet, to state a result on this metric the
                                                                      вҲ’1/2     вҠӨ       вҲ’1/2
authors claim (in the proof of Cor. 2) that a nonzero eigenvalue of ОЈW HH ОЈW equals the reciprocal of
                                          1/2     вҠӨ      1/2
the associated nonzero eigenvalue of ОЈW (HH )вҖ  ОЈW . However,    h    ithis is not correct
                                                                                      h in general
                                                                                           i       (due to the
                                  вҠӨ                         1/2   2   1            вҠӨ          1   0
inherent rank deficiency of HH ). For example, for ОЈW =           1   2   and HH       =      0   0   , we have that the
single nonzero eigenvalue of the former is 5/9 while the single nonzero eigenvalue of the latter is 5.


                                                        4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


               1
where L(H) := 2Kn вҲҘWвҲ— (H)H вҲ’ YвҲҘ2F + О»2K
                                      W               О»H
                                        вҲҘWвҲ— (H)вҲҘ2F + 2Kn вҲҘHвҲҘ2F .
For large ОІ, the minimizer H1/ОІ can be viewed as a backward/implicit gradient descent update from
H0 with respect to the loss L. This follows from rewriting the first order optimality condition as
                                     H1/ОІ вҲ’ H0
                                               = вҲ’KnвҲҮL(H1/ОІ ).
                                        1/ОІ
Observing that for ОІ вҶ’ вҲһ we have H1/ОІ вҶ’ H0 (formally shown in Appendix B), the above
equation can be written as dH dt t=0 = вҲ’KnвҲҮL(H0 ), where we think of t as ОІ
                                t                                           вҲ’1
                                                                               . This naturally
gives rise to the gradient flow
                                       dHt
                                            = вҲ’KnвҲҮL(Ht ),                                          (4)
                                        dt
associated with the UFM in Eq. 1. This means that results on this flow can be translated to results on
the minimizer of Eq. 2 in the large ОІ regime. Indeed, in Theorem 3.1 below, we show that N  g C 1 (H)
monotonically decreases along this flow, which implies that N C 1 (H1/ОІ ) < N C 1 (H0 ) for large
                                                               g                 g
enough ОІ (see the statement in Corollary 3.2 below).
Note that a flow for an objective that is equivalent to L(H) with О»W = 0 and О»H = 0 has been
studied in (Han et al., 2022), who called it the вҖңcentral pathвҖқ. The motivation for studying such an
objective, where the optimization variable W is replaced by the optimal WвҲ— (H), comes from the
empirical observation in (Han et al., 2022) that the gap вҲҘWвҲ— (H)H вҲ’ YвҲҘ2F вҲ’ вҲҘWH вҲ’ YвҲҘ2F is rather
small (compared to each term) during the optimization process of practical DNNs.
We now state our result for gradient flow on the вҖқcentral pathвҖқ (which is proved in Appendix A).
Theorem 3.1. Assume that О»W > 0, О»H вүҘ 0, and that H0 is non-collapsed (i.e., ОЈW (H0 ) Мё= 0).
Then, along the gradient flow, which is stated in Eq. 4, we have that

       вҖў N
         g C 1 (Ht ) strictly decreases along the flow untill it reaches zero.
       вҖў t 7вҶ’ e2О»H t Tr(ОЈW (Ht )) decreases along the flow.                 In particular, when О»H > 0,
         Tr(ОЈW (Ht )) decays exponentially.
       вҖў t 7вҶ’ e2О»H t Tr(ОЈB (Ht )) strictly increases along the flow.

Remark. Note that our gradient flow analysis has minimal assumptions. Unlike (Han et al., 2022),
our flow does not assume zero global mean (hG = 0), О»W = О»H = 0 and invertibility of ОЈW . And
most importantly, it does not include any engineered renormalization and projection of the gradient,
contrary to the previous work. Thus, it is more similar to practical gradient descent optimization
of DNNs. Our unmodified flow and minimal assumptions require a different, and more general,
analysis with quite involved computations.5
Not only does Theorem 3.1 state a monotonic decrease toward 0 in the NC1 metric, it also provides
a separation between the behavior of Tr(ОЈW ) and Tr(ОЈB ) along the flow. A strict separation is
observed for О»H = 0: Tr(ОЈW ) decreases while Tr(ОЈB ) increases. As gradient flow is often used
as a proxy for analyzing gradient descent with a small step-size (Elkabetz & Cohen, 2021), if we
overlook the difference between optimizing the UFM in Eq. 1 jointly w.r.t. W and H and restricting
the optimization to the вҖңcentral pathвҖқ (WвҲ— (H), H), then our theory also provides a mathematical
reasoning for the experiments on gradient descent in (Tirer & Bruna, 2022) that show monotonic
decrease in within-class variability.
Finally, with our interpretation of t as ОІ вҲ’1 , the following Corollary is a direct consequence of
Theorem 3.1 and the continuity of вҲҮL(H) (see Appendix B for a formal proof).
Corollary 3.2. Assume that H0 is non-collapsed. Then, there exists some constant C = C(H0 ) > 0
such that for ОІ > C we have that Ng C 1 (H1/ОІ ) < N g C 1 (H0 ).
   5
    In more detail, all the assumptions in (Han et al., 2022) (including continually renormalization the gradient)
                                                                                                      вҲ’1/2
lead to the fact that only the singular values (and not the singular vectors) of an вҖңSNR matrixвҖқ ОЈW (H)H
vary along their flow. However, since we do not make their assumptions, we do not have such a matrix whose
singular bases are fixed along the flow and we need to approach the problem in a more general way.


                                                        5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Recall that in the large ОІ regime we can interpret H as features of DNN that are deeper than H0 but
such that the architecture between H0 and H is extremely simple (e.g., they are features of adjacent
layers) and thus the distance between them is constrained. Under this interpretation, Corollary 3.2
implies that layer-wise optimization of DNN where each time a new layer is added (so that the
previous deepest features H1/ОІ are considered as the new H0 ) will result in gradually depthwise
decreasing NC1. An extension of the model in Eq. 2 that will include multiple levels of optimizable
parameters may be able to provide similar reasoning to the gradual depthwise decrease in NC1 that
is observed in practical DNN training, where all the layers are optimized simultaneously.

4    A NALYSIS OF THE N EAR -C OLLAPSE R EGIME
In this section, we will explore the behavior of the minimizers of Eq. 2 in the near collapse regime.
As stated in Corollary 2.2, if H0 is already collapsed then the minimizer of Eq. 2 is also collapsed.
This is aligned with the rationale that if we have a DNN that already exhibits collapse at some
intermediate layer, we would expect the subsequent layers to maintain this collapse.6 Essentially,
we would like to analyze the minimizer of Eq. 2 for H0 that is not already collapsed. Unfortunately,
for general non-collapsed H0 it is not likely that the minimizer is amenable for explicit analytical
characterization. Yet, the fact that for orthogonally collapsed H0 = HвҲ— we get a unique minimizer
(WвҲ— , HвҲ— ) of Eq. 2, which is still characterized by Theorem 2.1, gives us a desirable setting for
examining the minimizer of Eq. 2 obtained for HМғ0 = HвҲ— + ОҙH0 (with sufficiently small ОҙH0 ) by
exploiting our knowledge on (WвҲ— , HвҲ— ; H0 = HвҲ— ). Analyzing the near-collapse setting will shed
light on the way that the deviation from collapse in the input features is transferred to the optimized
features, e.g., the amount of interaction within/between classes and the effects of hyperparameters.
Such insights can be latter examined empirically beyond the near-collapse regime.
Let us denote by (WМғвҲ— , HМғвҲ— ) the minimizer of f (W, H; HМғ0 ). We are interested in studying the
dependence of ОҙW := WМғвҲ— вҲ’WвҲ— and ОҙH := HМғвҲ— вҲ’HвҲ— on ОҙH0 = HМғ0 вҲ’HвҲ— without the requirement
of computing (WМғвҲ— , HМғвҲ— ) (that lack analytical expressions). In particular, our focus is on the relation
between the features ОҙH and ОҙH0 (rather than ОҙW and ОҙH0 ), both because a minimizer HМғвҲ— uniquely
implies the associated WМғвҲ— , and because important aspects of NC, such as within-class variability
decrease (NC1) and inter-class feature structure (NC2), consider the feature mapping rather than the
last layer weights.
We begin with establishing such a result in the following theorem (which is proved in Appendix C)
for H0 that is not necessarily a collapsed features matrix.
The notation in the theorem is as follows. We use vec(В·) to denote the column-stack vectorization
of a matrix. The derivatives are w.r.t. the vectorized matrices vec(H) and vec(W). For example,
вҲҮH f вҲҲ RdnKГ—1 stands for the derivative of f w.r.t. vec(H), and a second derivative w.r.t. vec(W)вҠӨ
yields вҲҮвҠӨ
        W вҲҮH f вҲҲ R
                     dnKГ—Kd
                              .
Theorem 4.1. Let d вүҘ K, and set some H0 and ОҙH0 . Let (WМӮвҲ— , HМӮвҲ— ) be the minimizer of
f (W, H; H0 ) (with f stated in Eq. 2). Let (WМғвҲ— , HМғвҲ— ) be the minimizer of f (W, H; HМғ0 =
H0 + ОҙH0 ). Define ОҙW := WМғвҲ— вҲ’ WМӮвҲ— and ОҙH := HМғвҲ— вҲ’ HМӮвҲ— . Then, with approximation ac-
curacy of O(вҲҘОҙHвҲҘ2 , вҲҘОҙWвҲҘ2 , вҲҘОҙH0 вҲҘ2 ), we have that
             ОІ                                                вҲ’1
vec(ОҙH) вүҲ        вҲҮвҠӨ            вҠӨ          вҠӨ
                   H вҲҮH f вҲ’ вҲҮW вҲҮH f (вҲҮW вҲҮW f )
                                                  вҲ’1 вҠӨ
                                                    вҲҮ H вҲҮW f     vec(ОҙH0 ),
            Kn
               ОІ                                                                       вҲ’1
vec(ОҙW) вүҲ вҲ’       (вҲҮвҠӨW вҲҮW f )
                              вҲ’1 вҠӨ
                                вҲҮH вҲҮW f вҲҮвҠӨ               вҠӨ        вҠӨ
                                             H вҲҮH f вҲ’ вҲҮW вҲҮH f (вҲҮW вҲҮW f )
                                                                           вҲ’1 вҠӨ
                                                                             вҲҮH вҲҮW f      vec(ОҙH0 ),
               Kn
where all the derivatives7 are evaluated at the point (WМӮвҲ— , HМӮвҲ— ; H0 ).
In particular, for ОІ вү« max{1, О»H } we have (with additional approximation error of O(ОІ вҲ’2 ))

                                 О»H          1                     1
            vec(ОҙH) вүҲ IdnK вҲ’        IdnK вҲ’ InK вҠ— WМӮвҲ—вҠӨ WМӮвҲ— + ZвҲ— vec(ОҙH0 ),                    (5)
                                  ОІ          ОІ                     ОІ
   6
     This is also aligned with empirical observations of gradual depthwise collapse in practical DNNs and with
Corollary 3.2 at the limit where H0 is nearly collapsed.
   7
     The derivatives are stated in the proof.


                                                      6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


where
ZвҲ— := (EвҲ—вҠӨ + HМӮвҲ— вҠ— WМӮвҲ— )вҠӨ (HМӮвҲ— HМӮвҲ—вҠӨ вҠ— IK + nО»W IdK )вҲ’1 (EвҲ—вҠӨ + HМӮвҲ— вҠ— WМӮвҲ— ),
EвҲ— := vec(ed,1 eвҠӨ      вҲ— вҲ—                       вҠӨ      вҲ— вҲ—                   вҠӨ     вҲ— вҲ—

                K,1 (WМӮ HМӮ вҲ’ Y)), ..., vec(ed,1 eK,K (WМӮ HМӮ вҲ’ Y)), vec(ed,2 eK,1 (WМӮ HМӮ вҲ’ Y)), ...

                                                               ..., vec(ed,d eвҠӨ      вҲ— вҲ—

                                                                              K,K (WМӮ HМӮ вҲ’ Y)) ,

and ed,i is the standard vector in Rd with 1 in its ith entry (similar definition stands for eK,k ).

Observe that, assuming small approximation error, Theorem 4.1 states the linear operation that trans-
forms ОҙH0 to ОҙH. We will focus on the large ОІ regime that is stated in Eq. 5, where the matrix
inversion can be well approximated. Furthermore, due to the vectorization operation, observe that
the linear expression vec(ОҙH) вүҲ Fvec(ОҙH0 ) has the following block-based representation
                     пЈ®             пЈ№ пЈ®                    пЈ№пЈ®             (1) пЈ№
                       vec(ОҙH(1) )      F1,1 . . . F1,K        vec(ОҙH0 )
                            ..                 ..                    ..
                                   пЈ»вүҲпЈ°                                       пЈ»,                   (6)
                     пЈҜ             пЈә пЈҜ                    пЈәпЈҜ                 пЈә
                     пЈ°       .                    .       пЈ»пЈ°          .
                               (K)     FK,1 . . . FK,K                  (K)
                       vec(ОҙH )                               vec(ОҙH )      0

where ОҙH(k) := ОҙH[:, dn(k вҲ’ 1) + 1 : dnK] вҲҲ RdГ—n is the sub-matrix of ОҙH that is composed
of the columns associated with the kth class (and similarly for ОҙH0 ). Namely, we have that F вҲҲ
RdnKГ—dnK is composed of blocks of size dn Г— dn. The diagonal blocks are the вҖңintra-class blocksвҖқ.
Each of them shows the effect of perturbation in a certain class in H0 on the features of the same
class in H. The off-diagonal blocks are the вҖңinter-class blocksвҖқ. Each of them shows the effect of
perturbation in a certain class in H0 on the features of another class in H.
Recall that for H0 = HвҲ— that is already exactly collapsed, the minimizer of f (В·; H0 ) is also col-
lapsed, so HМӮвҲ— = HвҲ— in the above theorem. Importantly, in this case the matrix in Eq. 6 transforms
deviation from exact collapse in the input features to deviation from exact collapse in the optimized
features. Thus, we have that stronger attenuation behavior of the blocks of F (e.g., small singular
values) implies that the minimizer HМғвҲ— is closer to exact collapse. Based on specializing Theorem 4.1
to the near-collapse case, we present in the following theorem (which is proved in Appendix D) an
exact analysis of singular values of the blocks of F. (The notations Пғmax (В·) and Пғmin (В·) stand for
the largest and smallest singular values of a matrix, respectively).
Theorem 4.2. Consider the setting of Theorem 4.1, О»H О»W < 1 (assumed in Theorem 2.1), d > K,
ОІ вү« max{1, О»H }, and the representation of Eq. 5 that is given in Eq. 6. Let H0 be a collapse
features matrix (minimizer of Eq. 1 for the same О»H , О»W as in Eq. 2). Then, for k, kМғ вҲҲ [K] with
k Мё= kМғ we have that Fk,k is full rank, Fk,kМғ is rank-1, and

                               Пғmax (Fk,k ) = 1,
                                                           p
                               Пғmin (Fk,k ) = 1 вҲ’ ОІ вҲ’1        О»H /О»W ,
                                                                 p
                                                    вҲ’1
                               Пғmax (Fk,kМғ ) = 2ОІ        О»H (1 вҲ’ О»H О»W ).

Remark. In Appendix D we derive expressions for the complete sin-
gular value decomposition of Fk,k and Fk,kМғ . Our expressions for the
entire spectrum of Fk,k reveal its step-wise decreasing shape, as вҲҡ    vi-
sualized in Figure 1 for ОІ = 100, K = 4, d = 10, n = 10, О»W = 2
and various values of О»H . To keep the paper concise, we state in the
above theorem only the results for the maximal and minimal singular
values of Fk,k , but note that, similarly to Пғmin (Fk,k ), almost all sin- Figure 1: The effect of О» on
                                                                                                    H
gular values decrease as О»H increases. Even though a small portion the spectrum of Fk,k .
( 1вҲ’K/d
    n   ) of the singular values equal 1 (as shown in our analysis in
Appendix D), we can still gain insights on the attenuation profile since generic perturbations are
unlikely to concentrate in such an extremely low-dimensional subspace (and, in fact, the singular
vectors associated with this subspace do not affect the within-class variability).
From Theorem 4.2 we gain the following insights on the minimizer of Eq. 2 in the near-collapse and
large ОІ regime. First, observe that not only do exactly collapsed minimizers have orthogonal features


                                                     7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


for different classes, but also in the near-collapse setting an intra-class block is much more dominant
than each inter-class block, as follows from Fk,kМғ being rank-1 and Пғmax (Fk,kМғ ) вүӘ Пғmin (Fk,k ). For
generic perturbations that do not concentrate in specific low-dimensional subspaces this implies that
also before/near pure collapse, we have that the deviation from collapse in the features of a certain
class is mainly due to deviation from collapse of input (preceding) features of the same class and
not those of the K вҲ’ 1 other classes. (See Appendix D.1 for more details, and note that this also
implies preservation of per-class near-collapse). Second, we see that the feature mapping regulariza-
tion plays the major role in approaching (near-)collapse behavior. Indeed, increasing О»H decreases
the spectral values of the (more dominant) intra-class blocks {Fk,k } (contrary to increasing О»W ).
Recall that reducing the singular values of the blocks of F implies reducing the distance of the min-
imizer HМғвҲ— from exact collapse. Third, our result on the inter-class blocks {Fk,kМғМё=k } hints that the
regularization of the last layerвҖҷs weights (determined by О»W > 0) may still have a supportive effect
on reaching (near-)collapse behavior by reducing the component of the deviation from collapse that
is due to вҖңcrosstalkвҖқ/interference of features of different classes (e.g., when some classes are harder
to be classified then others). In the sequel, we show that the above observations correlate with the
NC behavior in practical settings.

5   E XPERIMENTS
In this section, we translate the insights that are obtained for the model in Eq. 2 to what is observed
with practical DNNs and datasets. We evaluate the distance of DNNвҖҷs features from exact NC using
metrics that have been also used in previous works. Despite defining                 N C 1 in Eq. 3,
                                                                           the metric
                                                                                         g
                                                                     1           вҖ 
here we mainly measure within-class variability using N C1 := K Tr ОЈW ОЈB , where we use the
definitions of Section 3. (We use this metric due to its popularity even though it is less amenable for
theoretical analysis). We measure the structure of the features using
                         (H вҲ’ hG 1вҠӨ     вҠӨ
                                     K ) (H вҲ’ hG 1K )
                                                      вҠӨ
                                                                  1            1
           N C2 :=                  вҠӨ  вҠӨ             вҠӨ
                                                           вҲ’вҲҡ          (IK вҲ’ 1K 1вҠӨ    K)     ,
                       вҲҘ(H вҲ’ hG 1K ) (H вҲ’ hG 1K )вҲҘF             K вҲ’1          K            F
where the simplex ETF is normalized to unit Frobenius norm.
The result of Section 3 provides reasoning to justify depthwise decrease
in within-class variability, which has already been empirically demon-
strated for end-to-end training in several papers (Papyan et al., 2020;
Tirer & Bruna, 2022; Galanti, 2022) (we present such experiments in
Appendix E.2). Here we show this behavior also for layer-wise training,
which is better represented by our model. We consider the CIFAR-10
dataset and train an MLP with 1 to 10 hidden layers and a final classi-
fication layer. Each time, we add and train a hidden layer on top of the
previous hidden layers, which are maintained fixed. Then we compute Figure 2: Layer-wise train-
                                                                              ing of MLP on CIFAR-10.
the NC1 metrics for the deepest features. Due to space limitation, the
experimental details are deferred to Appendix E.1. Figure 2 demonstrates decrease in both N C1 and
N
g  C 1 as we add more hidden layers on top the previous, which are maintained fixed. Note that our
theory justifies such decrease for all the layers (the features are not required to be near collapse).
Next, we turn to demonstrate correlation of practical NC behavior with the insight gained in Sec-
tion 4 that О»H plays a bigger role than О»W does in approaching NC. Based on the equivalence of
L2 -regularization with weight decay (WD) in gradient-based methods, we can make the analogy of
regularizing H in Eq. 2 to WD of the weights of practical DNNs in the feature mapping layers (i.e.,
excluding the last layerвҖҷs weights). Importantly, note that this analogy is empirically justified for
plain UFMs in (Zhu et al., 2021). Under this analogy, our analysis suggests that, as long as entering
the zero training error phase of training is maintained, increasing (resp. decreasing) the WD in the
feature mapping layers should decrease (resp. increase) the distance from exact collapse more than
increasing (resp. decreasing) the WD in the classification layer. Indeed, we empirically show this
behavior below. (More experiments are presented in Appendix E.2). We note that there exists a
work that empirically8 shows that WD facilitates collapse (Rangamani & Banburski-Fahey, 2022),
however, they do not examine the WD in feature mapping and classification layers separately.
    8
      Note that the claim in (Rangamani & Banburski-Fahey, 2022) that NC solution cannot minimize unregu-
larized bias-free MSE loss comes from demanding that HвҲ— вҖ“ without subtracting the global mean вҖ“ will be a
simplex ETF rather than an orthogonal frame as shown in Theorem 2.1.


                                                   8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


    0.25                                              0.8                                            0.25                                            0.8
                       Baseline (last features)                       Baseline (last features)                        Baseline (last features)                       Baseline (last features)
                       WDx2 for W                                     WDx2 for W                                      WD=0 for W                                     WD=0 for W
    0.20               WDx2 for H                                     WDx2 for H                     0.20             WD=0 for H                                     WD=0 for H
                                                      0.6                                                                                            0.6

    0.15                                                                                             0.15


                                                    NC2


                                                                                                                                                   NC2
NC1


                                                                                                   NC1
                                                      0.4                                                                                            0.4
    0.10                                                                                             0.10
                                                      0.2                                                                                            0.2
    0.05                                                                                             0.05

    0.000     25    50           75           100     0.00   25    50           75           100     0.000   25    50           75           100     0.00   25    50           75           100
                   Epoch                                          Epoch                                           Epoch                                          Epoch

    0.25                                              0.8                                            0.25                                            0.8
                       Baseline (last features)                       Baseline (last features)                        Baseline (last features)                       Baseline (last features)
                       WDx2 for W                                     WDx2 for W                                      WD=0 for W                                     WD=0 for W
    0.20               WDx2 for H                                     WDx2 for H                     0.20             WD=0 for H                                     WD=0 for H
                                                      0.6                                                                                            0.6

    0.15                                                                                             0.15


                                                    NC2


                                                                                                                                                   NC2
NC1


                                                                                                   NC1
                                                      0.4                                                                                            0.4
    0.10                                                                                             0.10
                                                      0.2                                                                                            0.2
    0.05                                                                                             0.05

    0.000     25    50           75           100     0.00   25    50           75           100     0.000   25    50           75           100     0.00   25    50           75           100
                   Epoch                                          Epoch                                           Epoch                                          Epoch



Figure 3: The effect of modifying the weight decay (WD) on NC metrics for ResNet18 trained on CIFAR-
10. Top: MSE loss without bias; Bottom: CE loss with bias. Observe that modifying the WD in the feature
mapping increases the deviation from the baseline more than modifying the WD of the last layer.

We consider the CIFAR-10 dataset and examine how modifying the regularization hyperparameters
affects the NC behavior of the widely used ResNet18 (He et al., 2016a) compared to a baseline
setting. Specifically, as a baseline hyperparameter setting, we consider one that is used in previous
works (Papyan et al., 2020; Zhu et al., 2021): default PyTorch initialization of the weights, SGD
optimizer with learning rate 0.05 that is divided by 10 every 40 epochs, momentum of 0.9, and WD
of 5e-4 for all the networkвҖҷs parameters. The modifications include: 1) doubling the WD only for
the last (FC) layer; 2) doubling the WD only for feature mapping (conv) layers; 3) zeroing the WD
for the last layer; and 4) zeroing the WD for feature mapping layers.
Figure 3 presents the NC1 and NC2 metrics of the (deepest) features for: (Top) MSE loss with
no bias in the FC layer (similar to the analyzed model); and (Bottom) CE loss with bias in the
FC layer. In all the settings, we reach zero training error at the 40 epoch approximately. The
empirical results show that modifying the WD in the feature mapping layers leads to curves with
larger deviations from the baseline compared to modifying the last layerвҖҷs WD, which is aligned with
the theory established in Section 4 (i.e., the important role of О»H in attenuating the dominant intra-
class perturbations). Reducing (zeroing) the WD in the feature mapping increases the distance from
exact NC (i.e., from 0 value of the metrics), while increasing the WD decreases the gap from exact
NC, as the theory predicts. The fact that sometimes (e.g., with CE loss) increasing the WD of the last
layer can also decrease the gap from collapse hints that mitigating inter-class interference/correlation
of features in practical deep learning settings is more significant for reaching NC than in our analysis
that considers a near-collapse regime.9 Yet, both the experiments and the theoretical study show that
the regularization of the feature mapping has larger significance in approaching NC.

6           C ONCLUSION
The features that are learned by training practical networks on real world datasets typically do not
reach exact NC. In this paper, we addressed this issue by studying a model that can force the features
to stay in the vicinity of a predefined features matrix. We analyzed it for the small vicinity case and
established results that cannot be obtained by the previously studied (idealized) UFMs. We proved
reduction in within-class variability of the optimized features compared to the input features (via an-
alyzing gradient flow along the вҖңcentral-pathвҖқ of a UFM with minimal assumptions, unlike existing
literature). We also presented an analysis of the modelвҖҷs minimizer in the near-collapse regime that
provides insights on the effect of the regularization hyperparameters on the closeness to collapse,
which correlate with the behavior in practical deep learning settings. We believe that our perturba-
tion analysis approach, which is based on exploiting our knowledge on exactly collapsed minimizers
of UFMs for studying non-collapse cases, can be applied to models other than the one considered
in this paper, such as models with different loss functions and/or multiple levels of features and/or
imbalanced data.

    9
      In Appendix E.2, we demonstrate the role of О»W in mitigating inter-class interference of features, which
is identified by our analysis, also empirically with practical DNNs.


                                                                                                 9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


R EFERENCES
Shaojie Bai, J Zico Kolter, and Vladlen Koltun. Deep equilibrium models. Advances in Neural
  Information Processing Systems, 32, 2019.
Mikhail Belkin, Alexander Rakhlin, and Alexandre B Tsybakov. Does data interpolation contra-
 dict statistical optimality? In The 22nd International Conference on Artificial Intelligence and
 Statistics, pp. 1611вҖ“1619. PMLR, 2019.
Ricky TQ Chen, Yulia Rubanova, Jesse Bettencourt, and David K Duvenaud. Neural ordinary
  differential equations. Advances in neural information processing systems, 31, 2018.
Yuejie Chi, Yue M Lu, and Yuxin Chen. Nonconvex optimization meets low-rank matrix factoriza-
  tion: An overview. IEEE Transactions on Signal Processing, 67(20):5239вҖ“5269, 2019.
Omer Elkabetz and Nadav Cohen. Continuous vs. discrete optimization of deep neural networks.
 Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 34:4947вҖ“4960, 2021.
Tolga Ergen and Mert Pilanci. Revealing the structure of deep neural networks via convex duality.
  In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 3004вҖ“3014. PMLR, 2021.
Cong Fang, Hangfeng He, Qi Long, and Weijie J Su. Exploring deep neural networks via layer-
  peeled model: Minority collapse in imbalanced training. Proceedings of the National Academy
  of Sciences, 118(43), 2021.
Tomer Galanti. A note on the implicit bias towards minimal depth of deep neural networks. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2202.09028, 2022.
Tomer Galanti, AndraМҒs GyoМҲrgy, and Marcus Hutter. On the role of neural collapse in transfer learn-
  ing. arXiv preprint arXiv:2112.15121, 2021.
Florian Graf, Christoph Hofer, Marc Niethammer, and Roland Kwitt. Dissecting supervised con-
  strastive learning. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 3821вҖ“3830. PMLR,
  2021.
XY Han, Vardan Papyan, and David L Donoho. Neural collapse under mse loss: Proximity to and
 dynamics on the central path. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2022.
Kaiming He, Xiangyu Zhang, Shaoqing Ren, and Jian Sun. Deep residual learning for image recog-
  nition. In Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition, pp.
  770вҖ“778, 2016a.
Kaiming He, Xiangyu Zhang, Shaoqing Ren, and Jian Sun. Identity mappings in deep residual
  networks. In European conference on computer vision, pp. 630вҖ“645. Springer, 2016b.
Elad Hoffer, Itay Hubara, and Daniel Soudry. Train longer, generalize better: closing the general-
  ization gap in large batch training of neural networks. Advances in neural information processing
  systems, 30, 2017.
Like Hui and Mikhail Belkin. Evaluation of neural architectures trained with square loss vs cross-
  entropy in classification tasks. In The Ninth International Conference on Learning Representa-
  tions (ICLR), 2021.
Wenlong Ji, Yiping Lu, Yiliang Zhang, Zhun Deng, and Weijie J Su. An unconstrained layer-peeled
 perspective on neural collapse. arXiv preprint arXiv:2110.02796, 2021.
Yehuda Koren, Robert Bell, and Chris Volinsky. Matrix factorization techniques for recommender
  systems. Computer, 42(8):30вҖ“37, 2009.
Vignesh Kothapalli, Ebrahim Rasromani, and Vasudev Awatramani. Neural collapse: A review on
  modelling principles and generalization. arXiv preprint arXiv:2206.04041, 2022.
Jianfeng Lu and Stefan Steinerberger. Neural collapse under cross-entropy loss. Applied and Com-
   putational Harmonic Analysis, 2022.


                                                10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Siyuan Ma, Raef Bassily, and Mikhail Belkin. The power of interpolation: Understanding the effec-
  tiveness of sgd in modern over-parametrized learning. In International Conference on Machine
  Learning, pp. 3325вҖ“3334. PMLR, 2018.
Dustin G Mixon, Hans Parshall, and Jianzong Pi. Neural collapse with unconstrained features. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2011.11619, 2020.
Vardan Papyan, XY Han, and David L Donoho. Prevalence of neural collapse during the terminal
  phase of deep learning training. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 117(40):
  24652вҖ“24663, 2020.
Akshay Rangamani and Andrzej Banburski-Fahey. Neural collapse in deep homogeneous classifiers
  and the role of weight decay. In ICASSP 2022-2022 IEEE International Conference on Acoustics,
  Speech and Signal Processing (ICASSP), pp. 4243вҖ“4247. IEEE, 2022.
Christos Thrampoulidis, Ganesh R Kini, Vala Vakilian, and Tina Behnia. Imbalance trouble: Revis-
  iting neural-collapse geometry. arXiv preprint arXiv:2208.05512, 2022.
Tom Tirer and Joan Bruna. Extended unconstrained features model for exploring deep neural col-
  lapse. In Proceedings of the 39th International Conference on Machine Learning, volume 162,
  pp. 21478вҖ“21505. PMLR, 2022.
Stephan Wojtowytsch et al. On the emergence of simplex symmetry in the final and penultimate
  layers of neural network classifiers. Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, 145:1вҖ“21, 2021.
Yibo Yang, Liang Xie, Shixiang Chen, Xiangtai Li, Zhouchen Lin, and Dacheng Tao. Do we really
  need a learnable classifier at the end of deep neural network? arXiv preprint arXiv:2203.09081,
  2022.
Jinxin Zhou, Xiao Li, Tianyu Ding, Chong You, Qing Qu, and Zhihui Zhu. On the optimization
   landscape of neural collapse under mse loss: Global optimality with unconstrained features. In
   Proceedings of the 39th International Conference on Machine Learning, volume 162, pp. 27179вҖ“
   27202. PMLR, 2022.
Zhihui Zhu, Tianyu Ding, Jinxin Zhou, Xiao Li, Chong You, Jeremias Sulam, and Qing Qu. A ge-
  ometric analysis of neural collapse with unconstrained features. Advances in Neural Information
  Processing Systems, 34:29820вҖ“29834, 2021.


                                               11
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


A    P ROOF OF T HEOREM 3.1

To prove Theorem 3.1, in addition to the within-class and between-class covariance matrices, let us
define the total covariance matrix (across all classes) of the non-centered features
                                                  K     n
                                               1 XX
                                 ОЈМғT (H) :=           hk,i hвҠӨ
                                                            k,i .
                                              Kn  i=1
                                                 k=1

For convenience we also define the non-centered between-class covariance matrix
                                               1 X       вҠӨ
                                   ОЈМғB (H) :=        hk hk .
                                               K
                                                      k=1


We have the decomposition ОЈМғT (H) = ОЈW (H) + ОЈМғB (H).
                                       вҠӨ
Using YHвҠӨ = (IK вҠ— 1вҠӨ        вҠӨ                   1 вҠӨ
                       n )H = nH and ОЈМғT = Kn HH , we have that for each feature matrix
H, the optimal weight matrix WвҲ— (H) is given by
                           1 вҠӨ 1          О»W вҲ’1 1 вҠӨ       О»W вҲ’1
               WвҲ— (H) =      H (    HHвҠӨ +   I) = H (ОЈМғT +   I) .
                           K     Kn       K     K         K

Next, let us simplify the terms with WвҲ— (H) in L(H):
                         1                    О»W               О»H
              L(H) :=       вҲҘWвҲ— (H)H вҲ’ YвҲҘ2F +    вҲҘWвҲ— (H)вҲҘ2F +     вҲҘHвҲҘ2F .
                        2Kn                   2K              2Kn

For the first term in L(H), observe that
  1                         1                              1                1
     вҲҘWвҲ— (H)H вҲ’ YвҲҘ2F =        Tr WвҲ— (H)HHвҠӨ WвҲ— (H)вҠӨ вҲ’         Tr WвҲ— (H)HYвҠӨ +

 2Kn                      2Kn                             Kn                2
       1             О»W вҲ’1            О»W вҲ’1         1           О»W вҲ’1        1
    =     Tr (ОЈМғT +     I) ОЈМғT (ОЈМғT +    I) ОЈМғB вҲ’ Tr (ОЈМғT +         I) ОЈМғB +
      2K             K                K             K            K           2

         О»W            О»W вҲ’2           1           О»W вҲ’1         1
    =вҲ’       Tr (ОЈМғT +     I) ОЈМғB вҲ’      Tr (ОЈМғT +     I) ОЈМғB + ,
        2K 2           K              2K           K             2
                                           1            вҠӨ
where in the second equality we used ОЈМғB = K HH             , and in the last equality we used (ОЈМғT +
О»W    вҲ’1           О»W         О»W   вҲ’1
 K I)    ОЈМғT = I вҲ’  K ( ОЈМғT +  K I)   .
For the second term in L(H), observe that
                       О»W              О»W
                          вҲҘWвҲ— (H)вҲҘ2F =    Tr WвҲ— (H)WвҲ— (H)вҠӨ

                       2K              2K
                                       О»W                О»W вҲ’2
                                     =      Tr   (ОЈМғ T +   I)  ОЈМғ B   .
                                       2K 2              K

Adding the two terms together,

       1                    О»W                 1           О»W вҲ’1        1
          вҲҘWвҲ— (H)H вҲ’ YвҲҘ2F +    вҲҘWвҲ— (H)вҲҘ2F = вҲ’    Tr (ОЈМғT +    I) ОЈМғB +
      2Kn                   2K                2K           K            2

                                 1           О»W вҲ’1         О»W       dвҲ’K
                             =     Tr (ОЈМғT +     I) (ОЈW +     I) вҲ’       ,
                                2K            K             K        2K

where we used (ОЈМғT + О»KW I)вҲ’1 ОЈМғB = I вҲ’ (ОЈМғT + О»KW I)вҲ’1 (ОЈW + О»KW I).
Finally, for the third term in L(H) we have
                                    О»H         О»H
                                       вҲҘHвҲҘ2F =    Tr ОЈМғT .
                                   2Kn          2


                                                 12
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


To conclude
                                                             dвҲ’K
                   1          О»W          О»W вҲ’1     О»H
           L(H) =    Tr (ОЈW +    I)(ОЈМғT +   I)    +    Tr ОЈМғT вҲ’    .
                  2K          K           K          2          2K

Next, we are going to analyze the traces of dОЈ      dОЈW        dОЈМғT
                                               dt , dt , and dt , along the flow that is stated in
                                                 B

Eq. 4, which is repeated here for the convenience of the reader:
                                      dHt
                                           = вҲ’KnвҲҮL(Ht ).
                                       dt
In the following lemma, we state the required derivatives.
Lemma A.1. Denote CB := ОЈB (ОЈМғT + О»KW I)вҲ’1 , CМғB := ОЈМғB (ОЈМғT + О»KW I)вҲ’1 and CW :=
ОЈW (ОЈМғT + О»KW I)вҲ’1 . Along the gradient flow we have
             dОЈB       1
                   =       CB (I вҲ’ CМғB ) + (I вҲ’ CМғвҠӨ     вҠӨ
                                                  B )CB вҲ’2О»H ОЈB
              dt      K
            dОЈW          1
                   =вҲ’        CW CМғB + CМғвҠӨ     вҠӨ
                                           B CW вҲ’2О»H ОЈW
              dt        K
             dОЈМғT      1
                   =       (I вҲ’ CМғB вҲ’ CW )CМғB + CМғвҠӨ  B (I вҲ’ CМғвҠӨ
                                                              B вҲ’ CвҠӨ
                                                                   W )   вҲ’2О»H ОЈМғT
              dt      K

Proof. We use the notation вҲӮkjl to denote the derivative w.r.t. the lth entry of hk,j . Then
                                    1
                        вҲӮkjl ОЈB =     (el (hk вҲ’ hG )вҠӨ + (hk вҲ’ hG )eвҠӨl ),
                                   Kn
                                    1
                                       el (hk,j вҲ’ hk )вҠӨ + (hk,j вҲ’ hk )eвҠӨ

                       вҲӮkjl ОЈW =                                       l ,
                                   Kn
                                    1
                        вҲӮkjl ОЈМғT =    (el hвҠӨ           вҠӨ
                                           k,j + hk,j el ),
                                   Kn
where el вҲҲ Rd is the one-hot vector whose lth entry is one (i.e., a standard basis vector). By the
product rule,
                                                                                                 вҲ’1 !
               1                      О»W вҲ’1           1                О»W                 О»W             О»H вҠӨ
вҲӮkjl L(H) =       Tr (вҲӮkjl ОЈW )(ОЈМғT +     I)     +       Tr (ОЈW +          I)вҲӮkjl ОЈМғT +       I       +     e hk,j
              2K                       K             2K                 K                  K             Kn l

     1                       О»W вҲ’1
 =      Tr (вҲӮkjl ОЈW )(ОЈМғT +      I)
   2K                        K
                                            вҲ’1                           вҲ’1 !
         1             О»W            О»W                           О»W             О»H вҠӨ
     вҲ’     Tr (ОЈW +        I) ОЈМғT +      I     вҲӮkjl ОЈМғT ОЈМғT +         I       +      e hk,j
        2K             K              K                           K              Kn l
                                                         вҲ’1                                 вҲ’1                  !вҠӨ
      1            О»W вҲ’1                         О»W                   О»W             О»W
 = 2        (ОЈМғT +    I) (hk,j вҲ’ hk ) вҲ’ ОЈМғT +         I     (ОЈW +         I) ОЈМғT +       I      hk,j + О»H Khk,j    el .
   K n              K                             K                    K              K
Therefore, the gradient of L is given by
вҲҮL(H) =                                                                        (7)
                                                    вҲ’1                           вҲ’1          !
     1             О»W вҲ’1          вҠӨ           О»W              О»W           О»W
            (ОЈМғT +   I) (H вҲ’ H вҠ— 1n ) вҲ’ ОЈМғT +    I       ОЈW +    I   ОЈМғT +    I     H + О»H KH .
    K 2n           K                          K               K            K

Next, we compute how each covariance matrix updates along the flow. Let ОЈB (a, b) = eвҠӨa ОЈB eb
denote the a, b-th entry of ОЈB . We further denote C := (ОЈМғT + О»KW I)вҲ’1 , CB := ОЈB (ОЈМғT +
О»W
 K I)
      вҲ’1
         ,CМғB := ОЈМғB (ОЈМғT + О»KW I)вҲ’1 CW := ОЈW (ОЈМғT + О»KW I)вҲ’1 and write вҲӮkjl L(H) = вҹЁLkj , el вҹ©,
where
                           1
                  Lkj = 2       C(hk,j вҲ’ hk ) вҲ’ (I вҲ’ CМғвҠӨ
                                                       B )Chk,j + О» H Khk,j .
                         K n


                                                  13
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Using the chain rule, we have that
       dОЈB (a, b) X                        dhk,j [в„“] X
                   =        вҲӮkjl ОЈB (a, b)           =       вҲӮkjl ОЈB (a, b)(вҲ’KnвҲӮkjl L(H))
           dt                                dt
                      k,j,l                            k,j,l
                      XX
                   =            вҲ’ вҹЁea , el вҹ©вҹЁeb , hk вҲ’ hG вҹ© + вҹЁea , hk вҲ’ hG вҹ©вҹЁel , eb вҹ© вҹЁel , Lkjl вҹ©
                        k,j    l
                        X
                    =         вҲ’ вҹЁea , Lkj вҹ©вҹЁeb , hk вҲ’ hG вҹ© + вҹЁea , hk вҲ’ hG вҹ©вҹЁLkj , eb вҹ©
                        k,j
                          пЈ«                                     пЈ¶
                           X
                    = eTa пЈӯ  вҲ’Lk,j (hk вҲ’ hG )вҠӨ вҲ’ (hk вҲ’ hG )LвҠӨ
                                                            k,j
                                                                пЈё eb
                                k,j
                      1
                   = eTa CB (I вҲ’ CМғB ) + (I вҲ’ CМғвҠӨ    вҠӨ           вҠӨ
                                                B )CB eb вҲ’2О»H ea ОЈB eb
                      K
Similar computation yields
      dОЈW (a, b)       1
                   = вҲ’ eвҠӨ     C  CМғ
                                W B + CМғ вҠӨ вҠӨ
                                          C              вҠӨ
                                         B W eb вҲ’2О»H ea ОЈW eb
          dt           K a
       dОЈМғT (a, b)   1
                   = eTa (I вҲ’ CМғB вҲ’ CW )CМғB + CМғвҠӨB (I вҲ’  CМғвҠӨ
                                                           B вҲ’ CвҠӨ
                                                                W )  eb вҲ’2О»H eвҠӨ
                                                                              a ОЈМғT eb
           dt        K



Let TB : t 7вҶ’ e2О»H t Tr(ОЈB ) and TW : t 7вҶ’ e2О»H t Tr(ОЈW ). The above lemma suggests that TB
strictly increases along the flow, while TW decreases. Indeed,
              d TW              d Tr(ОЈW )
                     = e2О»H t (           + 2О»H Tr(ОЈW ))
                dt                  dt
                          2
                     = вҲ’ e2О»H t Tr(CW CМғB )
                          K
                                 2                О»W вҲ’1              О»W вҲ’1
                     = вҲ’e2О»H t Tr(ОЈW (ОЈМғT +           I) ОЈМғB (ОЈМғT +       I) ) вүӨ 0,
                                 K                K                   K
The last inequality holds because the trace of the product of two positive semidefinite matrices is
always non-negative (e.g. by Von-NeumannвҖҷs trace inequality). Similarly
dTB       2
      = e2О»H t Tr(CB (I вҲ’ CМғB ))
  dt     K
          2                       О»W вҲ’1                     О»W вҲ’1
      = e2О»H t Tr(ОЈB (ОЈМғT +           I) (I вҲ’ ОЈМғB (ОЈМғT +       I) ))
         K                         K                        K
          2                       О»W вҲ’1             О»W           О»W вҲ’1
      = e2О»H t Tr(ОЈB (ОЈМғT +           I) (ОЈW +         I)(ОЈМғT +       I) )
         K                         K                 K            K
          2                         О»W вҲ’1                О»W вҲ’1         О»W                 О»W вҲ’2
      = e2О»H t Tr(ОЈB (ОЈМғT +              I) ОЈW (ОЈМғT +        I) ) +       Tr(ОЈB (ОЈМғT +         I) )
         K                           K                    K             K                  K
         2О»W 2О»H t                   О»W вҲ’2
      вүҘ       e      Tr(ОЈB (ОЈМғT +        I) ) > 0,
          K2                          K
where the strict inequality again comes from Von-Neumann trace inequality, which ensures that the
trace of product of a positive definite matrix and a non-zero positive semidefinite matrix is positive.
Since Ng C 1 = TW /TB , the above computation also shows that N
                                                              g C 1 has to strictly decrease along
the flow.


                                                     14
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


B    P ROOF OF C OROLLARY 3.2
Recall that the minimizer H1/ОІ satisfies the first order equation
                                                    Kn
                                 H1/ОІ вҲ’ H0 = вҲ’         вҲҮL(H1/ОІ ).                                 (8)
                                                    ОІ
We first show that H1/ОІ вҶ’ H0 as ОІ вҶ’ вҲһ. The following lemma would be helpful.
Lemma B.1. There exists a constant M > 0 independent of H, such that
                                     вҲҘвҲҮL(H)вҲҘF вүӨ M вҲҘHвҲҘF ,

for any H вҲҲ RdГ—Kn .

Proof. We bound each term in the expression of вҲҮL equation Eq. 7 individually. For the first term
we have
                   О»W вҲ’1                          О»W вҲ’1
         вҲҘ(ОЈМғT +     I) (H вҲ’ H вҠ— 1вҠӨ
                                  n )вҲҘF вүӨ вҲҘ(ОЈМғT +    I) вҲҘop вҲҘ(H вҲ’ H вҠ— 1вҠӨ
                                                                       n )вҲҘF
                   K                              K
                                           K                     2K
                                        вүӨ     вҲҘ(H вҲ’ H вҠ— 1вҠӨ
                                                         n )вҲҘF вүӨ    вҲҘHвҲҘF ,
                                          О»W                     О»W
where вҲҘ В· вҲҘop denotes the operator norm and the second inequality is due to the fact that each eigen-
value of (ОЈМғT + О»KW I)вҲ’1 is no bigger than О»KW . Similarly,
                             вҲ’1                               вҲ’1
                       О»W                 О»W           О»W
                 ОЈМғT +    I      ОЈW +        I   ОЈМғT +     I     H
                        K                  K            K
                                                                    F
                                    вҲ’ 21                             вҲ’ 21
                K            О»W                 О»W             О»W
            вүӨ          ОЈМғT +     I         ОЈW +     I   ОЈМғT +     I                 вҲҘHвҲҘF ,
                О»W            K                 K              K
                                                                               op

where in the last inequality we used вҲҘ(ОЈМғT + О»KW I)вҲ’1/2 вҲҘop вүӨ K/О»W since every
                                                             p
                                                                               eigenvalue
                                                                                        of
       О»W                                                      О»W                 О»W
              вҲ’1/2
                                  p
(ОЈМғT + K I)         is bounded by K/О»W . Denote A = ОЈW + K I , B = ОЈМғT + K I and
use A + ОЈМғB = B, we have
                     вҲҘBвҲ’1/2 ABвҲ’1/2 вҲҘop = вҲҘ(BвҲ’1/2 A1/2 )(BвҲ’1/2 A1/2 )вҠӨ вҲҘop
                                         = вҲҘ(BвҲ’1/2 A1/2 )вҠӨ (BвҲ’1/2 A1/2 )вҲҘop
                                         = вҲҘA1/2 BвҲ’1 A1/2 вҲҘop
                                         = вҲҘ(AвҲ’1/2 (A + ОЈМғB )AвҲ’1/2 )вҲ’1 вҲҘop
                                         = вҲҘ(I + AвҲ’1/2 ОЈМғB AвҲ’1/2 )вҲ’1 вҲҘop вүӨ 1.

Combining the above bounds together, we have obtained for any H вҲҲ RdГ—Kn ,

                                          1      3
                         вҲҘвҲҮL(H)вҲҘF вүӨ                 + О»H вҲҘHвҲҘF .
                                         Kn О»W



Next, we combine the lemma and the stationary equation Eq. 8 to get
                             nKM            nKM                 nKM
         вҲҘH1/ОІ вҲ’ H0 вҲҘF вүӨ         вҲҘH1/ОІ вҲҘF вүӨ     вҲҘH1/ОІ вҲ’ H0 вҲҘF +     вҲҘH0 вҲҘF .
                              ОІ              ОІ                   ОІ
Rearranging, we have the bound
                                                             вҲ’1
                                                    ОІ
                           вҲҘH1/ОІ вҲ’ H0 вҲҘF вүӨ             вҲ’1           вҲҘH0 вҲҘF .
                                                   nKM


                                                   15
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


This implies that H1/ОІ вҶ’ H0 as ОІ вҶ’ вҲһ. Combined with the continuity of вҲҮL(В·) and the first
order equation Eq. 8, this further implies
                                       H1/ОІ вҲ’ H0
                                    lim          = вҲ’KnвҲҮL(H0 ).
                                   ОІвҶ’вҲһ    1/ОІ

Now, by chain rule,

                   N
                   g C 1 (H1/ОІ ) вҲ’ N
                                   g C 1 (H0 )                        H1/ОІ вҲ’ H0
                lim                            = вҹЁвҲҮH N
                                                     g C 1 (H0 ), lim           вҹ©
               ОІвҶ’вҲһ            1/ОІ                                 ОІвҶ’вҲһ    1/ОІ
                                               = вҹЁвҲҮH N
                                                     g C 1 (H0 ), вҲ’KnвҲҮL(H0 )вҹ©
                                                        d
                                                    =          N
                                                               g C 1 (Ht ).
                                                        dt t=0
In the last line, Ht denotes the gradient flow iterate defined in Eq. 4. By (the proof of) Theorem 3.1,
when H0 is non-collapsed,
                                            d
                                                   N
                                                   g C 1 (Ht ) < 0
                                            dt t=0
must hold. This further implies that there exists some constant C = C(H0 ) > 0 such that for ОІ > C
               N
               g C 1 (H1/ОІ )вҲ’N
                             g C 1 (H0 )
we have that             1/ОІ             < 0.


                                                     16
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


C    P ROOF OF T HEOREM 4.1
Our proof is essentially a perturbation analysis approach that exploits the fact that each of
the minimizers is a stationary point of its associated objective function. Namely, the mini-
mizer of the perturbed  problem f (W, H; HМғ0 ), i.e., (WМғвҲ— , HМғвҲ— ), obeys that вҲҮf (WМғвҲ— , HМғвҲ— ; HМғ0 ) =
  вҲҮH f (WМғвҲ— , HМғвҲ— ; HМғ0 )

                          = 0, and the minimizer of the unperturbed problem, i.e., (WвҲ— , HвҲ— ) where
 вҲҮW f (WМғвҲ— , HМғвҲ— ; HМғ0 )
                                                                        вҲҮH f (WвҲ— , HвҲ— ; H0 )

for brevity we omit the вҖҷЛҶвҖҷ symbol, obeys that вҲҮf (WвҲ— , HвҲ— ; H0 ) =                             = 0.
                                                                       вҲҮW f (WвҲ— , HвҲ— ; H0 )

We use these properties in the following first order Taylor approximation of вҲҮf (WМғвҲ— , HМғвҲ— ; HМғ0 )
around (WвҲ— , HвҲ— ; H0 ) (with accuracy of O(вҲҘОҙHвҲҘ2 , вҲҘОҙWвҲҘ2 , вҲҘОҙH0 вҲҘ2 )) that is given by
  вҲҮH f (WМғвҲ— , HМғвҲ— ; HМғ0 )     вҲҮH f (WвҲ— , HвҲ— ; H0 )

                            вүҲ                                                                 (9)
  вҲҮW f (WМғвҲ— , HМғвҲ— ; HМғ0 )     вҲҮW f (WвҲ— , HвҲ— ; H0 )
                                                                          вҲҮвҠӨ           вҲ—    вҲ—
     вҠӨ
    вҲҮH вҲҮH f (WвҲ— , HвҲ— ; H0 ) вҲҮвҠӨ      вҲҮH f (WвҲ— , HвҲ— ; H0 ) vec(ОҙH)

                                  W                                          H0 вҲҮH f (W , H ; H0 )
 +                                                                   +                               vec(ОҙH0 ).
    вҲҮвҠӨ              вҲ—     вҲ—       вҠӨ           вҲ—
      H вҲҮW f (W , H ; H0 ) вҲҮW вҲҮW f (W , H ; H0 )
                                                    вҲ—      vec(ОҙW)        вҲҮвҠӨ           вҲ—    вҲ—
                                                                            H0 вҲҮW f (W , H ; H0 )

Recall that ОҙH := HМғвҲ— вҲ’ HвҲ— , ОҙW := WМғвҲ— вҲ’ WвҲ— , and ОҙH0 = HМғ0 вҲ’ H0 . Since the two terms in the
first line of Eq. 9 vanish, we get that
                                     вҠӨ                вҲ’1   вҠӨ
                                     вҲҮH вҲҮH f вҲҮвҠӨ

                  vec(ОҙH)                     W вҲҮH f      вҲҮH 0 вҲҮH f
                              вүҲвҲ’                                      vec(ОҙH0 ),         (10)
                  vec(ОҙW)           вҲҮвҠӨH вҲҮW f вҲҮвҠӨ
                                              W вҲҮW f      вҲҮвҠӨ
                                                           H0 вҲҮ W f

where all the derivatives are evaluated at (WвҲ— , HвҲ— ; H0 ), which is omitted in order to simplify the
presentation. As shown below, in our setting the matrix that is inverted is indeed nonsingular.
We turn now to compute the derivatives. Let us denote h := vec(H), w := vec(W), and y :=
vec(Y). Observe that from well known identities on the Kronecker product and the vectorization
operation we have
          1                         1                         1
              вҲҘWH вҲ’ YвҲҘ2F =              вҲҘ(Ikn вҠ— W)h вҲ’ yвҲҘ22 =     вҲҘ(HвҠӨ вҠ— IK )w вҲ’ yвҲҘ22 .
        2Kn                       2Kn                        2Kn
Therefore, the first order derivatives are given by
                     1                               О»H    ОІ
  вҲҮH f (W, H; H0 ) =   (Ikn вҠ— WвҠӨ )((Ikn вҠ— W)h вҲ’ y) +    h+    (h вҲ’ vec(H0 )), (11)
                    Kn                               Kn    Kn
                     1                              О»W
 вҲҮW f (W, H; H0 ) =    (H вҠ— IK )((HвҠӨ вҠ— IK )w вҲ’ y) +    w.
                    Kn                              K
Hence,
                                                  ОІ
                                     вҲҮвҠӨ
                                      H 0 вҲҮH f = вҲ’  IdnK ,
                                                 Kn
                                     вҲҮвҠӨ
                                      H0 вҲҮW f = 0KdГ—dnK .

Plugging these expressions in Eq. 10 and using blockwise matrix inversion gives
           ОІ                                           вҲ’1
vec(ОҙH) вүҲ      вҲҮвҠӨ          вҠӨ       вҠӨ
                H вҲҮH f вҲ’ вҲҮW вҲҮH f (вҲҮW вҲҮW f )
                                           вҲ’1 вҠӨ
                                             вҲҮ H вҲҮW f     vec(ОҙH0 ),
          Kn
             ОІ                                                                вҲ’1
vec(ОҙW) вүҲ вҲ’    (вҲҮвҠӨ
                 W вҲҮW f )
                          вҲ’1 вҠӨ
                            вҲҮH вҲҮW f вҲҮвҠӨ           вҠӨ         вҠӨ
                                     H вҲҮH f вҲ’ вҲҮW вҲҮH f (вҲҮW вҲҮW f )
                                                                   вҲ’1 вҠӨ
                                                                     вҲҮH вҲҮW f     vec(ОҙH0 ),
            Kn
which are stated in the theorem, where all the derivatives are evaluated at the point (WвҲ— , HвҲ— ; H0 ).
Let us state the second order derivatives that appear above. First, one can observe that
                                    1                О»H        ОІ
            вҲҮвҠӨ        вҲ—   вҲ—
             H вҲҮH f (W , H ; H0 ) =   InK вҠ— WвҲ—вҠӨ WвҲ— +    IdnK +    IdnK ,
                                   Kn                Kn        Kn
                                    1             О»W
           вҲҮвҠӨ        вҲ—   вҲ—
            W вҲҮW f (W , H ; H0 ) =    HHвҲ—вҠӨ вҠ— IK +    IKd .
                                   Kn             K


                                                 17
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


As for the mixed partial derivative, applying вҲҮвҠӨ
                                               W on Eq. 11, we get

                вҲӮ          1 вҲӮ                    1               вҲӮ
 вҲҮвҠӨ                               (Ikn вҠ— WвҠӨ )r +     (Ikn вҠ— WвҠӨ )

  W вҲҮH f =        вҲҮH f =                                            ((Ikn вҠ— W)h вҲ’ y)
               вҲӮw         Kn вҲӮw                  Kn              вҲӮw
                1 вҲӮ                     1              вҲӮ
                       (Ikn вҠ— WвҠӨ )r +     (Ikn вҠ— WвҠӨ )    ((HвҠӨ вҠ— IK )w вҲ’ y)

             =
               Kn вҲӮw                   Kn             вҲӮw
                1              1
             =    E(W, H) +      (Ikn вҠ— WвҠӨ )(HвҠӨ вҠ— IK )
               Kn             Kn
                1              1
             =    E(W, H) +      (HвҠӨ вҠ— WвҠӨ )
               Kn             Kn
where r := vec(WHвҲ’Y)      but treated as independent of w due to the product rule, and E(W, H) :=
 вҲӮ            вҠӨ

вҲӮw  (I kn вҠ— W   )r  . Denoting wk,i := W [k, i], we have that

             вҲӮ               вҠӨ                    вҲӮ
                                                      W )r = (Ikn вҠ— ed,i eвҠӨ
                                                         вҠӨ

                   (Ikn вҠ— W )r = (Ikn вҠ—                                          K,k )r
            вҲӮwk,i                               вҲӮwk,i
                                      = vec(ed,i eвҠӨ
                                                  K,k (WH вҲ’ Y)),

where ed,i is the standard vector in Rd with 1 in its ith entry (similar definition stands for eK,k ).
Therefore,
                                              1 вҲ—вҠӨ     1
                     вҲҮвҠӨ        вҲ—   вҲ—
                      H вҲҮW f (W , H ; H0 ) =    E +       (HвҲ— вҠ— WвҲ— ),
                                             Kn      Kn
                                              1 вҲ—    1
                     вҲҮвҠӨ        вҲ—   вҲ—
                      W вҲҮH f (W , H ; H0 ) =    E +      (HвҲ—вҠӨ вҠ— WвҲ—вҠӨ ),
                                             Kn     Kn

where EвҲ— = E(WвҲ— , HвҲ— ) and E(W, H) вҲҲ RdnKГ—Kd is given by
E(W, H) :=
 vec(ed,1 eвҠӨ                             вҠӨ                        вҠӨ

           K,1 (WH вҲ’ Y)), ..., vec(ed,1 eK,K (WH вҲ’ Y)), vec(ed,2 eK,1 (WH вҲ’ Y)), ...

                                                                           ..., vec(ed,d eвҠӨ

                                                                                          K,K (WH вҲ’ Y)) .


We focus now on the effect the deviation ОҙH0 = HМғ0 вҲ’ H0 on the feature learning ОҙH = HМғвҲ— вҲ’ HвҲ— .
This requires inverting the dnK Г— dnK matrix that links ОҙH and ОҙH0 , which is quite challenging.
Yet, from the derivatives that are stated above we observe the following
          ОІ                                             вҲ’1
vec(ОҙH) вүҲ      вҲҮвҠӨ          вҠӨ        вҠӨ
                 H вҲҮH f вҲ’ вҲҮW вҲҮH f (вҲҮW вҲҮW f )
                                            вҲ’1 вҠӨ
                                              вҲҮ H вҲҮW f     vec(ОҙH0 )
          Kn
                                                                            вҲ’1
           О»H         1                Kn вҠӨ
 = IdnK +     IdnK + InK вҠ— WвҲ—вҠӨ WвҲ— вҲ’         вҲҮW вҲҮH f (вҲҮвҠӨW WвҲҮ  f ) вҲ’1 вҠӨ
                                                                   вҲҮ  вҲҮ
                                                                     H W f     vec(ОҙH0 )
            ОІ         ОІ                 ОІ
                                              вҲ’1
           О»H         1        вҲ—вҠӨ   вҲ—  1 вҲ—
 = IdnK +     IdnK + InK вҠ— W W вҲ’ Z               vec(ОҙH0 )
            ОІ         ОІ                ОІ
where
         ZвҲ— := (EвҲ—вҠӨ + HвҲ— вҠ— WвҲ— )вҠӨ (HвҲ— HвҲ—вҠӨ вҠ— IK + nО»W IdK )вҲ’1 (EвҲ—вҠӨ + HвҲ— вҠ— WвҲ— ).

Therefore, under the assumption of ОІ вү« max{1, О»H }, which is associated with a restrictive link
between H0 and H, we can use the first-order truncated Neumann series to approximate the matrix
inversion (with accuracy of O(ОІ вҲ’2 )) that is stated in Eq. 5 and repeated here for the convenience of
the reader:

                                  О»H              1                     1
            vec(ОҙH) вүҲ IdnK вҲ’           IdnK вҲ’ InK вҠ— WвҲ—вҠӨ WвҲ— + ZвҲ— vec(ОҙH0 ).
                                    ОІ            ОІ                      ОІ


                                                   18
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


D    P ROOF OF T HEOREM 4.2
In this section we compute the entire spectrum (singular values) for the diagonal blocks (вҖңintra-class
blocksвҖқ) and the off-diagonal blocks (вҖңinter-class blocksвҖқ) of the block matrix in Eq. 6. To keep
the main body of the paper concise, we present in the statement of Theorem 4.2 only the results
for Пғmax (Fk,k ) and Пғmin (Fk,k ) of the full rank matrix Fk,k , as well as Пғmax (Fk,kМғ ) of the rank-1
matrix Fk,kМғ (kМғ Мё= k).
                                                          вҲҡ
Recall that we consider the (non-degenerate) setting c := О»H О»W < 1. Therefore, when H0 = HвҲ—
is a minimizer of Eq. 1 (associated with WвҲ— ), from Corollary 2.2 we have that (WвҲ— , HвҲ— ) the
minimizer of f (W, H; H0 ) is also orthogonally collapsed and characterized by Theorem 2.1 with
                                                                                 вҠӨ
О»W and О»H (independent of K, n, d). That is, HвҲ— = H вҠ— 1вҠӨ                 вҲ—
                                                             n and W H вҲқ H H вҲқ W W
                                                                                              вҲ—   вҲ—вҠӨ
                                                                                                     вҲқ
                                                                             вҲ—
IK . We also have the following results for the spectral norm of H and W , that we denote by ПғH
and ПғW respectively:
                                              r         r
                                2                О»W        О»W
                               ПғH = (1 вҲ’ c)          =          вҲ’ О»W ,
                                                 О»         О»
                                              r H       r H
                                2                О»H        О»H
                               ПғW  = (1 вҲ’ c)         =          вҲ’ О»H .
                                                 О»W        О»W
Observe that these
  2 2
                  вҲҡ expressions do not depend on the number of samples K, n, d. Note also that
ПғH  ПғW = (1 вҲ’ О»H О»W )2 = (1 вҲ’ c)2 < 1.
We remind the reader that vec(ОҙH) вүҲ Fvec(ОҙH0 ), for
                                            О»H       1              1
                        F = IdnK вҲ’             IdnK вҲ’ InK вҠ— WвҲ—вҠӨ WвҲ— + ZвҲ— ,
                                             ОІ       ОІ              ОІ
where
          ZвҲ— := (EвҲ—вҠӨ + HвҲ— вҠ— WвҲ— )вҠӨ (HHвҲ—вҠӨ вҠ— IK + nО»W IdK )вҲ’1 (EвҲ—вҠӨ + HвҲ— вҠ— WвҲ— ),
and EвҲ— = E(WвҲ— , HвҲ— ) and E(W, H) вҲҲ RdnKГ—Kd is defined as
E(W, H) :=
 vec(ed,1 eвҠӨ                             вҠӨ                        вҠӨ

           K,1 (WH вҲ’ Y)), ..., vec(ed,1 eK,K (WH вҲ’ Y)), vec(ed,2 eK,1 (WH вҲ’ Y)), ...

                                                                           ..., vec(ed,d eвҠӨ

                                                                                          K,K (WH вҲ’ Y)) ,

where ed,i is the standard vector in Rd with 1 in its ith entry (similar definition stands for eK,k ).
For the collapsed minimizer (WвҲ— , HвҲ— ), we know that HвҲ— = ПғH R вҠ— 1вҠӨ      вҲ—      вҠӨ
                                                                  n and W = ПғW R for
some (partial) orthonormal matrix R вҲҲ RdГ—K (i.e., RвҠӨ R = IK ).
Therefore, we have that WвҲ— HвҲ— вҲ’Y = вҲ’cIK вҠ—1вҠӨ                      вҲ—     вҲ—
                                              n вҠ—Id , and that H вҠ—W = (1вҲ’c)RвҠ—1n вҠ—R .
                                                                                         вҠӨ      вҠӨ

Observe that the alignment of the former expression with the latter (where the locations of the
dimensions d and K are swapped) is done using the matrices {ed,i eвҠӨ K,k }. Indeed, we can write
  вҲ—вҠӨ                    вҠӨ                        KdГ—dK
E = Kd,K (вҲ’cIK вҠ— 1n вҠ— Id ), where Kd,K вҲҲ R               is the permutation matrix that satisfies
                                  KвҠӨ
                                   d,K (X1 вҠ— X2 )Kd,K = X2 вҠ— X1

for any X1 вҲҲ RdГ—d and X2 вҲҲ RKГ—K . Such a matrix Kd,k is also known as commutation matrix
in the matrix theory literature. Another useful property of the commutation matrix that we will
frequently use is that
                                            Kd,K (x вҠ— Y) = Y вҠ— x                                    (12)
                KГ—1               dГ—m
for any x вҲҲ R         and Y вҲҲ R         .
Let us extract the k, kМғ-th block ZвҲ—k,kМғ вҲҲ RdnГ—dn of ZвҲ— . First, observe that

          ZвҲ— = (EвҲ—вҠӨ + HвҲ— вҠ— WвҲ— )вҠӨ (HвҲ— HвҲ—вҠӨ вҠ— IK + nО»W IdK )вҲ’1 (EвҲ—вҠӨ + HвҲ— вҠ— WвҲ— )
               1
             = BвҠӨ (A вҠ— IK )B,
               n


                                                    19
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


where
                          2
                    A = (ПғH RRвҠӨ + О»W Id )вҲ’1
                    B = вҲ’cKd,K (IK вҠ— 1вҠӨ                       вҠӨ    вҠӨ
                                      n вҠ— Id ) + (1 вҲ’ c)(R вҠ— 1n вҠ— R ).

Denote by {ek } the standard basis vectors in RK . To extract the k, kМғ-th block of ZвҲ— , we compute
                      ZвҲ—k,kМғ = (ek вҠ— Idn )вҠӨ ZвҲ— (ekМғ вҠ— Idn )
                                1               вҠӨ
                            =     (B(ek вҠ— Idn )) (A вҠ— IK ) (B(ek вҠ— Idn )) ,
                                n
with
               B(ek вҠ— Idn ) = вҲ’cKd,K (ek вҠ— 1вҠӨ                        вҠӨ    вҠӨ
                                            n вҠ— Id ) + (1 вҲ’ c)(rk вҠ— 1n вҠ— R )
                                = вҲ’c(1вҠӨ                            вҠӨ      вҠӨ
                                       n вҠ— Id вҠ— ek ) + (1 вҲ’ c)(rk 1n вҠ— R ),
where in the last line, we have used property Eq. 12 to swap the Kronecker product. Then,
         1
ZвҲ—k,kМғ = (вҲ’c(1вҠӨ                                 вҠӨ       вҠӨ вҠӨ                вҠӨ                       вҠӨ    вҠӨ
                  n вҠ— Id вҠ— ek ) + (1 вҲ’ c)(rk 1n вҠ— R )) (A вҠ— IK )(вҲ’c(1n вҠ— Id вҠ— ekМғ ) + (1 вҲ’ c)(rkМғ 1n вҠ— R ))
         n
          2 вҠӨ          1      вҠӨ                   2 вҠӨ         1      вҠӨ        вҠӨ
       = c (ek ekМғ )     (1n 1n ) вҠ— A + (1 вҲ’ c) (rk ArkМғ )      (1n 1n ) вҠ— RR
                       n                                      n

                        1
         вҲ’ c(1 вҲ’ c)       (1n 1вҠӨ            вҠӨ        вҠӨ
                               n ) вҠ— (ArkМғ rk + rkМғ rk A) .
                        n
Let us write R = [r1 r2 ...rK ] вҲҲ RdГ—K and let rK+1 , ..., rd be the orthonormal vectors such that
{ri }di=1 forms an orthonormal basis. We know that
                                                K                  d
                                                X      1           X  1
                    2
              A = (ПғH RRвҠӨ + О»W Id )вҲ’1 =              2 +О»   r rвҠӨ
                                                             i i +       rj rвҠӨ
                                                                             j .
                                                   Пғ
                                                i=1 H     W          О» W
                                                                        j=K+1
Therefore,
                                               ОҙkkМғ
                                rвҠӨ
                                 k ArkМғ =    2 +О»
                                            ПғH      W
                                                           1
                                ArkМғ rвҠӨ        вҠӨ
                                      k = rkМғ rk A =
                                                                    вҠӨ
                                                         2 + О» rkМғ rk .
                                                        ПғH    W

We can thus conclude that                                                               !
                     1                         Оҙ (1 вҲ’ c)2      2c(1 вҲ’ c)
             ZвҲ—k,kМғ = (1n 1вҠӨ
                           n)вҠ—      ОҙkkМғ c2 A + kkМғ2      RRвҠӨ вҲ’ 2        r rвҠӨ               .   (13)
                     n                          ПғH + О»W        ПғH + О»W kМғ k

When k Мё= kМғ, the off-diagonal block of ZвҲ— is given by
                                                                        !
                                    1                 2c(1 вҲ’ c)
                            ZвҲ—k,kМғ = (1n 1вҠӨ
                                          n)вҠ—        вҲ’ 2        r rвҠӨ        ,
                                    n                 ПғH + О»W kМғ k
which is a rank-1 matrix. Since other matrices in F do not contribute to the inter-class block,
we know that Fk,kМғ = ОІ1 ZвҲ—k,kМғ . It is well-known that the eigenvalues of Kronecker product of two
matrices are given by the products of their eigenvalues. We know that n1 (1n 1вҠӨ
                                                                              n ) has exactly one
non-zero eigenvalue, which equals to 1. This implies that
                                                               вҲҡ
                                        2c(1 вҲ’ c)      2О»H (1 вҲ’ О»H О»W )
                      Пғmax (Fk,kМғ ) =     2 +О» )    =                     .
                                      ОІ(ПғH      W              ОІ

Next, let us compute the intra-class block. Setting k = kМғ in equation Eq. 13, we get
                                                         d
                                                                      !
                                  вҲ—      1      вҠӨ
                                                       X
                                                                    вҠӨ
                                Zk,k = (1n 1n ) вҠ—            Вөi ri ri
                                         n             i=1
                                          d
                                          X       1
                                      =       Вөi ( 1n 1вҠӨ          вҠӨ
                                                       n ) вҠ— (ri ri )
                                          i=1
                                                  n


                                                  20
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


where
                                                                           r
               c2     (1 вҲ’ c)2   2c(1 вҲ’ c)                                     О»H
        Вөk = 2      + 2        вҲ’ 2         = (2c вҲ’ 1)2                            ,
            ПғH + О»W  ПғH + О»W     ПғH + О»W                                       О»W
                                                  r
               c2     (1 вҲ’ c)2                      О»H
        Вөi = 2      + 2        = (c2 + (1 вҲ’ c)2 )      ,                       for 1 вүӨ i вүӨ K and i Мё= k,
            ПғH + О»W  ПғH + О»W                        О»W
              c2
        Вөj =      = О»H , for K < j вүӨ d
             О»W
The intra-class block is therefore given by
                                                   d
                      О»H       Пғ2               1X        1
    Fk,k = (1 вҲ’          )Ind вҲ’ W In вҠ— (RRвҠӨ ) +       Вөi ( 1n 1вҠӨ          вҠӨ
                                                               n ) вҠ— (ri ri )
                       ОІ        ОІ               ОІ i=1     n
                          d                  2 XK                    d
                      О»H X                  ПғW                    1X        1
          = (1 вҲ’        )    In вҠ— (ri rвҠӨ
                                       i )вҲ’        In вҠ— (ri rвҠӨ
                                                             i )+       Вөi ( 1n 1вҠӨ          вҠӨ
                                                                                 n ) вҠ— (ri ri )
                       ОІ i=1                 ОІ i=1                ОІ i=1     n
               d                             d
               X                         1X        1
          =          О»i In вҠ— (ri rвҠӨ
                                  i )+         Вөi ( 1n 1вҠӨ          вҠӨ
                                                        n ) вҠ— (ri ri ),
               i=1
                                         ОІ i=1     n
where
                                                      r
                                 О»H     Пғ2         1 О»H
                          О»i = 1 вҲ’    вҲ’ W =1вҲ’                , for 1 вүӨ i вүӨ K                               (14)
                                  ОІ       ОІ        ОІ О»W
                                 О»H
                     О»i = 1 вҲ’        , for K < i вүӨ d                                                       (15)
                                  ОІ
Let s1 = вҲҡ1n 1n and {si }ni=1 be a set of orthonormal basis of Rn . Then, we can further write
                             d X n                             d
                            X                               1X
                Fk,k =         (    О»i sj sвҠӨ
                                           j ) вҠ— (r  rвҠӨ
                                                    i i ) +       Вөi (s1 sвҠӨ          вҠӨ
                                                                          1 ) вҠ— (ri ri )
                            i=1 j=1
                                                            ОІ i=1
                            d X
                              n                                       d
                            X                                      1X
                        =             О»i (sj вҠ— ri )(sj вҠ— ri )вҠӨ +         Вөi (s1 вҠ— ri )(s1 вҠ— ri )вҠӨ          (16)
                            i=1 j=1
                                                                   ОІ i=1
One can easily verify that {sj вҠ— ri }1вүӨjвүӨn,1вүӨiвүӨd is an orthonormal basis of Rnd . So, Eq. 16 gives
us the eigendecomposition of Fk,k . The spectral norm of Fk,k is therefore given by
                                                                      1
                            Пғmax (Fk,k ) = max max{|О»i |, |О»i + Вөi |}.
                                            1вүӨiвүӨd                     ОІ
As we consider the large ОІ regime, the expressions in both Eq. 14 and Eq. 15 are positive. Observe
that for K < i вүӨ d (associated with the over-parameterization of the model) we have that the
eigenvalue associated with the eigenvector (s1 вҠ— ri ) is given by
                                        1             О»H     О»H
                                  О»i + Вөi = 1 вҲ’           +      = 1.
                                        ОІ              ОІ      ОІ
Note, though, that due to the Kronecker product with s1 = вҲҡ1n 1n , perturbation in the direction of
this eigenvector does not affect the variability in the kth class at all. Furthermore, generic/practical
perturbations are likely to correlate with, or have their power spectrum spread over, many compo-
nents of the dn dimensional eigenbasis of Fk,k and not concentrate in an extremely low dimensional
d вҲ’ K subspace (composed only of s1 вҠ— ri with K < i < d). Thus, we expect these eigenvectors
to have small correlation with generic perturbations.
Showing that Пғmax (Fk,k ) = 1 reduces now to eliminating the option of eigenvalues larger than 1
for 1 вүӨ i вүӨ K. This is equivalent to having that
                                r
                              1 О»H
                                         вҲ’1 + (2c вҲ’ 1)2 < 0,

                              ОІ О»W
                                r
                              1 О»H
                                         вҲ’1 + (c2 + (1 вҲ’ c)2 ) < 0,

                              ОІ О»W


                                                        21
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023



                                                        вҲҡ
and both are ensured under our assumption c :=              О»H О»W < 1 (the non-degenerate case of the
model).
Finally, observing that Eq. 14 is smaller than Eq. 15, and that the second term in Eq. 16 does not
include eigenvectors (sj вҠ— ri ) for j > 1, we conclude that
                                                         r
                                                        1 О»H
                                     Пғmin (Fk,k ) = 1 вҲ’         .
                                                        ОІ О»W

D.1   A DDITIONAL D ISCUSSION ON THE R ESULTS OF THE T HEOREM

Theorem 4.2 has no restricting assumptions on the number of classes K. The only assumption,
which is common in theoretical NC papers and is also what is done in practice is that d > K, i.e.,
that the dimension of the features is larger than the number of classes. This means that, regardless
of the number of classes, the inter-class (off-diagonal) blocks have rank 1, while the intra-class
(diagonal) blocks have full rank (recall that each block is of size dn Г— dn).
Considering the conclusions from Theorem 4.2, which are stated in Section 4, if we sum up the max-
imal contribution of each of the K вҲ’ 1 inter-class blocks of a certain class, i.e., (K вҲ’ 1)Пғmax (Fk,kМғ ),
then for guaranteeing that this sum is smaller than the minimal contribution of the intra-class block,
i.e., Пғmin (Fk,k ), we may need to assume that ОІ вү« K. Note that this is a reasonable assumption
under our large ОІ setting. Yet, we believe that the rank difference between the two types of blocks
is a more important indicator for the dominance of the intra-class blocks, and this property is inde-
pendent of the number of classes K. Specifically, since dn > K (all the more so, in practice we
even have n вү« K), then for generic perturbations (that uniformly span the entire dnK dimensional
space) the rank-1 inter-class blocks nullify much of the perturbation contrary to the intra-class block
(which has full rank). This strengthen our conclusion that the deviation from collapse of each class
of the minimizer H is dominated by the deviation from collapse of the same class in H0 rather than
by the deviations of other classes. One thing that should be reminded here is that we analyse the
вҖңnear-NCвҖқ regime, so we assume that the system is already not far from exact NC. Reaching this
point in general might become harder when the number of classes grows.
Another point that can be raised regarding the results of Theorem 4.2, is that we do not analyze the
full matrix F but rather its blocks. In fact, we believe that our analysis, which includes complete
spectral analysis for each block separately, is more informative, as it clearly distinguishes between
properties of intra- and inter-class blocks and provides insights on the roles of the regularization
hyperparameters that are aligned with practical DNN training. In contrast, in the large ОІ regime we
have that F is full rank, which masks the rank-1 property of the inter-class (off-diagonal) blocks.
Nevertheless, analyzing the relationship of the full F and its blocks is an interesting a direction for
future research.


                                                   22
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


E     A DDITIONAL E XPERIMENTS AND E XPERIMENTAL D ETAILS
E.1   E XPERIMENTAL D ETAILS FOR T HE L AYER -W ISE E XPERIMENT

In this section, we provide the experimental details for the layer-wise training experiment that is
presented in Figure 2 in the main body of the paper.
We train an MLP with 10 hidden layers on CIFAR-10 dataset, where each sample is flattened to
a 3072x1 vector. Each hidden layer includes 3072 fully connected neurons with default PyTorch
initialization of the weights, batchnorm, and ReLU nonlinearity. We start with one hidden layer and
train the MLP with 3 epochs of Adam with mini-batch size of 256, learning rate of 1e-4, and CE
loss. Then, we compute NC1 metrics for the deepest features. At this point, the first вҖңouter iterationвҖқ
of the procedure is finished. We fix the parameters in the existing hidden layers, insert a new hidden
layer before the final classification layer, and repeat the procedure. Namely, at each outer iteration of
the procedure we optimize only the deepest hidden layer, which has just been inserted with default
PyTorch initialization of the weights, and the final classification layer, which is вҖңinitializedвҖқ with its
weights from the previous outer iteration.
Let us provide more details that has led to the implementation decisions that are stated above. We
have found that layer-wise training of DNNs (on a practical dataset, e.g., CIFAR-10 that we use
here) is significantly harder than end-to-end training in terms of reaching a small training loss value.
(Presumably, this is the reason that DNNs are typically trained in an end-to-end fashion). Careful
configuration of the training procedure was required for reaching considerable low loss (though,
still not zero training error) and low NC1 metrics as presented in Figure 2. From our efforts in
layer-wise training the 10-layer MLP we observed the following: Adam optimizer worked better
than SGD (which is harder to tune); Layer-wise minimization with CE loss (rather than MSE loss)
has led to lower NC1 metrics; Using no more than 3 epochs per вҖңouter iterationвҖқ allowed reaching
lower values for the loss and the NC1 metrics at the deeper layers. Regarding the latter (i.e., more
epochs per outer iteration lead to worse optimization results), when there are only one or two hidden
layers then the decrease in the loss and the decrease in the NC1 metrics are larger when more epochs
are being used. However, when we add in that case more hidden layers, the optimization appears
to get stuck at some local minima with higher loss and NC1 metrics compared to what we get with
only 3 epochs per outer iteration. As far as we understand, this behavior follows from the (extreme)
nonconvexity of the problem.

E.2   M ORE E XPERIMENTS ON THE E FFECT OF THE R EGULARIZATION H YPERPARAMETERS

In this section, we present more experiments that examine how modifying the regularization hyper-
parameters affects the NC behavior of a practical DNN вҖ“ ResNet18 (He et al., 2016a) вҖ“ compared
to a baseline setting. Specifically, as a baseline hyperparameter setting, we consider one that is
used in previous works (Papyan et al., 2020; Zhu et al., 2021): default PyTorch initialization of the
weights, SGD optimizer with mini-batch size of 256, learning rate of 0.05 that is divided by 10 ev-
ery 40 epochs, momentum of 0.9, and weight decay (L2 regularization) of 5e-4 for all the networkвҖҷs
parameters.
The first set of experiments is similar to the experiments in Section 5. These experiments support
the insight gained in Section 4 that О»H (the regularization of the feature mapping) plays a bigger
role than О»W (the regularization of the classification layer) does in approaching NC. We compare
the NC1 and NC2 metrics (defined in Section 5) of the baseline setting and the following modified
settings: 1) doubling the weight decay only for the last (FC) layer; 2) doubling the weight decay
only for feature mapping (conv) layers; 3) zeroing the weight decay for the last layer; and 4) zeroing
the weight decay for feature mapping layers.
In Figure 4 we consider the MNIST dataset with 3K training samples per class. Figure 4a presents
the NC1 and NC2 metrics of the deepest features for MSE loss and no bias in the FC layer. Fig-
ures 4b and 4c present the NC1 and NC2 metrics of the deepest and intermediate (output of 3 out of
the 4 ResBlock) features, respectively, when for CE loss with bias in the FC layer. In all the settings,
we reach zero training error at the 40 epoch approximately. In Figure 5 we repeat the experiments
with 5K training samples per class. Furthermore, repeating the experiments with 3 different random
seeds for initializing the DNNвҖҷs parameters yields similar curves that demonstrate the same trends.
In Table 1 we report the mean and the standard deviation (SD) for the NC metrics computed for the


                                                   23
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Table 1: The effect of modifying the weight decay (WD) on NC metrics for ResNet18 trained
on CIFAR-10 and MNIST datasets вҖ“ mean and SD are computed for 3 random seeds. Observe
that modifying the WD in the feature mapping increases the deviation from the baseline more than
modifying the WD of the last layer.
                   CIFAR-10, MSE loss              CIFAR-10, CE loss               MNIST, MSE loss               MNIST, CE loss
                   NC1            NC2            NC1             NC2             NC1            NC2           NC1            NC2
  Baseline    0.0061 Вұ 4e-4   0.111 Вұ 1e-2   0.062 Вұ 5e-3    0.173 Вұ 1e-2    8e-4 Вұ 5e-5   0.072 Вұ 1e-2   0.004 Вұ 3e-4   0.115 Вұ 5e-3
 WDx2 for W   0.0055 Вұ 3e-4   0.101 Вұ 8e-3   0.040 Вұ 2e-3    0.161 Вұ 7e-3    5e-4 Вұ 5e-5   0.055 Вұ 1e-2   0.003 Вұ 1e-4   0.102 Вұ 3e-3
 WDx2 for H   0.0022 Вұ 8e-5   0.070 Вұ 6e-3   0.024 Вұ 4e-3    0.131 Вұ 9e-3    4e-4 Вұ 2e-5   0.048 Вұ 5e-3   0.002 Вұ 7e-5   0.101 Вұ 3e-3
 WD=0 for W   0.0048 Вұ 2e-4   0.101 Вұ 6e-3   0.104 Вұ 8e-3    0.195 Вұ 9e-3   1.7e-3 Вұ 1e-4  0.108 Вұ 2e-2   0.009 Вұ 4e-4   0.147 Вұ 5e-3
 WD=0 for H   0.0280 Вұ 3e-3   0.226 Вұ 6e-3   0.174 Вұ 7e-3    0.331 Вұ 1e-2   41e-3 Вұ 2e-3   0.303 Вұ 2e-2   0.031 Вұ 4e-4   0.198 Вұ 8e-3



deepest features at the 100 epoch (which is already after the NC metrics reach plateaus) for both the
CIFAR-10 and the MNIST datasets.
Similar to previous works, from comparing Figures 4b and 4c (as well as Figures 5b and 5c) we
see that the NC distance metrics are larger in the intermediate features, which correlates with the
results for our model in Section 3. Examining all the settings of Figures 4 and 5, as well as Table 1,
the experiments show the important role of the regularization of the feature mapping layers in ap-
proaching NC. Namely, modifying the regularization of the feature mapping layers leads to curves
with larger deviations from the baseline compared to modifying the last layerвҖҷs regularization. This
is aligned with the theory established in Section 4 that links increasing О»H to reducing the dominant
component of the distance from collapse of a class, which is the deviation from collapse of its own
features in preceding layers.
The second set of experiments shows the role of О»W in mitigating the interferences between the fea-
tures of different classes (such interferences can hinder approaching NC). To visualize such behavior
we use a вҖңper-class NC1вҖқ metric, defined as
                                              n
                                                                              !
                            (k)     1      1X                               вҖ 
                       N C1 := Tr                (hk,i вҲ’ hk )(hk,i вҲ’ hk )вҠӨ ОЈB .
                                   K       n i=1

Note that the NC1 metric, which is defined in Section 5, can be written as
                         K          n
                                                                     !       K
                  1 1 X          1X                            вҠӨ вҖ          1 X    (k)
          N C1 =           Tr          (hk,i вҲ’ hk )(hk,i вҲ’ hk ) ОЈB =           N C1 .
                  KK             n i=1                                     K
                           k=1                                                             k=1

We also use the following metric to measure the alignment of the mean features and the last layerвҖҷs
weights
                               W(H вҲ’ hG 1вҠӨK)      1         1
                 N C3 :=                      вҲ’вҲҡ       (IK вҲ’ 1K 1вҠӨ
                                                                 K)   ,
                              вҲҘW(H вҲ’ hG 1вҠӨ )вҲҘ
                                         K F     K вҲ’ 1      K       F

where the simplex ETF is normalized to unit Frobenius norm.
In Figure 6a we present the NC metrics of the deepest features of the baseline training scheme on
the MNIST dataset with 3K samples per class. The other lines in Figure 6 show the NC metrics
for a modified training set, where the samples of classes (digits) 4 and 9 are degraded by a uniform
blur (blur kernel of size 9 Г— 9) that hardens the distinction between them. Each line corresponds
to a different value of weight decay for the last layerвҖҷs parameters. Yet, in all of the settings we
reached zero training error at the 40 epoch approximately. The empirical results show that large О»W
facilitates reaching reduced NC metrics (closeness to NC structure) by reducing the effect (вҖңinter-
ferenceвҖқ) of the features of the degraded samples on the features of the other classes. This is aligned
with the theory that is established for our model in Section 4.


                                                        24
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


F   A DDITIONAL M OTIVATION FOR THE M ODEL IN E Q . 2
In the model that we consider in Eq. 2, we interpret H as the deepest features of a DNN and H0 as
shallower features of the DNN. In particular, in the large ОІ regime that we theoretically analyze in
the paper, we interpret H0 as the penultimate features (one layer before H). Even though the relation
between H and H0 in our model differs from their explicit relation in many practical DNNs, there
exist networks where it is very reasonable to assume that the deepest features and the penultimate
features are close to each other.
For example, consider the ResNet architecture from (He et al., 2016b), where (under our interpre-
tation of H and H0 ) the deepest features obey H = H0 + r(H0 ), where r(В·) denotes a residual
block. The residual term can potentially be very small if H0 already separates the classes (e.g.,
it has a вҖңnear NCвҖқ structure). In fact, in the popular neural ODE framework (Chen et al., 2018),
which is understood as the infinite depth limit of these ResNets, we inherently have that H вүҲ H0 .
Another example where the concept H вүҲ H0 inherently holds is deep equilibrium models (DEQ)
(Bai et al., 2019). These practical DNN frameworks provide the rationality for analyzing our model.
Furthermore, our theoretical results, such as depthwise decrease in the within-class variability, are
aligned also with the empirical behavior of DNN architectures beyond the aforementioned examples
(e.g., plain MLP).


                                                 25
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


  0.25                                            0.8                                                0.25                                            0.8
                   Baseline (last features)                          Baseline (last features)                         Baseline (last features)                       Baseline (last features)
                   WDx2 for W                                        WDx2 for W                                       WD=0 for W                                     WD=0 for W
  0.20             WDx2 for H                                        WDx2 for H                      0.20             WD=0 for H                                     WD=0 for H
                                                  0.6                                                                                                0.6

  0.15                                                                                               0.15


                                                NC2


                                                                                                                                                   NC2
NC1


                                                                                                  NC1
                                                  0.4                                                                                                0.4
  0.10                                                                                               0.10
                                                  0.2                                                                                                0.2
  0.05                                                                                               0.05

  0.000   25    50           75           100     0.00      25    50           75           100      0.000   25    50           75           100     0.00   25    50           75           100
               Epoch                                             Epoch                                            Epoch                                          Epoch


                                                         (a) MSE loss without bias. Deepest features.
  0.25                                            0.8                                                0.25                                            0.8
                   Baseline (last features)                          Baseline (last features)                         Baseline (last features)                       Baseline (last features)
                   WDx2 for W                                        WDx2 for W                                       WD=0 for W                                     WD=0 for W
  0.20             WDx2 for H                                        WDx2 for H                      0.20             WD=0 for H                                     WD=0 for H
                                                  0.6                                                                                                0.6

  0.15                                                                                               0.15
                                                NC2


                                                                                                                                                   NC2
NC1


                                                                                                  NC1
                                                  0.4                                                                                                0.4
  0.10                                                                                               0.10
                                                  0.2                                                                                                0.2
  0.05                                                                                               0.05

  0.000   25    50           75           100     0.00      25    50           75           100      0.000   25    50           75           100     0.00   25    50           75           100
               Epoch                                             Epoch                                            Epoch                                          Epoch


                                                           (b) CE loss with bias. Deepest features.
  0.25                                            0.8                                                0.25                                            0.8
                  Baseline (inner features)                         Baseline (inner features)                        Baseline (inner features)                      Baseline (inner features)
                  WDx2 for W                                        WDx2 for W                                       WD=0 for W                                     WD=0 for W
  0.20            WDx2 for H                                        WDx2 for H                       0.20            WD=0 for H                                     WD=0 for H
                                                  0.6                                                                                                0.6

  0.15                                                                                               0.15
                                                NC2


                                                                                                                                                   NC2
NC1


                                                                                                  NC1
                                                  0.4                                                                                                0.4
  0.10                                                                                               0.10
                                                  0.2                                                                                                0.2
  0.05                                                                                               0.05

  0.000   25    50           75           100     0.00      25    50           75           100      0.000   25    50           75           100     0.00   25    50           75           100
               Epoch                                             Epoch                                            Epoch                                          Epoch


                                                         (c) CE loss with bias. Intermediate features.

Figure 4: The effect of modifying the weight decay (WD) on NC metrics for ResNet18 trained on
MNIST with 3K samples per class. Observe that modifying the WD in the feature mapping increases
the deviation from the baseline more than modifying the WD of the last layer.
  0.25                                            0.8                                                0.25                                            0.8
                   Baseline (last features)                          Baseline (last features)                         Baseline (last features)                       Baseline (last features)
                   WDx2 for W                                        WDx2 for W                                       WD=0 for W                                     WD=0 for W
  0.20             WDx2 for H                                        WDx2 for H                      0.20             WD=0 for H                                     WD=0 for H
                                                  0.6                                                                                                0.6

  0.15                                                                                               0.15
                                                NC2


                                                                                                                                                   NC2
NC1


                                                                                                  NC1


                                                  0.4                                                                                                0.4
  0.10                                                                                               0.10
                                                  0.2                                                                                                0.2
  0.05                                                                                               0.05

  0.000   25    50           75           100     0.00      25    50           75           100      0.000   25    50           75           100     0.00   25    50           75           100
               Epoch                                             Epoch                                            Epoch                                          Epoch


                                                         (a) MSE loss without bias. Deepest features.
  0.25                                            0.8                                                0.25                                            0.8
                   Baseline (last features)                          Baseline (last features)                         Baseline (last features)                       Baseline (last features)
                   WDx2 for W                                        WDx2 for W                                       WD=0 for W                                     WD=0 for W
  0.20             WDx2 for H                                        WDx2 for H                      0.20             WD=0 for H                                     WD=0 for H
                                                  0.6                                                                                                0.6

  0.15                                                                                               0.15
                                                NC2


                                                                                                                                                   NC2
NC1


                                                                                                  NC1


                                                  0.4                                                                                                0.4
  0.10                                                                                               0.10
                                                  0.2                                                                                                0.2
  0.05                                                                                               0.05

  0.000   25    50           75           100     0.00      25    50           75           100      0.000   25    50           75           100     0.00   25    50           75           100
               Epoch                                             Epoch                                            Epoch                                          Epoch


                                                           (b) CE loss with bias. Deepest features.
  0.25                                            0.8                                                0.25                                            0.8
                  Baseline (inner features)                         Baseline (inner features)                        Baseline (inner features)                      Baseline (inner features)
                  WDx2 for W                                        WDx2 for W                                       WD=0 for W                                     WD=0 for W
  0.20            WDx2 for H                                        WDx2 for H                       0.20            WD=0 for H                                     WD=0 for H
                                                  0.6                                                                                                0.6

  0.15                                                                                               0.15
                                                NC2


                                                                                                                                                   NC2
NC1


                                                                                                  NC1


                                                  0.4                                                                                                0.4
  0.10                                                                                               0.10
                                                  0.2                                                                                                0.2
  0.05                                                                                               0.05

  0.000   25    50           75           100     0.00      25    50           75           100      0.000   25    50           75           100     0.00   25    50           75           100
               Epoch                                             Epoch                                            Epoch                                          Epoch


                                                         (c) CE loss with bias. Intermediate features.

Figure 5: The effect of modifying the weight decay (WD) on NC metrics for ResNet18 trained on
MNIST with 5K samples per class. Observe that modifying the WD in the feature mapping increases
the deviation from the baseline more than modifying the WD of the last layer.


                                                                                                26
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


            0.125                                    0.125                                  0.60                              0.60
                                       class 0
                                       class 1
            0.100                      class 2       0.100
                                       class 3                                              0.45                              0.45
Per-Class NC1


                                       class 4
            0.075                      class 5       0.075
                                       class 6


                                                                                          NC2


                                                                                                                            NC3
                                       class 7
                                                   NC1                                      0.30                              0.30
            0.050                      class 8       0.050
                                       class 9
                                                                                            0.15                              0.15
            0.025                                    0.025

            0.0000   25    50     75         100     0.0000       25    50     75   100     0.000   25    50     75   100     0.000   25    50     75   100
                          Epoch                                        Epoch                             Epoch                             Epoch


                                                              (a) Original samples, WD 5e-4 across layers.
            0.125                                    0.125                                  0.60                              0.60
                                       class 0
                                       class 1
            0.100                      class 2       0.100
                                       class 3                                              0.45                              0.45
Per-Class NC1


                                       class 4
            0.075                      class 5       0.075
                                       class 6
                                                                                          NC2


                                                                                                                            NC3
                                                   NC1


                                       class 7                                              0.30                              0.30
            0.050                      class 8       0.050
                                       class 9
                                                                                            0.15                              0.15
            0.025                                    0.025

            0.0000   25    50     75         100     0.0000       25    50     75   100     0.000   25    50     75   100     0.000   25    50     75   100
                          Epoch                                        Epoch                             Epoch                             Epoch


(b) Samples of classes 4 and 9 are blurred, last layerвҖҷs WD remains 5e-4. The effect of the blurred classes on
the NC metrics (avg. and other classes) is minor.
            0.125                                    0.125                                  0.60                              0.60
                                       class 0
                                       class 1
            0.100                      class 2       0.100
                                       class 3                                              0.45                              0.45
Per-Class NC1


                                       class 4
            0.075                      class 5       0.075
                                       class 6
                                                                                          NC2


                                                                                                                            NC3
                                                   NC1


                                       class 7                                              0.30                              0.30
            0.050                      class 8       0.050
                                       class 9
                                                                                            0.15                              0.15
            0.025                                    0.025

            0.0000   25    50     75         100     0.0000       25    50     75   100     0.000   25    50     75   100     0.000   25    50     75   100
                          Epoch                                        Epoch                             Epoch                             Epoch


(c) Samples of classes 4 and 9 are blurred, last layerвҖҷs WD reduced to 5e-5. The blurred classes affect the
вҖңper-class NC1вҖқ of other classes and the NC metrics increase.
            0.125                                    0.125                                  0.60                              0.60
                                       class 0
                                       class 1
            0.100                      class 2       0.100
                                       class 3                                              0.45                              0.45
Per-Class NC1


                                       class 4
            0.075                      class 5       0.075
                                       class 6
                                                                                          NC2


                                                                                                                            NC3
                                                   NC1


                                       class 7                                              0.30                              0.30
            0.050                      class 8       0.050
                                       class 9
                                                                                            0.15                              0.15
            0.025                                    0.025

            0.0000   25    50     75         100     0.0000       25    50     75   100     0.000   25    50     75   100     0.000   25    50     75   100
                          Epoch                                        Epoch                             Epoch                             Epoch


(d) Samples of classes 4 and 9 are blurred, last layer has no WD. The blurred classes further interfere with other
classes and the NC metrics further increase.

Figure 6: The effect of modifying the weight decay (WD) of the last layerвҖҷs weights on NC metrics
for ResNet18 trained on MNIST with 3K samples per class where samples from classes 4 and 9 are
blurred. Observe that small WD in the last layer increases the effect of the вҖңpre-class NC1вҖқ curves
of the blurred classes on the other classes, and increases also the other NC metrics.


                                                                                     27
