Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


M ONKEYPOX 2022 WITH C ROSS I NFECTION H YPOTH -
ESIS VIA E PIDEMIOLOGICAL M ODEL

 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                            A BSTRACT
         A new re-emerging infectious disease of monkeypox 2022 is structurally related to
         smallpox that is induced by the monkeypox viruses and has caused 59,606 active
         cases with 18 deaths up to September 15, 2022. To end this ongoing epidemic,
         there is a need for population-wide control policies like reducing social interac-
         tion by keeping social distance, treatment of infected individuals, and restriction
         on animals, etc. We forecast the progression of the epidemic and come up with an
         efficient control mechanism by formulating a mathematical model. The biological
         feasibility and dynamical behavior of the proposed model are then investigated to-
         gether with sensitivity analysis to obtain the effect of various epidemic parameters
         mitigating the spread of the disease. Subsequently, by taking non-pharmaceutical
         and pharmaceutical intervention strategies as control measures, an optimal control
         theory is applied to mitigate the fatality of the disease to minimize the infectious
         population and reduce the cost of controls, we construct an objective functional
         and solve it by using Pontryagin’s maximum principle. Finally, extensive numeri-
         cal simulations are performed to show the impact of the application of intervention
         mechanisms in controlling the transmission of the monkeypox epidemic.


1   I NTRODUCTION
The infection of monkeypox is a contagious disease resulting from the orthopoxvirus. This infection
is zoonotic and was initially transported to humans by wild rodents in central and western Africa.
But human-to-human spread (horizontal transmission) is also possible, particularly within the family
home or in the context of care (Farahat et al., 2022). The monkeypox viruses can be diffused by
immediate contact with lesions on the skin or mucous membranes of a sick person, as well as by
droplets (sneezing, saliva, sputters, etc.) (Singh et al., 2021). Generally, an individual can become
infected through contact with patient’s environment. It is, therefore, important that patients respect
isolation measures throughout the illness. Humans can also become infected through active contact
with animals (rodents and monkeys) (Oladoye, 2021). Usually, the monkeypox infection starts
from fever, headaches, body aches, weakness, etc. (Deresinski, 2022). The symptoms may lead
to the appearance of a blistering rash consisting of fluid-filled blisters that progress to dryness and
crusting, then scarring and itching after two days. The bubbles are most concentrated on the face,
the forehands, and the feet soles. The disease is more severe in children as well as those who have
weak immune systems. Historically, monkeypox was identified first in the 1970s, but recently the re-
emerging of the disease, cases are reported in various countries around the globe (ASSESSMENT,
2022). Usually monkeypox virus transmits from human interaction, but there is a significant risk
of cross-infection (animal-to-human) spread (Petersen et al., 2019). Therefore, the hypothesis of
cross-infection between human and animals play a significant role and can not be neglected.
Modeling and forecasting with the aid of dynamical system is a challenging domain in various dis-
cipline, e.g., infectious disease epidemiology (Brauer, 2017; Saravanakumar et al., 2020; Guo et al.,
2020), health sciences (Choi et al., 2016), and various other fields of applied science and technology
(Rolnick et al., 2022), and therefore attracted the considerable attention of researchers, see for in-
stance, (Das et al., 2020b; Yin et al., 2021; Saha et al., 2021). Similarly, various models demonstrate
different outlooks regarding the dynamical behavior of an epidemic (Busenberg & Cooke, 2012;
Khajanchi et al., 2018; Das et al., 2020a). With the aim of these mathematical models, researchers
want to understand the dynamics of a disease and then suggest control strategies to control or com-
pletely eradicate the infection (Chen & Guo, 2016; Kumar et al., 2019). Besides the rich literature on


                                                  1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


infectious disease epidemiology, there have been no enough studies found to represent the temporal
dynamics of monkeypox 2022, to the best of our knowledge. We try to formulate a model which
describes the transmission of monkeypox 2022 to understand the dynamics and suggest a control
mechanism with the aid of optimal control theory. We summarize our contributions in this work as
follows:

       • The cross infection between humans and animals plays a significant role in the dynamics
         of monkeypox virus transmission. We, therefore, propose a model based on the hypothesis
         of cross-infection between humans and animals. The model has two blocks: humans and
         animals.
       • The first block describes the evolution of monkeypox in the human population, while the
         second block represents the evolution of the monkeypox virus among animals.
       • Four time-dependent control measures are then introduced in the model to demonstrate
         the utilization of optimal control measures: to minimize the infectious individuals and
         maximize the recovered population. Particularly, reducing the risk of disease transmission
         by educating people to rise awareness of risk factors, treatment of infected individuals, and
         restrictions on animals.


Figure 1: The plot represents the schematic process of the proposed monkeypox virus transmission
model (1)


2   R ELATED W ORK
The analysis of infectious diseases with the aid of dynamical systems is a fascinating outlook
to predict the dynamics of an epidemic. In the history of infectious disease epidemiology, Ker-
mack and McKendrick were the pioneers to develop the three-population-group epidemiological
model (susceptible-infectious-recovered) (Kermack & McKendrick, 1927), where various popu-
lation groups are employed to signify the infection, demonstrating their progression and inter-
actions. The classical susceptible-infectious-recovered model formulated by Kermack and McK-
endrick has been modified by incorporating an exposed compartment known as the susceptible-
exposed-infectious-recovered model (Anderson & May, 1979), which is also extensively used to
delineate the transmission of distinct diseases. Data-driven modeling methods have been also used
to investigate the transmission dynamics of infectious diseases (Heesterbeek et al., 2015). It is wor-
thy to mention that the idea of the classical susceptible-infectious-removed model has been further
investigated by various researchers to observe the transmission dynamics of distinct epidemics (see
for instance Flaxman et al. (2020); Samui et al. (2020); Britton et al. (2020)). Optimal control the-
ory has been extensively used and is very common in infectious disease epidemiology (Rohith &
Devika, 2020; Khajanchi et al., 2021). The adjustment of epidemic parameters in a feasible way, by
taking the limits on the system to optimize a given function, can be applied with the help of control
theory. Both non-pharmaceutical and pharmaceutical control measures can be used to control the
infection. Especially, the non-pharmaceutical intervention strategies play a key role. Usually, with
the help of optimal control analysis, we are able to know how to eradicate the disease.


                                                  2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


A re-emerging infectious disease of monkeypox 2022, was reported in May 2022. Here, we are
interested to formulate a model by taking an extended susceptible–infected–recovered-type model
with two compartmental blocks: humans and animals. We then discuss the qualitative analysis of
the proposed two-strained model. Further, applying the theory of optimal control to understand
the progression of the monkeypox virus transmission. Since it is not merely a medical problem,
regarding a public health concern, both the combination of non-pharmaceutical and pharmaceutical
intervention can be taken into account to propose a control mechanism for the control of monkeypox
virus transmission.

3     T HE M ODEL
We propose an epidemiological model for the dynamics of monkeypox based on the cross infection
hypothesis: animal to human and human to human. The various compartmental population of the
model divided into two blocks: human and animal. The first block represents the evolution of the
human population, consequently distributed into three epidemiological groups: sensitive individuals,
infected by monkeypox, and recovered individuals, while the second block represents the evolution
of animals, divided into two classes: susceptible animals and infected animals. To symbolize the
population groups, let us assume that Sh (t) represents the sensitive individuals at time t, which are
not infected but have a chance to be infected at time t + ∆t (∆t is the small increment in time). Mh
denotes the individual infected with monkeypox, and Rh is the recovered individuals. Similarly, the
susceptible and infected animals are denoted by Sa (t) and Ia (t), respectively. Due to the assumption
of a homogeneously mixed population for the successful transmission of the monkeypox virus, the
risky humans will enter the infected human compartment at a rate β, as well as, the susceptible
animal getting infected will move to the infected animal at a rate ϕ. The individual leaves the infected
human class only after they fully recover or die. The recovered individuals will enter Rh . Moreover,
the complete geometry of the epidemic problem is described by Figure 1, and thus, the evolution of
the disease is represented by the following deterministic system of differential equations:

 dSh (t) = Φh − βMh (t)Sh (t) − ξMa (t)Sh (t) − ϑSh (t),

      dt




 dMh (t)                                                                dRh (t)


            = βMh (t)Sh (t) + ξMa (t)Sh (t) − (ϑ + ϑ1 + r) Mh (t),               = rMh (t) − ϑRh (t),
      dt                                                                    dt





 dSa (t) = Φa − ϕMa (t)Sa (t) − αSa (t), dMa (t) = ϕMa (t)Sa (t) − (α + α1 ) Ma (t),



      dt                                           dt
                                                                                                     (1)
with biologically feasible non-negative initial population sizes
               Sh (0) > 0,    Mh (0) ≥ 0,    Rh (0) ≥ 0,     Sa (0) > 0,   Ma (0) ≥ 0.              (2)
In the above epidemic problem (1)-(2), the parameters are described as: the newborn of human and
animal are denoted by Φh and Φa , respectively, while the monkeypox virus transmission rates are
β and ξ. The natural death rate of a human is assumed to be ϑ, while the same ratio for the animal
population is denoted by α. The monkeypox virus transmission rate from one animal to another is
assumed to be ϕ, and α1 is the death rate that arises from the infection of monkeypox virus in the
animal population. Moreover, the disease-induced death rate of a human is represented by ϑ1 , and r
is the recovery rate of an infected human.
To proceed, first, we show the mathematical, as well as, the biological feasibility of the proposed
epidemic problem. To this end, we show the following result.

Proposition 1 The solution of the model (1)-(2) is positive and bounded.

3.1   DYNAMICAL A NALYSIS

In this section, we discuss the temporal dynamics of the model to find the stability conditions for
the monkeybox epidemic model. We find the monkeypox-free equilibrium state for the developed
model (1) and calculate the reproductive  number. Let W0 is the monkeypox-free equilibrium of
the model, then, W0 = Φϑh , 0, 0, Φαa , 0 . Moreover, the reproductive parameter, denoted by Ro ,


                                                   3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


               Parameters      Indices    % Increase or Decrease        Impact on Ro

               β               0.3677     10                            3.677 %
               ϑ1              -0.0288    10                            0.288 %
               r               -0.3316    10                            3.316 %
               ϕ               0.6322     10                            6.322 %
               α1              -0.5099    10                            5.099 %
               α               -0.7546    10                            7.546 %

Table 1: Indices of the proposed epidemic problem parameters related with the basic reproductive
number, and its relative impact.


represents the average of the secondary infectious produced by an infective whenever put into a sen-
sitive/susceptible individual. To calculate this quantity for the model reported in Eq.(1) by following
(Van den Driessche & Watmough, 2002), let us assume that X = (Mh , Ma )⊤ , then
                                             dX
                                                   = F − V,
                                               dt
where, F and V are the 2 by 2 variational matrices at the monkeypox-free equilibrium defined as
                            βΦh ξΦa
                               ϑ      α                   ϑ + ϑ1 + r       0
                     F =             ϕΦa     ,    V =                              .
                               0                                0       α + α1
                                     α
The reproductive number is the spectral radius of the matrix F V −1 and takes the following form
                                                 βΦh                     ϕΦa
                 Ro = Rh + Ra , Rh =                       , Ra =                .
                                           ϑ (ϑ + ϑ1 + r)            α (α + α1 )
Since the reproductive number is the expected average number of secondary infections. It is con-
cluded that whenever Ro < 1 the disease will die out, otherwise spread if Ro > 1.

3.2   B IOLOGICAL I NTERPRETATION OF THE BASIC R EPRODUCTIVE N UMBER

Since the initial spread of any epidemic is related to the reproductive number, we analyze the nor-
malized sensitivity of the proposed system parameters. The sensitivity of the threshold quantity will
enable us to recognize the most sensitive and effective parameters for disease transmission, because
a small perturbation in the most sensitive parameter can produce a great influence on the associated
epidemic model. To present the prediction for the prevalence of the monkeypox disease, reduction,
and persistence in the transmission of infection, we perform sensitivity analysis of the basic repro-
ductive number Ro . Let us assume that γ is any epidemic parameter, then the normalized forward
sensitivity co-efficient (index) related to the basic reproductive number Ro is defined by:
                                                   ∂Ro      γ
                                           ΥRγ =
                                              o
                                                         ×     .
                                                    ∂γ     Ro
It is clear from the formula of normalized sensitivity coefficient that it may be dependent or inde-
pendent of the model parameters. We calculate the associated sensitivity indices accordingly listed
in Table 1. It can be observed that some of the indices of the model parameters are negative and
some are positive. The negative and positive signs demonstrate that the perturbation to these param-
eters can produce a decrease or increase in the value of the basic reproductive number, respectively.
For example, the forward sensitivity index of the parameter β is ΥR     β = 0.3677, which indicates
                                                                         o


that if we increase the value of β by 10%, as a result, the value of the basic reproductive number
Ro would increase by 3.677%. Similarly, the forward sensitivity indices of ϑ1 and ϕ are 0.0288
and 0.6322, respectively, which implies that if we perturb the value of ϑ1 and ϕ by 10% it would
result in increase or decrease in the value of the basic reproductive number by 0.288% and 6.322%,
respectively. On the other hand, the sensitivity indices of r, α, and α1 are negatively associated with
the basic reproductive number, i.e., increasing their values would decrease the value of Ro . If we
increase the value of r, α, and α1 by 10% it casts the decrease of 15.961% in the value of Ro . In
this analysis, we observed that the most effective parameters of the proposed epidemic problem are
β, r, ϕ, α1 , and α, therefore, special attention is required for the parameters with highly sensitive
indices to forecast the transmission of monkeypox disease. We now state the dynamics of the model
by proving the following results.


                                                  4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Theorem 1 If Ro < 1, then the dynamical system (1) is locally and globally asymptotically stable
around the monkeypox-free equilibrium state of the model and unstable if it is greater than unity.


4     O PTIMAL C ONTROL

The application of optimal control theory is one of the important theoretical analyses associated
with infectious diseases. We use this tool to produce the proper control mechanism for eliminating
infection of monkeypox virus transmission. Our analysis is not limited to the theoretical analy-
sis, and we also perform some numerical experiments to show the effect of the proposed control
strategies on the dynamics of monkeypox virus transmission. The key goal is to reduce the infected
humans and animals while maximizing the recovered human using the optimal control theory. The
parameters with certain assumptions lead to the monkeypox model as described by Eq.(1), which is
a coupled system with five state variables (Sh (t), Mh (t), Rh (t), Sa (t), Ma (t)). We introduce four
control measures µi (t) (i = 1, 2, . . . , 4) that control the number of risky and infected individuals
externally over a given time frame.

4.1   R EDUCING THE R ISK OF H UMAN TO H UMAN AND Z OONOTIC T RANSMISSION

The main prevention measure for monkeypox is educating people to rise awareness of risk factors
about the control measures they can take for the reduction of the virus transmission. Due to suffi-
cient information, the population needs to maintain social distance, wear masks, follow the strategy
of home isolation, etc. Thus, we introduce the control factors (1 − η1 µ1 (t)) and (1 − η2 µ2 (t))
to control the interaction between susceptible/risky human Sh (t) with infected human Mh (t) and
animal Ma (t), which represent the depletion in β and ξ, respectively, while η1 and η2 compute
the usefulness of the control measure µ1 (t) and µ2 (t) (where µ1 (t), µ2 (t) ∈ [0, 1]), respectively.
The most successful framework is µ1 (t) ≡ 1 ≡ µ2 (t), which indicates that when the interaction
of susceptible humans with infected humans and animals is almost perfectly avoided it makes the
transmission of the disease to zero. Here, µ1 (t) ≡ 1 ≡ µ2 (t) means fully response by implementing
the given control mechanism, while µ1 (t) ≡ 0 ≡ µ2 (t) implies no response. The intensities of the
responses are associated with the behavior of the human population, and so these response inten-
sities are represented by µ1 (t) and µ2 (t) as control measures. We maximize the responses using
isolation so that they change their behavior and the cost will correspond to a nonlinear function of
µ1 (t) and µ2 (t). Thus, we wish to find the optimal response for risky individuals with the help of
isolation as a control measure.

4.2   T REATMENT FOR I NFECTED I NDIVIDUALS

The treatment of infected individuals not only controls the number of the infected individuals but
also influences its development. Although there is no proper treatment for the monkeypox virus
infection, smallpox and monkeypox are genetically similar, and there are antiviral drugs against
smallpox that can be used for treatment purposes. So in the present scenario, we assume the accessi-
bility of treatment for the infected population. We introduce the term −η3 µ3 (t)Mh (t) as a treatment
in the proposed model, where η3 represents the treatment rate associated with the intensity µ3 (t).
There are various costs associated with given medication, so we assume that the intensity of treat-
ment control measure µ3 (t) lies between 0 and unity. The control µ3 (t) will attempt to change the
fraction of the infected population to the recovered population.

4.3   R ESTRICTION ON A NIMALS

While it seems to be difficult that how to restrict animals from the transmission of the monkeypox
infection, it is possible. In the current situation, various countries have restricted the importation of
animals (rodents) and non-human primates. Animals that are infected with monkeypox should be
placed into quarantine immediately to be isolated from other animals. Moreover, an animal that has
close contact with another infected animal should be also isolated and accordingly quarantined to
observe the symptoms of monkeypox for 30 days. We introduce the control factor (1 − η4 µ4 (t)) to
control the interactions of susceptible and infected animals, where µ4 (t) ∈ [0, 1].


                                                   5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


In this section, the main objective is to obtain the optimal control strategy that minimizes the infected
population with the aid of the above control measures and with the minimum associated cost. Thus,
the admissible set of control measures µi (t) is defined by
                   U = {µi (t), i = 1, 2, . . . , 4 :       0 ≤ µi (t) ≤ 1,   t ∈ [0, T ]} .
We, therefore, develop the control problem by keeping in view the above strategies with the objective
functional W ({µi }) to be minimized:
                                               Z T                    4
                                                                 1 TX
                                                                  Z
                W (µi (t), i = 1, . . . , 4) =     h1 Mh (t)dt +         κi µ2i (t)dt,            (3)
                                                0                2 0 i=1
subject to
 dSh (t)
          = Φh − β {1 − η1 µ1 (t)} Mh (t)Sh (t) − ξ {1 − η2 µ2 (t)} Ma (t)Sh (t) − ϑSh (t),
   dt
dMh (t)
          = β {1 − η1 µ1 (t)} Mh (t)Sh (t) + ξ {1 − η2 µ2 (t)} Ma (t)Sh (t)
   dt
              − {ϑ + ϑ1 + r + η3 µ3 (t)} Mh (t),
 dRh (t)                                      dSa (t)
          = {r + η3 µ3 (t)} Mh (t) − ϑRh (t),         = Φa − ϕ {1 − η4 µ4 (t)} Ma (t)Sa (t) − αSa (t),
   dt                                            dt
dMa (t)
          = ϕ {1 − η4 µ4 (t)} Ma (t)Sa (t) − {α + α1 } Ma (t),
   dt
                                                                                                (4)
with the initial population sizes in Eq. (2). In Eq. (3), the integrand represents the value of cost
at time t, while the function W shows the sum of the cost described by the integrand or the total
incurred cost. The parameters h1 and κi ’s are non-negative parameters that are weight constants to
balance the units of the integrand. The control measures µ∗i (i = 1, 2, 3, 4) exist in the admissible
control set U that minimize W . We now discuss the existence of optimal control for our proposed
control problem (4), then use the well-known Pontryagin’s maximum principle for characterization
and getting the necessary conditions of the optimal controls. The following result will be presented
to ensure the existence of µ∗i that minimizes the function W .
Theorem 2 There exist optimal controls µ∗ (t) = (µ1 (t), µ2 (t), µ3 (t), µ4 (t)) in U that minimize
the objective function W associated with the control problem in Eqs.(4)–(3).
Since the above result ensures the existence of the controls to minimize the objective functional (3)
subject to the state system (4), we then derive the necessary conditions for characterization of the
optimal control problem using Pontryagin’s maximum principle, see Theorem 3 in the appendix.

5     N UMERICAL E XPERIMENTS
We perform numerical experiments to test the model predictions and verify the analytical findings.
We utilize a well-known numerical procedure of the Runge-Kutta method of the 4th order. First, we
discretize the model and develop the algorithm to perform the numerical simulations.

5.1   D ISCRITIZATION

To discritize the model, we set
                                Φh − βMh Sh − ξMa Sh − ϑSh
                                                                 
          Sh
      Mh                 βMh Sh + ξMa Sh − (ϑ + ϑ1 + r) Mh 
X =  Rh  , F =                         rMh − ϑRh                 ,
                                                                 
      S 
            a
                                    Φa − ϕMa Sa − αSa              
         Ma                        ϕMa Sa − (α + α1 ) Ma
                                   Φh − β {1 − η1 µ1 } Mh Sh − ξ {1 − η2 µ2 } Ma Sh − ϑSh
                                                                                               
         φ1
      φ2                β {1 − η1 µ1 } Mh Sh + ξ {1 − η2 µ2 } Ma Sh − {ϑ + ϑ1 + r + η3 µ3 } Mh 
Y =  φ3  , G =                                  {r + η3 µ3 } Mh − ϑRh                          ,
                                                                                               
      φ 
           4
                                              Φa − ϕ {1 − η4 µ4 } Ma Sa − αSa                    
         φ5                                  ϕ {1 − η4 µ4 } Ma Sa − {α + α1 } Ma

                                                        6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


and
                {φ1 − φ2 } {β (1 − η1 µ∗1 ) Mh∗ + ξ(1 − η2 µ∗3 )Ma } + φ∗1 ϑ,
                                                                                            
                              ∗     ∗                       ∗               ∗
     {φ1 − φ2 } {β (1 − η1 µ1 ) Sh } − {ϑ + ϑ1 + r + η3 µ3 } φ2 − {r + µ3 } φ3 − h1 , 
  H=                                                                                        ,
                       ϑφ3 , {φ4 − φ5 } {ϕ (1 − η4 µ∗4 ) Ma } − αφ4 ,
      {φ1 − φ2 } {ξ (1 − η2 µ∗2 ) Sh∗ } + {α + α1 } φ5 + {φ4 − φ5 } {ϕ (1 − η4 µ∗4 ) Sa∗ } ,
then Eq.(1), Eq.4), and Eq.(6) can be re-casted as
              dX(t)                  dX(t, µ)                  dY (t)
                     = F (t, X(t)),           = G(t, X(µ)),           = H(t, φ).                  (5)
                dt                      dt                       dt
The application of forward and backward Runge-Kutta method of order four gives
                        l                                            l
        Xi+1 = Xi +       (h1 + 2h2 + 2h3 + h4 ) ,     Yi−1 = Yi −     (k1 + 2k2 + 2k3 + k4 ) ,   (6)
                        6                                            6
where

                                            l       lh1                      l       lh2
        h1 = F (tn , Xn ),    h2 = F    tn + , Xn +       ,      h3 = F tn + , Xn +         ,
                                            2        2                       2        2

                                                                           l      lk1
        h4 = F (tn + h, Xn + lh3 ) , k1 = F (tn , Xn ),       k2 = F tn − , Xn −        ,
                                                                           2       2

                      l        lk2
        k3 = F tn − , Xn −            , k4 = F (tn − k, Xn − lk3 ) .
                      2         2
Thus the rest of algorithms can be concluded as:

Algorithm 1 Runge-Kutta Method (RK4)
 1: Input: Endpoints t0 , tmax , integer n, parametric values, initial conditions
 2: Output: approximation Sh , Mh , Rh , Sa , Ma at (n + 1) values of t
 3: Parameters and Initial Conditions: Setting the values of epidemic parameters and initial sizes
      for compartmental populations
 4: for i = 1, · · · , n do
 5:   Recursive Formula: Xi+1 for both control and without control system as given in Eq.(5)
      and Eq.(6)
 6: end for
 7: for i = 1, · · · , n, j = n + 2 − i do
 8:   Recursive Formula: Yi−1 as given in Eq.(5) and Eq.(6)
 9: end for
10: Optimal Control: Plugging optimal control variables as given by Eq.(7)
11: Output: ti , Shi+1 , Mhi+1 , Rh i+1

                                        , Sai+1 , Mai+1



5.2    D ISCUSSION

We perform numerical simulations to discuss sensitivity analysis and the application of optimal
control strategies. We conduct numerical experiments to present the validation of our theoretical
findings for the model parameters and initial sizes of populations as specified in Table 2. It could
be noted that some of the parameters are directly correlated to the basic reproductive number, Ro ,
while some are negatively correlated, as shown in Figure 2. Figure 3 represents the contour plot
that describes the dependency of the basic reproductive number, Ro , on β (disease transmission
co-efficient of humans) and ϕ (disease transmission co-efficient of animals); β and ϑ (natural death
rate); β and r (recovery rate of infected population); and ϕ and α1 (the death rate arises from
monkeypox in animal population). It is very much clear from Table 1 and Figure 2 that the epidemic
parameters, namely, β and ϕ have positive indices, and are also associated with the susceptible
population. If we increase the value of β and ϕ, it will increase the value of basic reproductive
number Ro and cross the value Ro = 1, which leads to a substantial outbreak of the monkeypox
virus transmission. To maintain the value of the basic reproductive number and deduce a favorable


                                                   7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


control method to eradicate the spread of monkeypox virus transmission, we need to restrict the
value of these parameters, which is possible with the help of contact tracing and maintaining social
distancing. On the other hand, the parameters with negative indices are ϑ, r, α, and α1 as shown
in Figure 2, while the relative effect is reported in Figure 3. Moreover, whenever the value of those
parameters having negative indices increases, the basic reproductive number Ro will decrease, and
if its value becomes less than unity, the infection will no longer persist. So, treatment of infected
humans through medication has been incorporated with the aid of optimal control to eliminate the
monkeypox virus. To observe the influence of intervention strategies on the transmission dynamics
of monkeypox, we perform the numerical simulations of the proposed optimal control problem
with the help of the Runge-Kutta (RK4) scheme, as concluded in Algorithm 1. Moreover, the
time frame is taken to be 20 units, and the value of parameters are borrowed from Table 2 while
investigating and implementing the optimal control mechanism. To investigate the effect of optimal
control measures for the monkeypox virus transmission, we execute the proposed problem in two
folds: without control µ1 (t) = µ2 (t) = µ3 (t) = µ4 (t) = 0 and with the combination of four
controls (µ1 (t), µ2 (t), µ3 (t), µ4 (t)) which leads to the results as presented in Figure 4. These graphs
respectively demonstrate the dynamics of human and animal compartments of the proposed model
under no control and with controls. The black dashed and red dashed curves respectively represent
the dynamics of each compartmental population with and without the utilization of control strategies
to highlight the effect of optimal policies implementation, see Figure 4. A significant reduction in
the infected population, as well as, an increase in the non-infected population can be seen with
the application of optimal control measures, whenever, compared without intervention strategies.
We conclude that the combination of suggested optimal control measures can achieve a significant
reduction in monkeypox virus transmission whenever applied in a true sense.

                                      1


                                     0.5


                                      0


                                    −0.5


                                     −1
                                           1   2   3           4   5   6
                                           β   ϑ   r       φ       α   α
                                               1                   1

Figure 2: The plot represents the sensitivity indices and most sensitive epidemic parameters related
to basic reproductive number Ro .



6    C ONCLUSION
To keep the current scenario of the monkeypox virus transmission in our mind, we investigated and
proposed a model for the dynamics of monkeypox virus transmission. Both theoretical and numer-
ical analyses of the proposed epidemic problem have been studied with the aid of stability theory.
Positivity, as well as, the boundedness of the states of the epidemic problem guarantees that the
considered model is a well-defined dynamical system. We performed the local and global dynamics
of the model and derived the stability conditions. The proposed model has several epidemic pa-
rameters and so with the help of normalized sensitivity analysis, the most significant parameters are
quantified. It could be observed that disease transmission from both human-to-human and animals
to human play a significant role in disease transmission. Besides the disease transmission rate, the
parameter r is also very effective and has a major effect on infected individuals and Ro . Moreover,
we modified the proposed model by incorporating optimal measures with the aid of control theory
to mitigate the monkeypox disease burden and describe the effect of control policies implementa-
tion, and as a result to stop the disease from spreading. The findings of our optimal control problem
show that the maintenance of the social distancing, tracing contact, transportation of animals and
treatment of infected individuals may support mitigating monkeypox virus spreading in the current
scenario of the epidemic.


                                                       8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                              1                                                                                                                                                                                        1


                                                                                    4


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           4.5
                                                                                                                                                                                      7
                                                                                                                                             6
                                                                                                                5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   3


                                                  3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           2


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             5
                                            0.8                                                                                                                                                                                      0.8                                   2.                                                                            1.5


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               3.
                                                                                                              4


                                                                                                                                                                                      6
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               1.5


                                                                                                                                         5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               3                            2
                                            0.6                                                                                                                                                                                      0.6


                                                                                        3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   2.


                                                                                                                                                                                                           β
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               1


                                        β
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            1.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     0.4           2
                                            0.4                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    1


                                                                                                                                         4


                                                                                                                                                                                      5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               1.5


                                                                                                                  3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             1


                                                                                        2
                                            0.2                     1                                                                                                                                                                0.2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         0.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       0.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       0.5


                                                                                                                                                                                  4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       0


                                                                                                                                             3
                                              0


                                                                                                                  2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        0                    0.2                                 0.4                       0.6                 0.8                  1
                                               0                                   0.2                    0.4                      0.6                                     0.8                1
                                                                                                                      φ                                                                                                                                                                                          ϑ1

                                             0.1                                                                                                                                                                                      0.2
                                                                                                                      3                                                                                                                                                                                                                             1
                                                    7


                                                                                                                                                                                  2


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            3
                                                                                     4
                                                        6


                                            0.08


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            2.5


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   1.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     0.15                                                                              1
                                                               5


                                                                                                                                   2
                                                                                            3

                                            0.06


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            2
                                                        4


                                                                                                                                                                                                         φ
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      0.1                              1
                                        β


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   5
                                                                                                2                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            0.5


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                1.
                                                                                                                                                                                          1
                                            0.04 3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   0.5
                                                                                                                                         1
                                                                    2                                                                                                                                                                0.05 1                                  0.5
                                                                                                    1
                                            0.02
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               0.5
                                                              1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          0
                                              0                                                                                                                                                                                            0                      0.05                                           0.1                     0.15                      0.2
                                               0                                   0.02                  0.04                  0.06                                        0.08               0.1
                                                                                                                          r                                                                                                                                                                                      α1

Figure 3: Contour plots of the basic reproductive number Ro to show the sensitivity analysis. The
basic reproductive number is taken to be the function of β, ϕ and ϑ1 to show the relative effect of
these parameters on the basic reproductive number.


                                  100                                                                                                                                     40                                                                                                                               55
                                                                                                        with control                                                                                                                       with control                                                                                                        with control
                                  90                                                                    without control                                                   35                                                               without control                                                 50                                                  without control
      Susceptible Human (Sh(t))


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Recovered Human (Rh(t))
                                                                                                                                                 Infected Human (Mh(t))


                                  80                                                                                                                                      30                                                                                                                               45

                                  70                                                                                                                                      25                                                                                                                               40

                                  60                                                                                                                                      20                                                                                                                               35

                                  50                                                                                                                                      15                                                                                                                               30

                                  40                                                                                                                                      10                                                                                                                               25

                                  30                                                                                                                                      5                                                                                                                                20

                                  20                                                                                                                                      0                                                                                                                                15
                                    0                5                             10                    15                   20                                           0              5           10                                    15               20                                              0                 5               10                  15            20
                                                                                 Time (t)                                                                                                           Time (t)                                                                                                                               Time (t)

                                                                            20                                                                                                                                                       25
                                                                                                                                                                          with control                                                                                                                                             with control
                                                                            18                                                                                            without control                                                                                                                                          without control
                                               Susceptible Animal (Sa(t))


                                                                            16                                                                                                                                                       20
                                                                                                                                                                                                           Infected Animal (Ma(t))


                                                                            14

                                                                            12                                                                                                                                                       15

                                                                            10

                                                                            8                                                                                                                                                        10

                                                                            6

                                                                            4                                                                                                                                                         5

                                                                            2

                                                                            0                                                                                                                                                         0
                                                                             0                      5                         10                                           15                  20                                      0                      5                                             10                      15                  20
                                                                                                                      Time (t)                                                                                                                                                                Time (t)


Figure 4: The plots represent the dynamics of the compartmental population with the implementa-
tion and without the implementation of control strategies


Given the increased development of fractional calculus, many operators of fractional orders were
introduced to capture more valuable information. In our future work, we will generalize the proposed
model to its associated fractional version to discuss the dynamics of monkeypox virus disease.


                                                                                                                                                                                                     9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


R EFERENCES
Roy M Anderson and Robert M May. Population biology of infectious diseases: Part i. Nature, 280
  (5721):361–367, 1979.
RAPID RISK ASSESSMENT. Monkeypox multi-country outbreak. 2022.
Fred Brauer. Mathematical epidemiology: Past, present, and future. Infectious Disease Modelling,
  2(2):113–127, 2017.
Tom Britton, Frank Ball, and Pieter Trapman. A mathematical model reveals the influence of popu-
  lation heterogeneity on herd immunity to sars-cov-2. science, 369(6505):846–849, 2020.
Stavros Busenberg and Kenneth Cooke. Vertically transmitted diseases: models and dynamics,
  volume 23. Springer Science & Business Media, 2012.
Yu Chen and Deyin Guo. Molecular mechanisms of coronavirus rna capping and methylation.
  Virologica Sinica, 31(1):3–11, 2016.
Edward Choi, Mohammad Taha Bahadori, Jimeng Sun, Joshua Kulas, Andy Schuetz, and Walter
  Stewart. Retain: An interpretable predictive model for healthcare using reverse time attention
  mechanism. Advances in neural information processing systems, 29, 2016.
Dhiraj Kumar Das, Subhas Khajanchi, and TK Kar. Transmission dynamics of tuberculosis with
  multiple re-infections. Chaos, Solitons & Fractals, 130:109450, 2020a.
Utpal Dhar Das, Brijesh P Singh, and Tanusree Deb Roy. Temporal variation of temperature in
  guwahati, assam: an application of seasonal arima model. J Stat Appl Prob, 9(1):169–180, 2020b.
Stan Deresinski. A case of monkeypox in a returned traveler. Infectious Disease Alert, 41(8), 2022.
Ramadan Abdelmoez Farahat, Abdelaziz Abdelaal, Jaffer Shah, Sherief Ghozy, Ranjit Sah, D Kat-
  terine Bonilla-Aldana, Alfonso J Rodriguez-Morales, Timothy D McHugh, and Hakan Leblebi-
  cioglu. Monkeypox outbreaks during covid-19 pandemic: are we looking at an independent
  phenomenon or an overlapping pandemic?, 2022.
Seth Flaxman, Swapnil Mishra, Axel Gandy, H Juliette T Unwin, Thomas A Mellan, Helen Cou-
  pland, Charles Whittaker, Harrison Zhu, Tresnia Berah, Jeffrey W Eaton, et al. Estimating the
  effects of non-pharmaceutical interventions on covid-19 in europe. Nature, 584(7820):257–261,
  2020.
Qian Guo, Mo Li, Chunhui Wang, Peihong Wang, Zhencheng Fang, Shufang Wu, Yonghong Xiao,
  Huaiqiu Zhu, et al. Host and infectivity prediction of wuhan 2019 novel coronavirus using deep
  learning algorithm. BioRxiv, 2020.
Hans Heesterbeek, Roy M Anderson, Viggo Andreasen, Shweta Bansal, Daniela De Angelis, Chris
  Dye, Ken TD Eames, W John Edmunds, Simon DW Frost, Sebastian Funk, et al. Modeling infec-
  tious disease dynamics in the complex landscape of global health. Science, 347(6227):aaa4339,
  2015.
William Ogilvy Kermack and Anderson G McKendrick. A contribution to the mathematical the-
 ory of epidemics. Proceedings of the royal society of london. Series A, Containing papers of a
 mathematical and physical character, 115(772):700–721, 1927.
Subhas Khajanchi, Dhiraj Kumar Das, and Tapan Kumar Kar. Dynamics of tuberculosis transmis-
  sion with exogenous reinfections and endogenous reactivation. Physica A: Statistical Mechanics
  and its Applications, 497:52–71, 2018.
Subhas Khajanchi, Kankan Sarkar, Jayanta Mondal, Kottakkaran Sooppy Nisar, and Sayed F Ab-
  delwahab. Mathematical modeling of the covid-19 pandemic with intervention strategies. Results
  in Physics, 25:104285, 2021.
Devendra Kumar, Jagdev Singh, Maysaa Al Qurashi, and Dumitru Baleanu. A new fractional sirs-si
  malaria disease model with application of vaccines, antimalarial drugs, and spraying. Advances
  in Difference Equations, 2019(1):1–19, 2019.


                                                10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Moyinoluwa Joshua Oladoye. Monkeypox: A neglected viral zoonotic disease. Electronic Journal
 of Medical and Educational Technologies, 14(2):em2108, 2021.
Eskild Petersen, Anu Kantele, Marion Koopmans, Danny Asogun, Adesola Yinka-Ogunleye,
  Chikwe Ihekweazu, and Alimuddin Zumla. Human monkeypox: epidemiologic and clinical char-
  acteristics, diagnosis, and prevention. Infectious Disease Clinics, 33(4):1027–1043, 2019.
G Rohith and KB Devika. Dynamics and control of covid-19 pandemic with nonlinear incidence
  rates. Nonlinear Dynamics, 101(3):2013–2026, 2020.
David Rolnick, Priya L Donti, Lynn H Kaack, Kelly Kochanski, Alexandre Lacoste, Kris Sankaran,
  Andrew Slavin Ross, Nikola Milojevic-Dupont, Natasha Jaques, Anna Waldman-Brown, et al.
  Tackling climate change with machine learning. ACM Computing Surveys (CSUR), 55(2):1–96,
  2022.
Priyabrata Saha, Saurabh Dash, and Saibal Mukhopadhyay. Physics-incorporated convolutional
  recurrent neural networks for source identification and forecasting of dynamical systems. Neural
  Networks, 144:359–371, 2021.
Piu Samui, Jayanta Mondal, and Subhas Khajanchi. A mathematical model for covid-19 transmis-
  sion dynamics with a case study of india. Chaos, Solitons & Fractals, 140:110173, 2020.
S Saravanakumar, A Eswari, L Rajendran, and Marwan Abukhaled. A mathematical model of risk
  factors in hiv/aids transmission dynamics: observational study of female sexual network in india.
  Applied Mathematics & Information Sciences, 14(6):967–976, 2020.
Neha P Singh, Shivani Sharma, Garvit Ghai, and Amandeep Singh. A systematic review on epi-
  dermology of human monkeypox virus. Annals of the Romanian Society for Cell Biology, 25(7):
  602–610, 2021.
Pauline Van den Driessche and James Watmough. Reproduction numbers and sub-threshold endemic
  equilibria for compartmental models of disease transmission. Mathematical biosciences, 180(1-
  2):29–48, 2002.
Yuan Yin, Vincent Le Guen, Jérémie Dona, Emmanuel de Bézenac, Ibrahim Ayed, Nicolas Thome,
  and Patrick Gallinari. Augmenting physical models with deep networks for complex dynamics
  forecasting. Journal of Statistical Mechanics: Theory and Experiment, 2021(12):124012, 2021.


A PPENDIX
A.1 P ROOF OF P ROPOSITION 1

Proof. The differentiability of the right-hand side of the proposed model equations implies the
existence of a unique maximal solution for any associated Cauchy problem. So, the solution of the
first equation of the model looks like
                                Z t
         Sh (t) = exp −ϑt −         (βMh (x) + ξMa (x)) dx
                                 0
                                            Z x
                         × Φh t exp ϑt +        (βMh (y) + ξMa (y)) dy dx
                                             0
                                                      Z t
                                 + Sh (0) exp −ϑt −       (βMh (x) + ξMa (x)) dx > 0.
                                                       0
The solution of second equation of the model (1) takes the form
                                            Z t              Z t
          Mh (t) = exp −(ϑ + ϑ1 + r)t +          βSh (x)dx       ξMa (x)Sh (x)
                                              0                0
                                                     Z x
                          × exp (ϑ + ϑ1 + r)x +           βSh (y)dy dx
                                                       0
                                                                   Z t
                                + Mh (0) exp −(ϑ + ϑ1 + r)t +          βSh (x)dx ≥ 0.
                                                                    0


                                                11
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Clearly, we see that Sh (t) > 0 and Mh (t) ≥ 0 for Sh (0) > 0 and Mh (0) ≥ 0. Following the
same steps, we can easily show that Rh (t) ≥ 0, Sa (t) > 0 and Ma (t) ≥ 0. Moreover, to show the
boundedness, let us assume that the total human and animal populations are denoted by Nh (t) and
Na (t) respectively, then the total dynamics of humans and animal looks like
                          dNh (t)                       dNa (t)
                                  ≤ Φh − ϑNh (t),               ≤ Φa − αNa (t).
                            dt                            dt
It is easy to solve the above inequalities and then taking unbounded limit i.e., t approaches to infinity,
Nh (t) → Φϑh and Na (t) → Φαa , and thus the feasible region for the proposed model is given by

                                                       5          Φh              Φa
                  Ω = (Sh , Mh , Rh , Sa , Ma ) ∈ R+     , Nh ≤      , Na ≤            .
                                                                   ϑ               α

A.2 P ROOF OF T HEOREM 1

Proof. We use the approach of linear stability analysis and linearize the proposed model around the
Monkeypox free equilibrium, W0 , then the variational matrix may takes the form
                                         − βΦ                             − ξΦ
                                                                                  
                          −ϑ                 ϑ
                                               h
                                                           0     0           α
                                                                               a

                                 βΦh                                       ξΦa
                                  ϑ − (ϑ + ϑ1 + r)
                        0                                 0     0                 
                                                                           α      
             J(W0 ) =  0
                                           r             −ϑ 0              0      .
                                                                                   
                                                                            ϕΦa
                        0                  0              0 −α           − α      
                           0                0              0     0 − (α + α1 )
Let the associated eigenvalues of J(W0 ) are λi , where, i = 1, 2, . . . , 5, then we obtain
           λ1 = −ϑ = λ3 , λ2 = − (ϑ + ϑ1 + r) (1 − Rh ) , λ4 = −α, λ5 = −(α + α1 ).
Obviously, λ1 , λ3 , λ4 and λ5 are negative while λ2 is negative whenever Rh < 1 holds. Since,
Rh < 1 provided that R0 < 1, therefore we conclude that the proposed Monkeypox model is
locally asymptotically stable at the disease-free state W0 subject to the condition R0 < 1 holds.
To discuss the global dynamics, let us define Sho = Φϑh and Sao = Φαa , and a real-valued function,
H(t) = H0 + H1 , such that
                    H0 = Sh − Sh0 + Sa − Sa0 , H1 = Mh + Rh + Ma .


Clearly, H(t) is non-negative and its temporal differentiation with the application of some algebraic
manipulation leads to the assertion
          dH
              = −ϑ {Sh − Sho } − α {Sa − Sao } − (ϑ + ϑ1 ) Mh − ϑRh − (α + α1 ) Ma ,
           dt
implies that dH                                                   o            o       dH
             dt < 0. Also it could be noted that, whenever, Sh = Sh and Sa = Sa , then dt = 0,
which prove that H(t) is Lyapunov function and the proposed model is stable globally asymptoti-
cally.

A.3 P ROOF OF T HEOREM 2

Proof. Since the solutions of model (1) are bounded and non-negative for the initial population sizes
(2). The objective functional is also non- negative which ultimately implies that W is bounded.
Thus to minimize the sequence of controls µτ (t) = (µτ1 (t), µτ2 (t), µτ3 (t), µτ4 (t)) ∈ U exists, such
that
                                 lim W (µτ (t)) = inf W (µ(t)).
                                   τ →∞                 µ∈U
                                                        ∞
The controls in set U are bounded uniformly in L space which implies that they are bounded
uniformly in L2 ([0, T ]) space. Since, L2 space is reflexive, so there exists a subsequence µ∗ (t) ∈ U
such that
               µτ1 (t) → µ∗1 (t), µτ2 (t) → µ∗2 (t), µτ3 (t) → µ∗3 (t), µτ4 (t) → µ∗4 (t)
weakly in L2 space as τ approaches ∞, then the sequence defined by z τ = (Shτ , Mhτ , Rhτ , Saτ , Maτ ) is
bounded uniformly corresponding to µτ (t). It can be observed from the right-hand side of model (1)
that they are uniformly bounded which gives the equi-continuity of the state sequence and uniform


                                                   12
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


bounded-ness of the derivatives for z τ . The Arzel–Ascoli theorem then gives that there exist z τ =
(Shτ , Mhτ , Rhτ , Saτ , Maτ ) such that z τ → z ∗ uniformly on [0, T ].
Further, to complete the proof, let us assume a proper subsequence passing through the limit of the
system (1) and corresponding to µ∗1 (t), µ∗2 (t), µ∗3 (t), µ∗4 (t), we can obtain the optimal solution z ∗ .
Thus, the lower semi-continuity of L2 norm with respect to L2 weak convergence gives that
                                             Z T                         4
                                                                  1 TX
                                                                    Z
             inf W (µτ ) = lim W (µτ ) ≥          h1 Mh dt +                κi µ2i dt = W (µ∗ ).
            µ∈U            τ →∞                0                  2  0 i=1

Therefore, µ∗ (t) = (µ∗1 (t), µ∗2 (t), µ∗3 (t), µ∗4 (t)) is an optimal control measure.

A.4 C HARACTERIZATION OF O PTIMAL C ONTROL

Theorem 3 There exists optimal controls µ∗ = (µ1 , µ2 , µ3 , µ4 ) in U and the corresponding so-
lutions of optimal state z ∗ = (Sh∗ , Mh∗ , Rh∗ , Sa∗ , Ma∗ ) of the Eq.(4) that minimize W (3), then the
adjoint variables φ1 , φ2 , φ3 , φ4 , and φ5 satisfying the equations:
       ′
     φ1 (t) = {φ1 − φ2 } {β (1 − η1 µ1 ) Mh + ξ(1 − η2 µ2 )Ma } + φ1 ϑ,
       ′
     φ2 (t) = {φ1 − φ2 } {β (1 − η1 µ1 ) Sh } + {ϑ + ϑ1 + r + η3 µ3 } φ2 − {r + µ3 } φ3 − h1 ,
       ′                   ′
     φ3 (t) = ϑφ3 ,      φ4 (t) = {φ4 − φ5 } {ϕ (1 − η4 µ4 ) Ma } + αφ4 ,
       ′
     φ5 (t) = {φ1 − φ2 } {ξ (1 − η2 µ2 ) Sh } + {α + α1 } φ5 + {φ4 − φ5 } {ϕ (1 − η4 µ4 ) Sa } ,
with the transversal condition:
                               φ1 (T ) = φ2 (T ) = φ3 (T ) = φ4 (T ) = φ5 (T ) = 0.
Further, the associated optimal measures µ∗ (t) = (µ∗1 (t), µ∗2 (t), µ∗3 (t), µ∗4 (t)) are:
       1                                  1                                           1
 µ∗1 =     {φ2 − φ1 } βη1 Mh Sh , µ∗2 =      {φ1 − φ2 } ξη2 Ma Sh , µ∗3 =               {φ2 − φ3 } η3 Mh ,
       κ1                                κ2                                          κ3
       1
 µ∗4 =     {φ5 − φ4 } η4 Ma Sa .
       κ4
Proof. In order to investigate the necessary conditions for the control measures using the Pon-
tryagin’smaximum principle for the proposed model (4), we define the Hamiltonian H for every
t ∈ [0, T ] as:
                                               4
                                            1X
                        H = h1 Mh (t)dt +         κi µ2i (t) + φ(t)g(z, µ),
                                            2 i=1
where φ(t) = (φ1 (t), φ2 (t), φ3 (t), φ4 (t), φ5 (t), ), g = (g1 , g2 , g3 , g4 , g5 ), and g1 , g2 , g3 , g4 and g5
respectively represent the right hand side of the first, second, third, fourth and fifth equation of the
system (4). We derive the minimized Hamiltonian with the help of Pontryagin’s maximum principle
which minimize the objective function W (3). The Pontryagin’s maximum principle relates the state
variables of the model and the objective functional with including adjoint variables. Therefore, by
                                                  ′        ′      ′         ′             ′
using the Pontryagin’s principle there exists φ1 (t), φ2 (t), φ3 (t), φ4 (t) and φ5 (t) that satisfies
              ′       ∂H ′             ∂H      ′          ∂H ′               ∂H ′               ∂H
            φ1 (t) =      , φ (t) =         , φ (t) =         , φ (t) =            , φ (t) =           ,
                      ∂Sh 2           ∂Mh 3              ∂Rh 4              ∂Sa 5              ∂Ma
with the transversal conditions φ1 (T ) = φ2 (T ) = φ3 (T ) = φ4 (T ) = φ5 (T ) = 0. Now by using
the characterization of controls we have
                       ∂H               ∂H                 ∂H                  ∂H
                             = 0,              = 0,              = 0,                   = 0.
                     ∂µ1 (t)          ∂µ2 (t)            ∂µ3 (t)              ∂µ4 (t)
From ∂µ ∂H
          i
            = 0 (i = 1, 2, 3, 4), and at µ1 (t) = µ∗1 (t), µ2 (t) = µ∗2 (t), µ3 (t) = µ∗3 (t) and µ4 (t) =
µ∗4 (t) we obtain
          1                                    1                                   1
   µ∗1 =     {φ2 − φ1 } βη1 Mh Sh , µ∗2 =        {φ1 − φ2 } ξη2 Ma Sh , µ∗3 =        {φ2 − φ3 } η3 Mh ,
         κ1                                   κ2                                  κ3
          1
   µ∗4 =     {φ5 − φ4 } η4 Ma Sa .
         κ4

                                                        13
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


               Parameter       Value     Parameter         Value   Parameter       Value

               Φh              0.9430    β                0.0003   ξ              0.0044
               ϑ               0.4570    ϑ1               0.0910   r              0.0590
               Φa              0.6000    ϕ                0.0790   α              0.1200
               α1              0.0900    η1               0.0900   η2             0.5000
               η3              0.0400    η4               0.0400   η5             0.0500
               h1              0.6000    h2               0.9000   k1             0.4400
               k2              0.0200    k3               0.2000   k4             0.2000
               k5              0.2000

    Table 2: Parametric values used in the numerical simulation of the optimal control problem


By considering the lower and upper bound for µ1 (t), µ2 (t), µ3 (t), and µ4 (t), we leads to the fol-
lowing assertions:

                                      1
               µ∗1 (t) = min max 0,     {φ2 (t) − φ1 (t)} βη1 Mh (t)Sh (t) , 1 ,
                                     κ1

                                      1
               µ∗2 (t) = min max 0,     {φ1 (t) − φ2 (t)} ξη2 Ma (t)Sh (t) , 1 ,
                                     κ2
                                                                                                  (7)
                                      1
               µ∗3 (t) = min max 0,     {φ2 (t) − φ3 (t)} η3 Mh (t) , 1 ,
                                     κ3

                                      1
               µ∗4 (t) = min max 0,     {φ5 (t) − φ4 (t)} η4 Ma (t)Sa (t) , 1 .
                                     κ4
It is also clear from the Hamiltonian H that
             ∂2H                  ∂2H                    ∂2H               ∂2H
                  = κ21 > 0,           = κ22 > 0,             = κ23 > 0,        = κ24 > 0,
             ∂µ21                 ∂µ22                   ∂µ23              ∂µ24
which implies that the optimal measures minimize (H).
We state the optimality system with the help of µ∗1 , µ∗2 , µ∗3 and µ∗4 . Thus, the optimality system that
minimize H at (Sh∗ , Mh∗ , Rh∗ , Sa∗ , Ma∗ , µ∗1 , µ∗2 , µ∗3 , µ∗4 , φ1 , φ2 , φ3 , φ4 ) becomes:
         dSh
             = Φh − β {1 − η1 µ∗1 } Mh∗ Sh∗ − ξ {1 − η2 µ∗2 } Ma∗ Sh∗ − ϑSh∗ ,
          dt
        dMh
             = β {1 − η1 µ∗1 } Mh∗ Sh∗ + ξ {1 − η2 µ∗2 } Ma∗ Sh∗ − {ϑ + ϑ1 + r + η3 µ∗3 } Mh∗ ,
         dt
        dRh                                  dSa
             = {r + µ3 (t)} Mh∗ − ϑRh∗ ,          = Φa − ϕ {1 − η4 µ4 (t)} Ma∗ Sa∗ − αSa∗ ,
          dt                                  dt
        dMa
             = ϕ {1 − η4 µ∗4 } Ma∗ Sa∗ − {α + α1 } Ma∗ ,
         dt
with initial population sizes Sh∗ (0) > 0, Mh∗ (0) ≥ 0, Rh∗ (0) ≥ 0, Sa∗ (0) ≥ 0, Ma∗ (0) ≥ 0, and the
associated co-states (adjoint variables) are
        ′
      φ1 = {φ1 − φ2 } {β (1 − η1 µ∗1 ) Mh∗ + ξ(1 − η2 µ∗3 )Ma } + φ∗1 ϑ,
        ′
      φ2 = {φ1 − φ2 } {β (1 − η1 µ∗1 ) Sh∗ } − {ϑ + ϑ1 + r + η3 µ∗3 } φ2 − {r + µ∗3 } φ3 − h1 ,
        ′              ′
      φ3 = ϑφ3 ,     φ4 = {φ4 − φ5 } {ϕ (1 − η4 µ∗4 ) Ma } − αφ4 ,
        ′
      φ5 = {φ1 − φ2 } {ξ (1 − η2 µ∗2 ) Sh∗ } + {α + α1 } φ5 + {φ4 − φ5 } {ϕ (1 − η4 µ∗4 ) Sa∗ } ,
where φ1 (T ) = φ2 (T ) = φ3 (T ) = φ4 (T ) = φ5 (T ) = 0 are the transversal conditions, and the
four control variables are stated by Eq.(7). Hence, the proof.


                                                    14
