Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


B IG L EARNING : A U NIVERSAL M ACHINE L EARNING
PARADIGM ?
 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review

                                              A BSTRACT

          Recent breakthroughs based on big/foundation models reveal a vague avenue for
          AI, that is, big data, big/foundation models, big learning, · · · . Following that
          avenue, here we elaborate on our newly introduced big learning. Specifically,
          big learning exhaustively exploits the information/tasks inherent in its large-scale
          complete/incomplete training data, by learning to simultaneously model many/all
          joint/conditional/marginal data distributions (thus named big learning) with one
          universal foundation model. We reveal that big learning is what existing foundation
          models are implicitly doing; accordingly, our big learning provides high-level
          guidance for flexible design and improvements of foundation models. Besides,
          big learning (i) is equipped with great flexibilities for complete/incomplete train-
          ing data and for customizing trustworthy data tasks; (ii) potentially delivers all
          joint/conditional/marginal data capabilities after training; (iii) significantly reduces
          the training-test gap with improved model generalization; and (iv) potentially
          unifies conventional machine learning paradigms and enables their flexible coop-
          erations, manifested as a universal learning paradigm. Preliminary experiments
          verified the effectiveness of the presented big learning.


1    I NTRODUCTION
AI is undergoing a paradigm shift with the rise of big/foundation models (Bommasani et al., 2021;
Yuan et al., 2022), e.g., BERT (Stickland & Murray, 2019), GPT-3 (Brown et al., 2020), DALL-Es
(Ramesh et al., 2021; 2022), MAE (He et al., 2021), etc. Foundation models, often based on mask-
and-predict pretraining and downstream finetuning, are capable of benefiting from pretraining on
broad data at scale and accordingly, demonstrate diverse downstream task capabilities with impressive
robustness (Stickland & Murray, 2019), adaptability (He et al., 2021), and generalization (Ramesh
et al., 2021). Therefore, they are rapidly being integrated into real-world AI systems, e.g., BERT into
Google search, Codex (Chen et al., 2021a) into GitHub’s Copilot, etc.
Despite the impressive capabilities and characteristics of foundation models, a unified theoretical
framework justifying their successes remains missing (Bommasani et al., 2021; Yuan et al., 2022),
which is crucial for their further improvements and is likely a milestone for the foundation model
community (Tamkin et al., 2021).
To address that challenge, we first notice that the successes of foundation models are mainly attributed
to the following two properties, in addition to increasingly powerful parallel computing techniques.

    • Data comprehensiveness. Foundation models are not picky about their training data and
      therefore embrace flexible training on massive easily-accessible data with great diversity (e.g.,
      those crawled from the Internet). These training data, thanks to their massiveness, diversity,
      and minimal human interventions in the collection, are likely more consistent with the “true”
      data distribution that underlies both training and test phases, leading to a narrowed training-test
      gap from the data perspective and serving as one reason for the improved generalization and
      robustness of foundation models.
    • Task comprehensiveness. A foundation model is often pretrained in a massive-task manner on
      a wealth of data tasks (like mask-and-predict), which can be flexibly specified as modeling some
      conditional data distributions across potentially diverse domains (see Section 3 for details). Such
      massive-task and potentially diverse pretraining of foundation models narrows the pretraining-
      finetuning/training-test gap from the learning perspective, i.e., it’s likely the downstream task


                                                     1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


      resembles a pretraining one, and therefore contributes to the successes of foundation models.
      Moreover, the massive-task pretraining may encourage learning compositional intrinsic meta-
      knowledge encoded in the model parameters (Lu et al., 2021; Aghajanyan et al., 2021), which
      may hold the key for out-of-distribution generalization (Bommasani et al., 2021).

Based on the above observations and by reviewing the development history of deep learning, we
perceive a vague avenue for AI, that is big data, big/foundation models, big learning, · · · . Specifi-
cally, one leverages big data to comprehensively represent the underlying data distribution, develops
big/foundation models to serve as a big information “container,” relies on big learning to comprehen-
sively and exhaustively convey data information into that container, and so on. Accordingly, different
from existing machine learning paradigms that only exploit limited information contained in training
data, we present big learning for exhaustive data information exploitation, following that AI avenue.
The presented big learning further strengthens the above-mentioned data and task compre-
hensiveness by leveraging a universal foundation model to simultaneously model many/all
joint/conditional/marginal data distributions (across potentially diverse domains), manifested as
a “big” training task that exhaustively exploits the data information. Such big learning behavior
closely resembles the fundamental unconscious mind and the vision system of human brains, which
are excellent at comprehensive information exploitation in a multitasking manner (Bargh & Morsella,
2008; Mesquita, 2015; Ludwig et al., 2014; Saarela & Landy, 2015).
Our big learning comes with three main contributions.

    • It serves as a theoretical platform for analyzing, justifying, and improving big/foundation models,
      because most of them are implicitly doing (parts of) big learning, as revealed in Section 3.
    • By modeling many/all joint/conditional/marginal data distributions, big learning (i) compre-
      hensively exploits the available data information and embraces statistical sharing power to
      encourage summarizing intrinsic compositional meta-knowledge within model parameters and
      (ii) potentially delivers all joint/conditional/marginal data capabilities after training, which are
      of great value e.g., for arbitrary data completion, flexible counter-factual analysis, and reasoning.
    • It delivers extraordinary data and training-task flexibilities by enabling large-scale training with
      complete/incomplete data on diverse learning tasks across different domains, leading to (i)
      minimal human interventions in data collection and learning-task specification, (ii) significantly
      reduced training-test (or pretraining-finetuning) gap, and (iii) potentially a universal machine
      learning paradigm that unifies and enables cooperations among conventional ones.

2    R ELATED WORK AND PRELIMINARY

Big/Foundation models. Taking shape in NLP, big/foundation models have drastically changed
the research and practice of AI (Bommasani et al., 2021; Yuan et al., 2022). BERT (Stickland &
Murray, 2019) and GPT series (Radford et al., 2019; Brown et al., 2020) significantly accelerate
the development of natural language processing, while models like DALL-Es (Ramesh et al., 2021;
2022) effectively promote interdisciplinary research among different research fields. Most foundation
models are pretrained in a mask-and-predict manner, i.e., holding out a portion of the input followed
by training the model to use the remaining parts to predict that held-out portion. We will reveal in
Section 3 that such mask-and-predict pretraining is a special case of the proposed big learning, which
accordingly reveals the underlying principle of foundation models and serves as a theoretical platform
for their analysis, justification, and further improvements.
Transformers and Vision Transformers (ViTs). Based on the self-attention mechanism (Vaswani
et al., 2017), Transformers have been serving as the de facto model architecture for foundation
models. Often Transformers (like BERT) take as input a sequence of discrete indexes x ∈ ZL with
length L and output the corresponding latent embedding h ∈ RL×D with embedding dimension D
for downstream applications; attentions are implemented among the L locations layer-wisely. ViTs
(Dosovitskiy et al., 2020) are Transformers modified for dealing with continuous images, which
have been empirically proven to have better generalization and robustness than convolutional neural
networks (Naseer et al., 2021). Different from Transformers embedding discrete indexes into high-
dimensional continuous features, ViTs directly employ flattened image patches as those features, as
demonstrated in Fig. 1b. It’s well known that Transformers/ViTs are over-parameterized Lan et al.


                                                     2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


(2019) and therefore data/information hungry; we will reveal that this property of Transformers/ViTs,
together with their great modeling flexibility, exactly matches our big learning.
Multi-mode learning objectives. Two well-known multi-mode learning objectives are (i) the cross-
entropy loss, often used in maximum likelihood learning with discrete categorical observations, and
(ii) the GAN loss (Goodfellow et al., 2014) for adversarial learning on continuous observations.

     • Given feature-label/history-current-word pairs (x, y) ∼ q(x, y), y ∈ {1, · · · , C} and a model
       pθ (y|x) modeling the categorical distributed y given x, the cross-entropy loss is identical to
                         KL[q(x, y)||pθ (y|x)q(x)] ∝ Eq(x) Eq(y|x) [− log pθ (y|x)],                      (1)
       where the optimal pθ∗ (y|x) = q(y|x). Note the categorical distribution is capable of modeling
       multiple modes, e.g., consider the diverse generation from the GPT-3 (Brown et al., 2020).
     • Generative adversarial nets (GANs) are widely used for synthesizing highly realistic images
       (Karras et al., 2019a;b; 2021). A standard GAN (Goodfellow et al., 2014) consists of a generator
       Gθ and a discriminator Dϕ , both of which are trained in an adversarial manner via
                           min max Ex∼q(x) log Dϕ (x) + Epθ (x) log(1 − Dϕ (x)),                          (2)
                            θ    ϕ

       where q(x) is the underlying data distribution and pθ (x) is the generated distribution with
       the generative process x = Gθ (z), z ∼ p(z). p(z) is an easy-to-sample distribution, like a
       normal distribution. With optimal Dϕ∗ , Eq. (2) minimizes the Jensen-Shannon divergence
       JS[q(x)||pθ (x)] (Goodfellow et al., 2014). Recently, the community begins to exploit integrat-
       ing ViTs into GANs to benefit from their modeling flexibility (Jiang et al., 2021; Lee et al., 2021;
       Zhao et al., 2021; Zhang et al., 2021). We also employ the ViT-based GAN generator and discrim-
       inator in the experiments, so as to leverage ViTs’ modeling flexibility and over-parameterization
       property to meet the modeling requirement of our big learning.


3      B IG LEARNING : A UNIVERSAL MACHINE LEARNING PARADIGM

For better introduction of our big learning, we first present its main idea in simplified unsupervised
settings, where a data sample X = (x) contains only a feature x ∈ RL×D (with length L and
dimension D, like L flattened patches of an image or L words with D = 1), followed by generalizing
its scope to the general settings with a data sample X = (y, x) containing an additional supervision
        y     y
y ∈ RL ×D (e.g., when Ly = Dy = 1, y ∈ {1, · · · , C} may represent a label). Note in both cases,
our big learning can naturally handle “incomplete data,” which are defined as either x missing values
along the L-dimension (like missing image patches) or y missing values along the Ly -dimension.

3.1     U NSUPERVISED BIG LEARNING

In unsupervised settings, we focus on generation tasks for the introduction. Given a collection of data
samples {x1 , x2 , · · · } from the underlying data distribution q(x), the mainstream machine learning
paradigms concentrate solely on the joint modeling, i.e., to construct a joint model pθ (x) to resemble
the joint data distribution q(x), or informally pθ (x) −→ q(x), using GANs (Brock et al., 2019;
Karras et al., 2019a), VAEs (Kingma & Welling, 2013; Dai & Wipf, 2019), Flows (Dinh et al., 2014;
Kingma & Dhariwal, 2018), diffusion models (Ho et al., 2020; Song et al., 2020), etc.
Motivations. We highlight two practical situations where the joint modeling is restricted.

    1. For most practical applications like those in medical/biological scenarios, only a limited portion
       of the accessible data are complete and can be utilized by joint modeling. It’s inexpedient to
       simply discard all incomplete ones (and the valuable information therein), especially where the
       data collection is expensive. Moreover, discarding incomplete data likely introduces unexpected
       interventions that violate the i.i.d. assumption, which lays the foundation of deep learning.
    2. It’s worth highlighting that, given a dataset with complete data, one already receives the data sam-
       ples from all joint/conditional/marginal distributions; therefore, ideally, one should comprehen-
       sively exploit that valuable information e.g., to form all the associated data capabilities (like vari-


                                                       3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


          (a) Unsupervised Big Learning               (b) MAE (He et al., 2021) and HOG (Wei et al., 2021)

Figure 1: Unsupervised big learning (a) and its special cases (b). Often a mask token [M] is inserted to the input
locations outside S for forward propagation, while no loss is back-propagated to the output locations outside T.
Note inserting the [M] tokens later in a middle layer (but at the same location) often lightens the computation
and memory burdens but improves the performance (He et al., 2021).


     ous conditional sampling for data completion) or to leverage different joint/conditional/marginal
     perspectives (formed as different training tasks) to regularize each other1 .

The above analyses motivate us to model all joint/conditional/marginal distributions simultaneously
(manifested as “big” learning with massive tasks), to enable flexible training with all available
complete/incomplete data2 and, at the same time, comprehensively “collect” data capabilities via
exhaustive data exploitation. Ideally, to collect all joint/conditional/marginal data capabilities, one
                        PL−1       PL−i k 3
need construct Nall = i=0 CLi ( k=1 CL−i       ) models in total (See Appendix A for details), which
is clearly prohibitive. Alternatively, we propose the following unsupervised big learning.
Unsupervised big learning. For the unsupervised settings with x ∈ RL×D and the index set
L = {1, · · · , L}, the proposed unsupervised big learning leverages a universal foundation model
pθ (xT |xS ) to model many/all joint/conditional/marginal data distributions simultaneously, i.e.,
                                        pθ (xT |xS ) −→ q(xT |xS ),                                           (3)
where S ⊂ L and T ⊆ L, T ̸= ∅ denote any non-overlapping source/target index sets, respectively.
q(xT |xS ) is the underlying conditional data distribution, whose samples are readily selected from
training data. Note S ∪ T need not be L, indicating that unsupervised big learning can naturally
handle incomplete data (with the model architecture and training objective detailed below). Fig. 1
demonstrates unsupervised big learning and Table 1 compares it with the conventional joint modeling.

                      Table 1: Comparing joint modeling with unsupervised big learning.

    Compared Methods                            Joint Modeling            Unsupervised Big Learning
    Intuitively                                Straight-forward             Complicated/Intractable
    Training Data                               Complete Data              Complete/Incomplete Data
    Data Information Exploitation           Single Joint Perspective    Exhaustive Many/All Perspectives
    Capabilities After Training                       Joint                Joint/Conditional/Marginal
    Potential Downstream Applications               Limited                   Extremely Abundant


Model architecture and training objective. Since the lengths of source xS and target xT are
not fixed, it’s not easy to model the universal pθ (xT |xS ) based on convolutions. Motivated by the
modeling flexibility of Transformers/ViTs and the fact that most foundation models are built on
top of them, we propose to model the universal pθ (xT |xS ) based on the transformer architecture.
    1
      If the joint modeling is learned perfectly, it’s possible but often computationally expensive to recover all
conditional/marginal capabilities. However, that perfect modeling assumption is usually violated in practice.
    2
      Incomplete data are readily exploited in the corresponding conditional/marginal tasks.
    3 i
      CL denotes the number of i-combinations from a set with L elements. Note in this paper, we only consider
the joint/conditional/marginal distributions w.r.t. the length L, e.g., consider the NLP setup with D = 1.


                                                        4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


The training objective is data-specific and can be specified as commonly-used machine learning
objectives, as exampled below, where we reveal that common foundation models are implicitly doing
big learning.
  1. Let x denotes a sequence of continuous features, such as flattened patches of an image (He
     et al., 2021), as demonstrated in Fig. 1b. Unsupervised big learning aims at acquiring the data
     capabilities of generating a subset of image patches xT given another subset xS , manifested
     as versatile data completions (S ̸= ∅) or joint/marginal generations (S = ∅). Considering the
     varying lengths of xS /xT , we resort to the attention mechanism to handle that challenge and,
     accordingly, construct pθ (xT |xS ) as a modified ViT, which models the generative process of
     xT conditioned on xS , similar to a (conditional-)GAN generator. For practical applications, xT
     are usually multi-mode; therefore, the training objective need have the multi-mode capability.
     We propose to use the GAN loss as detailed in the following Eqs. (4) and (5), where we again
     leverage a ViT-based GAN discriminator to handle varying-length xS /xT .
     One can of course consider other multi-mode extensions (such as maximum likelihood learning
     via e.g., VAEs, Flows, diffusion models, and EBMs (LeCun, 2022)) and even the simple
     unimodal Gaussian case as in the MAE (He et al., 2021). Specifically, the MAE employs
     pθ (xT |xS ) = N (xT |µθ (xS ), I), where µθ (xS ) is a modified ViT, S is a 25% subset of L, and
     T = L\S. It’s thus clear that the MAE is a special case of our unsupervised big learning.
  2. Let x denotes a sequence of discrete tokens, like text words or vector-quantified image patches
     (Ramesh et al., 2021). Unsupervised big learning predicts the target/masked tokens xT given
     the source ones xS for many/all (S, T) pairs. To model the correlations among the target tokens
     xT , we propose to construct the universal pθ (xT |xS ) as a conditional language model, which
     autoregressively generates xT (w.r.t. the order specified by T) conditioned on the bidirectionally
     extracted xS -features. Therefore, thanks to the random ordering in T, unsupervised big learning
     will deliver versatile generation/completion w.r.t. any predicting order4 after training.
     The unsupervised big learning is closely related to the permutation language modeling (PLM)
     proposed in the XLNet (Yang et al., 2019), except that PLM only considers the conditional
     modeling with S ∪ T = L and a fixed 85%/15% split for S/T; it’s therefore clear that the XLNet
     implicitly implements (a special case of) unsupervised big learning. Similarly, the masked
     language modeling of the BERT can be recovered by further specifying conditional independent
     assumption among xT tokens. With S = ∅ and the only forward autoregressive order for T,
     unsupervised big learning readily reduces to the causal language modeling of GPTs.
Take the former continuous settings for an example. For simplicity, we illustrate with the standard
GAN loss (Goodfellow et al., 2014). Given a universal model pθ (xT |xS ) that models the generative
processes of xT given xS for all (S, T) pairs, one can
  1. match any model distribution pθ (xT |xS )q(xS ) to the corresponding underlying (subset) data
     distribution q(xS∪T ) with
               min max Eq(xS∪T ) log σ[fϕ (x; S, T)] + Epθ (xT |xS )q(xS ) log σ[−fϕ (x; S, T)], (4)
                 θ    ϕ
                                                                           T |xS )
     where the optimal fϕ∗ (x; S, T) = log pθ (xq(x  S∪T )
                                                  T |xS )q(xS )
                                                                = log pq(x
                                                                       θ (xT |xS )
                                                                                   . To handle the varying
     lengths of S/T, fϕ (x; S, T) is also constructed as a modified ViT; see Appendix C for details.
  2. enable “communications” among any two model distributions with S1 ∪ T1 = S2 ∪ T2 via
                            Epθ (xT1 |xS1 )q(xS1 ) log σ[fϕ (x; S2 , T2 ) − fϕ (x; S1 , T1 )]
                          (
                min max                                                                           (5)
                 θ     ϕ     + Epθ (xT2 |xS2 )q(xS2 ) log σ[fϕ (x; S1 , T1 ) − fϕ (x; S2 , T2 )],
     where the “communication” discriminator can be implicitly constructed with the same neural
     network fϕ (x; S, T) from Eq. (4). Proofs are given in Appendix B.
Note (S, T) can be flexibly sampled from all possible pairs (or a predefined subset) according to
the actual situations of the problem of interest. How to “optimally” specify the pretraining settings
for (S, T) is beyond the scope of this paper. Here, we focus on demonstrating the feasibility of
(unsupervised) big learning, i.e., one can train a universal foundation model to yield many/all
joint/conditional/marginal data capabilities, informally pθ∗ (xT |xS ) = q(xT |xS ) for all (S, T) pairs.
  4
    The previous continuous example need not consider the predicting order, thanks to its (conditionally) joint
modeling and generation of xT via GANs.


                                                      5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


3.2      D ISCUSSIONS ON UNSUPERVISED BIG LEARNING

The following discussions are readily extended to our big learning presented in Section 3.3.
Can we share one universal foundation model pθ (xT |xS ) among all (S, T) pairs? Yes, and
it’s what we should do. It’s clear that all conditional/marginal data distributions q(xT |xS ) can be
derived from the joint one q(x), meaning that their perfect modelings should share the same set
of parameters. Being consistent with that fact, (unsupervised) big learning employs the universal
pθ (xT |xS ), ∀(S, T) with shared parameters θ to simultaneously model all joint/conditional/marginal
data distributions. The great successes from existing foundation models (like BERT, XLNet, MAE,
etc.) have extensively verified the effectiveness of that universal modeling of (unsupervised) big
learning, under certain special settings with S ∪ T = L, fixed S/T ratio, but various (S, T) pairs.
On the model capacity of pθ (xT |xS ). To collect many/all data capabilities within one universal
foundation model pθ (xT |xS ) brings tremendous challenges to its model capacity. Fortunately, Trans-
formers/ViTs are well-known to be data/information hungry, along with their modeling flexibility and
parallel-computing amenability, making them well suited to model pθ (xT |xS ). Moreover, huge Trans-
formers are emerging, e.g., the BaGuaLu with 174 trillion parameters (Ma et al., 2022). Therefore,
the model capacity is likely not an issue for (unsupervised) big learning (see the experiments).
Generalization to diverse domains. Considering practical situations, to directly model within the
observed domain, i.e., pθ (xT |xS ), may not be a good choice (He et al., 2021; Wei et al., 2021). We
reveal that, with trustworthy domain knowledge, one may alternatively do (unsupervised) big learning
in diverse transformed domains, e.g., via (i) pθ (x̂T |x̂S ) with x̂ = g(x) or (ii) pθ (h(xT )|k(xS )) as
exampled in Fig. 1b, where g(·), h(·), and k(·) are domain-knowledge-inspired functions.
On the generalization of model parameters and latent features. As aforementioned, exiting
big/foundation models, showing extraordinary robustness, adaptability, and generalization capabilities,
are implicitly doing (unsupervised) big learning. Accordingly, we try to explain from the big learning
perspective why they have such amazing characteristics.

   • Firstly, by referring to Eq. (3) and Fig. 1, both the model parameters and latent features of
     pθ (xT |xS ) are shared among many/all data tasks,5 manifested as a massive multi-task learning
     that exhaustively exploits the data information with statistical sharing power. Because all data
     tasks share a consistent goal to model (from diverse perspectives) the one underlying data
     distribution q(x), it’s expected that (unsupervised) big learning would encourage the parameters
     θ (and also the latent features) to summarize the intrinsic data information or compositional data
     meta-knowledge (Wu et al., 2021; Lu et al., 2021), manifested as those amazing characteristics.
   • Secondly, thanks to its comprehensive training nature, (unsupervised) big learning comes
     with extraordinary data and training-task flexibilities, enabling training with massive com-
     plete/incomplete data on many/all data tasks across potentially diverse domains. That signif-
     icantly expanded training experiences (associated with both data and tasks) are expected to
     effectively reduce the training-test (or pretraining-finetuning) gap and therefore improves the
     robustness/generalization of big-learned foundation models.

On the weighting of massive data tasks. We highlight that (unsupervised) big learning comes
with flexible weighting of its massive training tasks, e.g., via predefined sampling strategy for (S, T).
How to “optimally” weight those tasks is challenging and is likely downstream-task dependent;
we will not cover it here expect presenting several thoughts. (i) Most real-world datasets naturally
consist of both complete and incomplete samples, meaning the corresponding (S, T) pairs are already
given; therefore, one may prefer to “let the data speak for themselves.” (ii) One can of course
employ a specific sampling strategy for (S, T), e.g., according to the available domain knowledge.
It’s worth emphasizing that, despite different weighting strategies, the optimum is the same, i.e., θ
informationally identical to the underlying data distribution q(x).

3.3      B IG LEARNING IN GENERAL SETTINGS

Based on unsupervised big learning with X = (x) containing only feature x ∈ RL×D , we next
present its generalized version, i.e., big learning, where X = (y, x) contains both feature x and
   5
       The diversity of the training objectives of such trustworthy data tasks is further enlarged in Section 3.3.


                                                           6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                   (a) Big Learning                         (b) BERT (Stickland & Murray, 2019)

Figure 2: Big learning (a) and its special case of BERT (b). Similar to the mask token [M] for x (see Fig. 1b),
we employ another mask token [My ] for y, which works identically to the classification token [CLS] in BERT
settings (Stickland & Murray, 2019) and the start-of-sentence token in GPT settings (Brown et al., 2020). Often
inserting [M]/[My ] tokens later in a middle layer improves performance (He et al., 2021; Touvron et al., 2021).

                      y    y
supervision y ∈ RL ×D . The non-overlapping source/target index subsets S/T are correspondingly
expanded as S′ = [Sy , S] and T′ = [Ty , T], respectively, where L′ = [Ly , L], S′ ⊂ L′ , T′ ⊆ L′ , and
T′ ̸= ∅.
Thanks to the modeling flexibility of unsupervised big learning, to generalize it into big learning
is straight-forward, where the main idea is to model pθ (X T′ |X S′ ) −→ q(X T′ |X S′ ) for many/all
(S′ , T′ ) pairs, as demonstrated in Fig. 2a. q(X) ≜ q(y, x) is the underlying data distribution.
Model architecture and training objective. For situations where X = (y, x) has the same data
type (e.g., both y and x denote a sequence of continuous features), big learning works basically the
same as its unsupervised variant. We next elaborate on the situations with multimodality (Gupta
et al., 2021; Li et al., 2021; Ramesh et al., 2021; 2022; Baevski et al., 2022), where e.g., y denotes a
discrete token sequence but x is a continuous feature sequence. We reveal two solutions.
  1. To transform one data type into the other for alignment. For example, one can vector-
     quantize the continuous x into a sequence of discrete tokens, similar to the DALL-E (Ramesh
     et al., 2021), followed by employing similar techniques introduced in Section 3.1.
  2. To recursively reuse pθ (X T′ |X S′ ) to model the correlation between x and y. The key idea
     is to further exploit the flexibility of big learning. Specifically, we can unfold the learning via
             pθ (X T′ |X S′ ) = pθ (y Ty |xT , X S′ )pθ (xT |X S′ ) = pθ (X Ty |X T∪S′ )pθ (X T |X S′ ), (6)
     where X T′ = (y Ty , xT ) and X Ty /X T has one unique data type after unfolding. Big learning
     first forward-propagates twice through the model, with the output xT of the first propagation
     inserted to the input of the second one; after calculating the objective and thanks to the continuity
     of xT , the gradients can be back-propagated to parameter θ twice for model updating.
BERT pretraining as a special case of big learning. Section 3.1 revealed that (unsupervised) big
learning contains the masked language modeling of the BERT pretraining as a special case. We next
reveal that big learning also covers the next sentence prediction (NSP) task (Stickland & Murray,
2019), where x indicates two sentences and label y ∈ {0, 1} indicates whether they are next to each
other. It’s readily verified that NSP is recovered with S′ = [∅, L] and T′ = [{1}, ∅] (refer to the 1st
column of Table 2). To summarize, big learning contains the BERT pretraining as a special case.
Big learning serves as a universal machine learning paradigm. Benefiting from its modeling
flexibility, big learning has most machine learning paradigms as special cases, as illustrated in Table 2.
That universality of big learning, combined with its data/task flexibilities, enable flexible combinations
and communications among different learning paradigms, e.g., via the shared parameters θ or training
objectives like Eq. (5). Therefore, the proposed big learning might potentially facilitate semantically
diverse multi-task self-learning on the Internet, producing brain-scale big/foundation models with
reinforced performance, robustness, and generalization.
Big learning versus self-supervised contrastive learning. Contrastive learning focuses on exploiting
domain prior knowledge to learn generally applicable data representations for downstream tasks (He


                                                       7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023



Table 2: Example special cases of big learning pθ (X T′ |X S′ ) with S′ = [Sy , S] and T′ = [Ty , T]. Without loss
of generality, we assume y ∈ {1, · · · , C}1×1 is the label paired with x, where Ly = {1}. We focus on the core
idea for demonstration and highlight that the model/objective implementations can be task-specific.

    Supervised Learning   Self-supervised Learning      Unconditioned Generation      Conditioned Generation
          pθ (y|x)               pθ (xT |xS )                    pθ (x)                      pθ (x|y)
       S′ = [∅, L]               S′ = [∅, S]                  S′ = [∅, ∅]                 S′ = [{1}, ∅]
       T′ = [{1}, ∅]             T′ = [∅, T]                  T′ = [∅, L]                 T′ = [∅, L]


et al., 2020; Chen et al., 2020; Grill et al., 2020; Chen & He, 2021). From the perspective of prior
exploitation, contrastive learning is orthogonal to our big learning that is mostly data-driven. One can
of course consider leveraging the flexibility of big learning to combine it with contrastive learning for
incorporating trustworthy domain priors; please refer to Appendix D for further discussions.
On the i.i.d. assumption. Due to the space constraint, please refer to Appendix E for the details.


4     E XPERIMENTS

The data/task flexibilities of big learning significantly expand its scope of application, which, however,
also bring tremendous challenges to the comprehensive evaluations of its robustness, adaptability,
and generalization capabilities. We emphasize that the great successes of existing big/foundation
models have provided concrete evidences that support the presented big learning.
In what follows, we concentrate on demonstrating the main idea that (unsupervised) big learning
is indeed capable of delivering many/all joint/conditional/marginal data capabilities, thanks to its
extraordinary data/task flexibilities and exhaustive exploitation of data information. We conduct
unsupervised big learning with all joint/conditional/marginal data tasks (via (S, T)-sampling) on
image datasets of MNIST and CelebA, based on Eqs. (4) and (5) (details are given in Appendix F).
After training, we (i) diversely test the data completion capabilities of the big-learned model and (ii)
ferociously challenge its generalization capability with abused anomalous out-of-domain tasks.

4.1     V ERSATILE DATA COMPLETION CAPABILITIES WITH ADAPTIVE GENERATION DIVERSITY

We first test the big-learned data generation/completion capabilities with different ratios rS of S in L.
For a specific rS , we either randomly sample rS L image patches or choose the first rS -portion to form
the source xS , which is then input to the model pθ (xT |xS ) for image completion. Fig. 3 shows the cor-
responding results. It’s clear that the big-learned model masters many/all joint/conditional/marginal
data capabilities simultaneously. Besides, big learning also learns from the data an adaptive gen-
eration diversity conditioned on xS . Specifically, with increasing/decreasing rS (i.e., more/less
source information), big learning delivers increasingly deterministic/diverse generations controlled
by xS /random-noise, following our intuition (see Appendix H for more results).
We then test the big-learned capabilities with respect to various S and noise settings, with the results
summarized in Fig. 4. On the one hand, given an image x and a random noise z, big learning clearly
delivers for various Ss diverse realistic generations on both MNIST (see the variations in class/stroke-


Figure 3: Versatile data generation/completion capabilities from big learning. The first row with light-blue boxes
shows different Ss, with an increasing S-ratio from left to right. The rightmost column gives the real image.

                                                        8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Figure 4: Versatile data completion capabilities from big learning w.r.t. various S (left) and noise z (right). Ss
are shown in upper-right light-blue boxes, while the red boxes show x (left) and xS (right), respectively.

thickness/shape/angle) and CelebA (see the varying identity/hair-style/make-up/expression). On the
other hand, given a specific xS with limited information, the big-learned model, when input different
noises z i , also generates realistic images with diversity.
The experimental results in Figs. 3 and 4 demonstrate that, by comprehensively exploiting the
available information inherent in large-scale complete/incomplete data, big learning is capable of
delivering versatile data generation/completion capabilities with learned adaptive generation diversity.

4.2   G ENERALIZATION ON ABUSED ANOMALOUS OUT- OF - DOMAIN COMPLETION

We design abused completion tasks to ferociously challenge the generalization of our big learning.
Specifically, we intentionally design xS with (i) abused interventions to source patches (e.g., random
relocation and duplication, as shown in Fig. 5(a)); (ii) mixed-up patches from different data samples
(see Fig. 5(b)); and (iii) unseen out-of-domain image patches, as shown in Figs. 5(c)-(d).


Figure 5: Abused anomalous completion for demonstrating the generalization of big learning. (a) xS constructed
with random center patches replaced in the upper-left corner (top) and duplicated and replaced in the center
(bottom). A model big-learned on CelebA is used in (b)-(d). (b) xS combining patches from different images.
Out-of-domain xS from Flowers (Nilsback & Zisserman, 2008) (c) and MetFaces (Karras et al., 2020) (d).

It’s clear that big learning manages to handle these abused xS with reasonable image completion;
e.g., see the realistic characters with overall consistent style and smooth strokes in Fig. 5(a), the
harmoniously completed faces even with mismatched face frame and hair color in Fig. 5(b), and
the fluent out-of-domain completion with smooth junctions in Figs. 5(c)-(d). These surprising
results from abused anomalous out-of-domain completions (as well as the great successes of existing
foundation models) justify the remarkable generalization capability of the presented big learning.

5     C ONCLUSIONS
We propose the big learning that exhaustively exploits the available data information during training
and potentially delivers all joint/conditional/marginal data capabilities after training. We reveal that
big learning (i) comes with marvelous training flexibilities for complete/incomplete data and for
customizing training tasks, (ii) is what existing foundation models are implicitly doing, and (iii)
unifies conventional machine learning paradigms and enables their flexible cooperations. Though
inspiring, big learning also shares the constrains of foundation models that are discussed in detail in
Bommasani et al. (2021); Yuan et al. (2022); e.g., to comprehensively verify its effectiveness (for
general downstream tasks) is extremely challenging and time-consuming. Therefore, we believe that
big learning needs our community, and vice versa.


                                                        9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


R EFERENCES
Armen Aghajanyan, Anchit Gupta, Akshat Shrivastava, Xilun Chen, Luke Zettlemoyer, and Sonal Gupta.
  Muppet: Massive multi-task representations with pre-finetuning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2101.11038, 2021.

Alexei Baevski, Wei-Ning Hsu, Qiantong Xu, Arun Babu, Jiatao Gu, and Michael Auli. Data2vec: A general
  framework for self-supervised learning in speech, vision and language. arXiv preprint arXiv:2202.03555,
  2022.

John A Bargh and Ezequiel Morsella. The unconscious mind. Perspectives on psychological science, 3(1):
  73–79, 2008.

Rishi Bommasani, Drew A Hudson, Ehsan Adeli, Russ Altman, Simran Arora, Sydney von Arx, Michael S
  Bernstein, Jeannette Bohg, Antoine Bosselut, Emma Brunskill, et al. On the opportunities and risks of
  foundation models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2108.07258, 2021.

A. Brock, J. Donahue, and K. Simonyan. Large scale GAN training for high fidelity natural image synthesis. In
   ICLR, 2019. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=B1xsqj09Fm.

Tom Brown, Benjamin Mann, Nick Ryder, Melanie Subbiah, Jared D Kaplan, Prafulla Dhariwal, Arvind
  Neelakantan, Pranav Shyam, Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, et al. Language models are few-shot learners.
  Advances in neural information processing systems, 33:1877–1901, 2020.

Mark Chen, Jerry Tworek, Heewoo Jun, Qiming Yuan, Henrique Ponde de Oliveira Pinto, Jared Kaplan, Harri
 Edwards, Yuri Burda, Nicholas Joseph, Greg Brockman, et al. Evaluating large language models trained on
 code. arXiv preprint arXiv:2107.03374, 2021a.

Ting Chen, Simon Kornblith, Mohammad Norouzi, and Geoffrey Hinton. A simple framework for contrastive
   learning of visual representations. In International conference on machine learning, pp. 1597–1607. PMLR,
   2020.

Xinlei Chen and Kaiming He. Exploring simple siamese representation learning. In Proceedings of the
  IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 15750–15758, 2021.

Xinlei Chen, Saining Xie, and Kaiming He. An empirical study of training self-supervised vision transformers.
  In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision, pp. 9640–9649, 2021b.

B. Dai and D. Wipf. Diagnosing and enhancing VAE models. In ICLR, 2019. URL https://openreview.
   net/forum?id=B1e0X3C9tQ.

J. Devlin, M. Chang, K. Lee, and K. Toutanova. BERT: Pre-training of deep bidirectional transformers for
   language understanding. arXiv preprint arXiv:1810.04805, 2018.

Laurent Dinh, David Krueger, and Yoshua Bengio. Nice: Non-linear independent components estimation. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:1410.8516, 2014.

Alexey Dosovitskiy, Lucas Beyer, Alexander Kolesnikov, Dirk Weissenborn, Xiaohua Zhai, Thomas Unterthiner,
  Mostafa Dehghani, Matthias Minderer, Georg Heigold, Sylvain Gelly, et al. An image is worth 16x16 words:
  Transformers for image recognition at scale. arXiv preprint arXiv:2010.11929, 2020.

I. Goodfellow, J. Pouget-Abadie, M. Mirza, B. Xu, D. Warde-Farley, S. Ozair, A. Courville, and Y. Bengio.
   Generative adversarial nets. In NIPS, pp. 2672–2680, 2014.

Jean-Bastien Grill, Florian Strub, Florent Altché, Corentin Tallec, Pierre Richemond, Elena Buchatskaya, Carl
   Doersch, Bernardo Avila Pires, Zhaohan Guo, Mohammad Gheshlaghi Azar, et al. Bootstrap your own
   latent-a new approach to self-supervised learning. Advances in neural information processing systems, 33:
   21271–21284, 2020.

Tanmay Gupta, Amita Kamath, Aniruddha Kembhavi, and Derek Hoiem. Towards general purpose vision
  systems. arXiv preprint arXiv:2104.00743, 2021.

Raia Hadsell, Sumit Chopra, and Yann LeCun. Dimensionality reduction by learning an invariant mapping. In
  2006 IEEE Computer Society Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR’06), volume 2,
  pp. 1735–1742. IEEE, 2006.

Kaiming He, Haoqi Fan, Yuxin Wu, Saining Xie, and Ross Girshick. Momentum contrast for unsupervised
  visual representation learning. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern
  recognition, pp. 9729–9738, 2020.


                                                     10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Kaiming He, Xinlei Chen, Saining Xie, Yanghao Li, Piotr Dollár, and Ross Girshick. Masked autoencoders are
  scalable vision learners. arXiv preprint arXiv:2111.06377, 2021.

Jonathan Ho, Ajay Jain, and Pieter Abbeel. Denoising diffusion probabilistic models. Advances in Neural
  Information Processing Systems, 33:6840–6851, 2020.

Yifan Jiang, Shiyu Chang, and Zhangyang Wang. Transgan: Two pure transformers can make one strong gan,
  and that can scale up. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 34, 2021.

T. Karras, S. Laine, and T. Aila. A style-based generator architecture for generative adversarial networks. In
   CVPR, June 2019a.

T. Karras, S. Laine, M. Aittala, J. Hellsten, J. Lehtinen, and T. Aila. Analyzing and improving the image quality
   of StyleGAN. arXiv preprint arXiv:1912.04958, 2019b.

Tero Karras, Miika Aittala, Janne Hellsten, Samuli Laine, Jaakko Lehtinen, and Timo Aila. Training generative
  adversarial networks with limited data. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 33:12104–12114,
  2020.

Tero Karras, Miika Aittala, Samuli Laine, Erik Härkönen, Janne Hellsten, Jaakko Lehtinen, and Timo Aila.
  Alias-free generative adversarial networks. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 34, 2021.

Diederik P Kingma and Max Welling. Auto-encoding variational bayes. arXiv preprint arXiv:1312.6114, 2013.

Durk P Kingma and Prafulla Dhariwal. Glow: Generative flow with invertible 1x1 convolutions. Advances in
  neural information processing systems, 31, 2018.

Zhenzhong Lan, Mingda Chen, Sebastian Goodman, Kevin Gimpel, Piyush Sharma, and Radu Soricut. Albert:
  A lite bert for self-supervised learning of language representations. arXiv preprint arXiv:1909.11942, 2019.

Yann LeCun. A path towards autonomous machine intelligence version 0.9. 2, 2022-06-27. 2022.

Kwonjoon Lee, Huiwen Chang, Lu Jiang, Han Zhang, Zhuowen Tu, and Ce Liu. Vitgan: Training gans with
 vision transformers. arXiv preprint arXiv:2107.04589, 2021.

Qing Li, Boqing Gong, Yin Cui, Dan Kondratyuk, Xianzhi Du, Ming-Hsuan Yang, and Matthew Brown. Towards
  a unified foundation model: Jointly pre-training transformers on unpaired images and text. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2112.07074, 2021.

Ilya Loshchilov and Frank Hutter. Decoupled weight decay regularization. arXiv preprint arXiv:1711.05101,
   2017.

Kevin Lu, Aditya Grover, Pieter Abbeel, and Igor Mordatch. Pretrained transformers as universal computation
  engines. arXiv preprint arXiv:2103.05247, 2021.

Casimir JH Ludwig, J Rhys Davies, and Miguel P Eckstein. Foveal analysis and peripheral selection during
  active visual sampling. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 111(2):E291–E299, 2014.

Zixuan Ma, Jiaao He, Jiezhong Qiu, Huanqi Cao, Yuanwei Wang, Zhenbo Sun, Liyan Zheng, Haojie Wang,
  Shizhi Tang, Tianyu Zheng, et al. BaGuaLu: targeting brain scale pretrained models with over 37 million cores.
  In Proceedings of the 27th ACM SIGPLAN Symposium on Principles and Practice of Parallel Programming,
  pp. 192–204, 2022.

L. Mescheder, A. Geiger, and S. Nowozin. Which training methods for GANs do actually converge? In ICML,
   pp. 3478–3487, 2018.

Anabela Mesquita. Human behavior, psychology, and social interaction in the digital era. IGI Global, 2015.

Muhammad Muzammal Naseer, Kanchana Ranasinghe, Salman H Khan, Munawar Hayat, Fahad Shahbaz Khan,
 and Ming-Hsuan Yang. Intriguing properties of vision transformers. Advances in Neural Information
 Processing Systems, 34:23296–23308, 2021.

M. Nilsback and A. Zisserman. Automated flower classification over a large number of classes. In ICCV,
  Graphics & Image Processing, pp. 722–729. IEEE, 2008.

A. Radford, J. Wu, R. Child, D. Luan, D. Amodei, and I. Sutskever. Language models are unsupervised multitask
   learners. OpenAI Blog, 1(8):9, 2019.


                                                      11
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Aditya Ramesh, Mikhail Pavlov, Gabriel Goh, Scott Gray, Chelsea Voss, Alec Radford, Mark Chen, and Ilya
  Sutskever. Zero-shot text-to-image generation. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp.
  8821–8831. PMLR, 2021.
Aditya Ramesh, Prafulla Dhariwal, Alex Nichol, Casey Chu, and Mark Chen. Hierarchical text-conditional
  image generation with clip latents. arXiv preprint arXiv:2204.06125, 2022.

Toni P Saarela and Michael S Landy. Integration trumps selection in object recognition. Current Biology, 25(7):
  920–927, 2015.

Yang Song, Jascha Sohl-Dickstein, Diederik P Kingma, Abhishek Kumar, Stefano Ermon, and Ben Poole.
  Score-based generative modeling through stochastic differential equations. arXiv preprint arXiv:2011.13456,
  2020.
A. Stickland and I. Murray. BERT and PALs: Projected attention layers for efficient adaptation in multi-task
  learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:1902.02671, 2019.

Alex Tamkin, Vincent Liu, Rongfei Lu, Daniel Fein, Colin Schultz, and Noah Goodman. DABS: A domain-
  agnostic benchmark for self-supervised learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2111.12062, 2021.

Hugo Touvron, Matthieu Cord, Alexandre Sablayrolles, Gabriel Synnaeve, and Hervé Jégou. Going deeper
  with image transformers. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision, pp.
  32–42, 2021.

A. Vaswani, N. Shazeer, N. Parmar, J. Uszkoreit, L. Jones, A. Gomez, Ł. Kaiser, and I. Polosukhin. Attention is
   all you need. In NeurIPS, pp. 5998–6008, 2017.
A. Wang, A. Singh, J. Michael, F. Hill, O. Levy, and S. Bowman. Glue: A multi-task benchmark and analysis
   platform for natural language understanding. In ICLR, 2018.

Chen Wei, Haoqi Fan, Saining Xie, Chao-Yuan Wu, Alan Yuille, and Christoph Feichtenhofer. Masked feature
  prediction for self-supervised visual pre-training. arXiv preprint arXiv:2112.09133, 2021.

Thomas Wolf, Lysandre Debut, Victor Sanh, Julien Chaumond, Clement Delangue, Anthony Moi, Pierric Cistac,
  Tim Rault, Rémi Louf, Morgan Funtowicz, Joe Davison, Sam Shleifer, Patrick von Platen, Clara Ma, Yacine
  Jernite, Julien Plu, Canwen Xu, Teven Le Scao, Sylvain Gugger, Mariama Drame, Quentin Lhoest, and
  Alexander M. Rush. Transformers: State-of-the-art natural language processing. In Proceedings of the 2020
  Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing: System Demonstrations, pp. 38–45,
  Online, October 2020. Association for Computational Linguistics. URL https://www.aclweb.org/
  anthology/2020.emnlp-demos.6.

Yuhuai Wu, Markus N Rabe, Wenda Li, Jimmy Ba, Roger B Grosse, and Christian Szegedy. Lime: Learning
  inductive bias for primitives of mathematical reasoning. In International Conference on Machine Learning,
  pp. 11251–11262. PMLR, 2021.

Z. Yang, Z. Dai, Y. Yang, J. Carbonell, R. Salakhutdinov, and Q. Le. XLNet: Generalized autoregressive
   pretraining for language understanding. In NeurIPS, pp. 5753–5763, 2019.
Sha Yuan, Hanyu Zhao, Shuai Zhao, Jiahong Leng, Yangxiao Liang, Xiaozhi Wang, Jifan Yu, Xin Lv, Zhou
  Shao, Jiaao He, et al. A roadmap for big model. arXiv preprint arXiv:2203.14101, 2022.

Bowen Zhang, Shuyang Gu, Bo Zhang, Jianmin Bao, Dong Chen, Fang Wen, Yong Wang, and Baining Guo.
  Styleswin: Transformer-based gan for high-resolution image generation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2112.10762,
  2021.

Long Zhao, Zizhao Zhang, Ting Chen, Dimitris Metaxas, and Han Zhang. Improved transformer for high-
  resolution gans. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 34, 2021.


                                                     12
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                   Appendix of
             Big Learning: A Universal Machine Learning Paradigm?

                                           Anonymous Authors



A    O N NAIVE MODELING OF ALL JOINT / CONDITIONAL / MARGINAL DATA
     DISTRIBUTIONS

We present with the unsupervised settings, where x ∈ RL×D with length L and dimension D (like L
flattened patches of an image or L words with D = 1). It’s straightforward to generalize the following
analyses to the general settings with a data sample X = (y, x) contains an additional supervision
         y   y
y ∈ RL ×D . Considering D > 1 and D = 1 for image patches and text words, respectively, we
concentrate on analyzing the modeling of all joint/conditional/marginal data distributions w.r.t. the
length L below.
                                                                     PL−1         PL−i k
As mentioned in the main manuscript, one need construct Nall = i=0 CLi ( k=1 CL−i              ) models to
naively model all joint/conditional/marginal data distributions, to collect all joint/conditional/marginal
data capabilities. CLi denotes the number of i-combinations from a set with L elements.
To elaborate on that, consider a simple 3-length 1-dimensional problem with x = [x1 , x2 , x3 ]T ,
where L = 3, D = 1, xi ∈ R, and the length index set L = {1, 2, 3}.

       • The goal of the joint modeling is to deliver pθ (x) −→ q(x) with one model pθ (x).
       • By contrast, to naively model all joint/conditional/marginal data distributions, one need
         construct 19 models for such a simple 3-length problem, i.e.,
           pθ1 (x1 ), pθ2 (x2 ), pθ3 (x3 ), pθ4 (x1 , x2 ), pθ5 (x2 , x3 ), pθ6 (x1 , x3 ), pθ7 (x1 , x2 , x3 ),
           pθ8 (x2 |x1 ), pθ9 (x3 |x1 ), pθ10 (x2 , x3 |x1 ),
           pθ11 (x1 |x2 ), pθ12 (x3 |x2 ), pθ13 (x1 , x3 |x2 ),                                                  (7)
           pθ14 (x1 |x3 ), pθ15 (x2 |x3 ), pθ16 (x1 , x2 |x3 ),
           pθ17 (x1 |x2 , x3 ), pθ18 (x2 |x1 , x3 ), pθ19 (x3 |x1 , x2 ).

Based on the above 3-length problem, one can readily summarize the following two steps in calculat-
ing the number of models in naively modeling all joint/conditional/marginal data distributions, i.e.,
q(xT |xS ), ∀S ⊂ L, T ⊆ L, T ̸= ∅.

      1. Sample S. The source index set S may contain {0, · · · , L − 1} indexes/locations, where S
         containing 0 index corresponds to joint/marginal generations and S containing ≥ 1 indexes
         corresponds to conditional generations/completions. For a special case with i indexes in S
         with i ∈ [0, L − 1], one has CLi ways to specify that source index set S.
      2. Sample T conditioned on S. Given a S consisting of i indexes, the target index set T could
         contain {1, · · · , L − i} indexes/locations outside S. For a special case of T containing k
                                                   k
         indexes where k ∈ [1, L − i], one has CL−i    ways to specify the target T.

Therefore, to naively model all joint/conditional/marginal data distributions, one need construct
      PL−1        PL−i k
Nall = i=0 CLi ( k=1 CL−i    ) models, which, however, is prohibitive in practice.
Note with ideal modeling of q(xT |xS ), the orders in S/T should not matter. However, that may not
hold true considering practical constraints, e.g., where existing joint modeling techniques fail to
model the multi-mode characteristics of xT . Besides, in the NLP application of language modeling,
one may be interested in versatile (conditional) generation ordering (as defined in T), mimicking
the permutation language modeling (Yang et al., 2019). In that case, to naively modeling all
                                                                      ′
                                                                            PL−1      PL−i
joint/conditional/marginal data distributions, one need construct Nall   = i=0 CLi ( k=1 AkL−i )
models to take into consideration the order of T, where the order of S is ignored and AkL−i denotes
the number of the ordered arrangements of k elements from a set with L − 1 elements. Similarly, one
                  ′′
                      PL−1        PL−i
need construct Nall  = i=0 AiL ( k=1 AkL−i ) models to model the orders in both S and T.


                                                       13
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                       (a) Case 1                                        (b) Case 2

                  Figure 6: Demonstration of unsupervised big learning based on GANs.


B     D ERIVATIONS OF THE GAN EXAMPLE ASSOCIATED WITH E QS . (4) AND (5)

Here we present the detailed derivations/proofs for the GAN example associated with Eqs. (4) and (5)
of the main manuscript. For better understanding, we begin with a simplified case where T = L\S,
followed by generalizing the results to the general situations with T ⊆ L\S.

B.1   T = L\S

To leverage the GAN training framework (Goodfellow et al., 2014), one needs the sampling capabili-
ties from the distributions of interest. With T = L\S, here we are interested in the joint distributions
with accessible sampling capabilities, including
                                     q(x)
                                                                                                       (8)
                                 pθ (x; S) = pθ (xL\S |xS )q(xS ) ∀S.
Note one can of course exploit the flexibility of big learning to define other joint distributions with
sampling capabilities, such as an recursively defined distribution
                               pθ (x; S1 , S2 ) = pθ (xL\S2 |xS2 )pθ (xS2 ),                           (9)
                  R
where pθ (xS2 ) = pθ (xL\S1 |xS1 )q(xS1 )dxL\S2 . For simplicity, we focus on the simplified settings
in Eq. (8) and leave the interesting but complicated recursive case for future research.
Given the underlying data distribution q(x) and “model” distributions pθ (x; S) in Eq. (8),

      1. one can match any pθ (x; S) to q(x) adversarially with a GAN. Take the standard GAN
         (Goodfellow et al., 2014) for an example, the objective is
                 min max Eq(x) log σ(fϕ (x; S)) + Epθ (xL\S |xS )q(xS ) log(1 − σ(fϕ (x; S))),        (10)
                   θ    ϕ

                                                                                 q(x   |x )
         where the optimal fϕ∗ (x; S) = log pθ (xL\Sq(x)                               S
                                                          |xS )q(xS ) = log pθ (xL\S |xS ) . Ideally, opti-
                                                                                 L\S


         mizing the above objective is identical to minimizing the Jensen-Shannon divergence
         JS[q(x)||pθ (x; S)], as illustrated with the blue solid arrows in Fig. 6.
      2. one can also conduct matching among any two model distributions (e.g., pθ (x; S1 ) =
         pθ (xL\S1 |xS1 )q(xS1 ) and pθ (x; S2 ) = pθ (xL\S2 |xS2 )q(xS2 )) to enable communica-
         tions/cooperations among them, via optimizing
                                    Epθ (xL\S1 |xS1 )q(xS1 ) log σ(fϕ′ (x; S1 , S2 ))
                                  (
                         min max                                                             (11)
                          θ    ϕ    + Epθ (xL\S2 |xS2 )q(xS2 ) log(1 − σ(fϕ′ (x; S1 , S2 )))
                                                      pθ (x   1 |x 1 )q(x 1 )
         where the optimal fϕ′ ∗ (x; S1 , S2 ) = log pθ (xL\S2 |xS2 )q(xS2 ) . The orange dotted arrows in
                                                          L\S    S      S
         Fig. 6 demonstrate such idea.


                                                    14
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


At first sight of Eqs. (10) and (11), it seems one should at least construct two discriminators, with
fϕ (x; S) and fϕ′ (x; S1 , S2 ) respectively. However, we notice that
                                                  q(x)                          q(x)
              fϕ′ ∗ (x; S1 , S2 ) = log                           − log
                                          pθ (xL\S2 |xS2 )q(xS2 )       pθ (xL\S1 |xS1 )q(xS1 )
                                  = fϕ∗ (x; S2 ) − fϕ∗ (x; S1 ).
Accordingly, we propose to employ further simplification that builds fϕ′ (x; S1 , S2 ) on top of fϕ (x; S),
i.e., we reformulate Eq. (11) as
                              Epθ (xL\S1 |xS1 )q(xS1 ) log σ[fϕ (x; S2 ) − fϕ (x; S1 )]
                           (
                  min max                                                                             (12)
                   θ    ϕ     + Epθ (xL\S2 |xS2 )q(xS2 ) log σ[fϕ (x; S1 ) − fϕ (x; S2 )].

Till now, we present the derivations associated with T = L\S, i.e., matching in the joint space. In
what follows, we generalize to the settings with T ⊆ L\S, to deliver (unsupervised) big learning in
all joint/conditional/marginal spaces.

B.2   T ⊆ L\S

Similar to the previous section, we also consider simplified situations with no recursiveness, that is,
we do not consider a model distribution pθ (xT |xS )pθ (xS ), even though such recursive flexibility of
big learning is quite interesting. We leave that as future research.
Accordingly, the considered joint/conditional/marginal distributions with sampling capabilities are
                                    q(xS∪T )
                                                                                                            (13)
                                   pθ (xS∪T ) = pθ (xT |xS )q(xS )                 ∀S, T
where S ∪ T need not be L. Note S ∪ T ⊂ L means the corresponding q(xS∪T ) is a marginal data
distribution, whose data samples are readily accessible from those of q(x).
Similar to the previous section,

       • one can match any model distribution pθ (xS∪T ) to the underlying joint/marginal data
         distribution q(xS∪T ), via the standard GAN objective
            min max Eq(xS∪T ) log σ(fϕ (x; S, T)) + Epθ (xT |xS )q(xS ) log(1 − σ(fϕ (x; S, T))),           (14)
              θ     ϕ

                                                                  T |xS )
         where fϕ∗ (x; S, T) = log pθ (xq(x S∪T )
                                         T |xS )q(xS )
                                                       = log pq(x
                                                              θ (xT |xS )
                                                                          .
       • one can also conduct matching among any two model distributions, e.g., pθ (xT1 |xS1 )q(xS1 )
         and pθ (xT2 |xS2 )q(xS2 ), as long as S1 ∪ T1 = S2 ∪ T2 , with the corresponding objective
                                Epθ (xT1 |xS1 )q(xS1 ) log σ(fϕ (x; S1 , T1 , S2 , T2 ))
                              (
                    min max                                                                       (15)
                      θ    ϕ     + Epθ (xT2 |xS2 )q(xS2 ) log(1 − σ(fϕ (x; S1 , T1 , S2 , T2 ))),
                                                        p (x       |x   )q(x   )
         where fϕ′ ∗ (x; S1 , T1 , S2 , T2 ) = log pθθ (xT21 |xS21 )q(xS21 ) .
                                                               T    S      S
         For further simplifications, we again resort to
                                                             q(xS2 ∪T2 )                 q(xS1 ∪T1 )
                  fϕ′ ∗ (x; S1 , T1 , S2 , T2 ) = log                         − log
                                                        pθ (xT2 |xS2 )q(xS2 )       pθ (xT1 |xS1 )q(xS1 )
                                               = fϕ∗ (x; S2 , T2 ) − fϕ∗ (x; S1 , T1 )
         and build fϕ′ (x; S1 , T1 , S2 , T2 ) on top of fϕ (x; S, T).
         Accordingly, Eq. (15) is reformulated as
                                 Epθ (xT1 |xS1 )q(xS1 ) log σ[fϕ (x; S2 , T2 ) − fϕ (x; S1 , T1 )]
                               (
                  min max                                                                                   (16)
                    θ     ϕ      + Epθ (xT2 |xS2 )q(xS2 ) log σ[fϕ (x; S1 , T1 ) − fϕ (x; S2 , T2 )].

Accordingly, we conclude the proofs for the GAN example of the main manuscript.


                                                           15
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


C    O N MODEL ARCHITECTURES OF THE GAN EXAMPLE IN E QS . (4) AND (5)
We next focus on discussing the model architectures of the GAN generator and discriminator employed
in Eqs. (14) and (16) (i.e., Eqs. (4) and (5) of the main manuscript).
Recently, the community begins to exploit integrating ViTs into GANs (Jiang et al., 2021; Lee
et al., 2021; Zhao et al., 2021; Zhang et al., 2021). For example, the ViTGAN (Lee et al., 2021),
delivering SOTA generative performance, employs simple modifications to the ViT architecture to
construct the generator and the discriminator, but adopts many techniques to regularize the ViT-based
discriminator for stable training. Motivated by the modeling flexibility of ViTs, we also employ
ViT-based GAN generator and discriminator in the experiments, but similarly, find it challenging to
stabilize GAN training with a ViT-based discriminator. It’s worth highlighting that it’s possible to
design other alternative model architectures for our big learning; we employ what’s presented below
for a demonstration.


                                          (a) GAN Generator


                                        (b) GAN Discriminator

Figure 7: Example implementations of the GAN generator and discriminator employed in Eqs. (14) and (16)
(i.e., Eqs. (4) and (5) of the main manuscript).

Fig. 7 demonstrates the employed GAN generator and discriminator, both of which are constructed
with Transformers/ViTs to exploit their modeling capabilities and flexibilities.


                                                  16
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


       • GAN Generator. Following the MAE (He et al., 2021), we design the GAN generator
         pθ (xT |xS ) with an autoencoder-like architecture, which employs an encoding G-Encoder
         and a decoding G-Decoder, as shown in Fig. 7a. The G-Encoder encodes the source patches
         xS (if any) to their latent codes; then, these codes are combined with the mask tokens [M],
         patch-wise noise embeddings, and new positional encodings to serve as the input of the
         G-Decoder; finally, the G-Decoder transforms its input to generate the target patches xT .
         [M] tokens are inserted later in a middle layer, because doing this often improves per-
         formance and lowers the computational burden (Touvron et al., 2021; He et al., 2021).
         A noise z is mapped with an 8-layer MLP to produce the patch-wise noise embeddings
         {n1 , · · · , nL }. Note we also introduce another toke [Mn ] to indicate no noise embeddings
         are necessary at the corresponding source locations in S.
       • GAN Discriminator. As shown in Fig. 7b, we also modify the Transformer/ViT architecture
         to construct the universal GAN discriminator σ(fϕ (x; S, T)) that applies to all (S, T) cases.
         We employ an additional CLS token mimicking the BERT, whose output indicates whether
         the input patches are realistic or not (more specifically, whether they form a “real” data from
         q(xS∪T ) or a fake one from pθ (xT |xS )q(xS ), by referring to Eq. (14)). The input of the
         discriminator consists of patch embeddings, positional embeddings, and two new special
         tokens ([Ms ] and [Mt ]) that indicate source or target patches mimicking the sentence tokens
         in the BERT.

D    B IG LEARNING VERSUS CONTRASTIVE LEARNING
Contrastive learning (Hadsell et al., 2006) aims at learning a latent representation space, where the
representations of different views of the same image (“positive pairs”) are near each other but those
from different images (“negative pairs”) are far away from each other.
As discussed in the main manuscript, the self-supervised contrastive learning focuses on exploiting
domain prior knowledge to learn generally applicable data representations, while the presented big
learning is mostly data-driven. From that perspective, they are orthogonal to each other. However, we
reveal below that big learning and contrastive learning have a lot in common.

       • Both of them are based on massive multi-task training, associated with source/target indexes
         (S, T) and online/target augmentation pairs (A, B) (see Fig. 8a), respectively.
       • Both of them share a universal model among massive training tasks.
       • From the information perspective, both of them predict (or retrieve) the T/B-associated
         information conditioned on the information related to S/A, as detailed below.

Existing contrastive learning methods can be roughly grouped into two groups, based on whether the
method uses negative pairs (like SimCLR (Chen et al., 2020) and MoCo (Chen et al., 2021b)) or not
(like BYOL (Grill et al., 2020) and SimSiam (Chen & He, 2021)).

       • Group 1. Contrastive learning methods using negative pairs, like SimCLR and MoCo, can
         be interpreted as retrieving (in the latent representation space) the target positively paired
         sample B i from the negative samples within the mini-batch, conditioned on the source
         augmented sample Ai , as illustrated in Fig. 8a.
       • Group 2. Contrastive learning methods not using negative pairs, like BYOL and SimSiam,
         directly predict/generate (in the latent representation space) the target/teacher projection as-
         sociated with B i , conditioned on the student projection associated with Ai , as demonstrated
         in Fig. 8b.

Either group of contrastive learning methods retrieves or predicts the B-associated information
conditioned on the information related to A, which is quite similar to the proposed big learning
that predicts/generates xT conditioned on xS . Therefore, from the information perspective, both of
them predict (or retrieve) a piece of data/prior information conditioned on another piece of data/prior
information.
It’s interesting to consider combining big learning with contrastive learning to exhaustively exploit
the available information from both data and domain-prior perspectives.


                                                  17
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


         (a) Group 1 predicts/retrieves the positively paired sample from the negative samples within
         a mini-batch. A and B denote the online and target augmentation, respectively.


         (b) Group 2 directly generates/predicts the target/teacher projection conditioned on the
         student projection.

 Figure 8: Demonstrations of contrastive learning methods. (b) is adapted from Fig. 3 of Chen & He (2021).


E    O N THE i.i.d. ASSUMPTION

The i.i.d. assumption is one of the key foundations of deep learning. But it’s also well-known that
the training data collected for practical applications are rarely i.i.d., leading to a training-test gap
(i.e., novel/unseen data information emerges during testing) that significantly hinders the practical
reliability of existing deep-learning models.
Recently, foundation models begin to demonstrate increasing robustness and generalization towards
that gap, likely due to their large-scale pretraining (special cases of big learning) effectively reduces
the probability of observing novel information during testing. We next elaborate on that and present 3
reasons on why big learning is expected to significantly reduce the training-test/pretraining-finetuning
gap for improved robustness.

  1. Thanks to its remarkable flexibilities on complete/incomplete training data and massive diverse
     learning tasks, big learning delivers abundant “exercise experiences” that significantly enlarges
     the training scope of the model, making it less likely to be “surprised” by novel test data/tasks.
  2. Manually collecting or filtering data samples will likely introduce unintentional interventions
     that violate the i.i.d. assumption. The data flexibility of big learning makes it possible to conduct
     training with minimal human interventions in data collection, and accordingly, “let the data
     speak for themselves.”
  3. Even with the same dataset with all complete samples, big learning is expected to behave more
     robustly to the i.i.d. assumption, because (i) to collect perfectly i.i.d. complete samples is
     often intractable for practical applications; (ii) the conditional tasks of big learning are always
     implemented with perfect and trustworthy i.i.d. samples; and (iii) big learning enables (implicit)
     communications among tasks, which is expected to transfer advantages that benefit each other.


                                                     18
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


F    E XPERIMENTAL SETTINGS
We employ the same model architectures in the previous Section C for the experiments on the
MNIST and CelebA datasets, with the detailed hyperparameters summarized in Table 3. Despite
the relatively small models used, we find that big learning is capable of delivering potentially
all joint/conditional/marginal data capabilities simultaneously. We adopt the AdamW optimizer
(Loshchilov & Hutter, 2017) with β = (0.1, 0.999) and constant learning rates for both the generator
and the discriminator. Code will be released upon publication.
                           Table 3: Hyperparameters used in the experiments.

              Dataset                                         MNIST             CelebA
              Image size                                         64               120
              Patch size                                          8                10
              G-Encoder depth                                     6                 6
              G-Encoder #heads                                    8                 8
              G-Encoder dim                                     256               256
              G-Decoder depth                                     6                 6
              G-Decoder #heads                                    8                 8
              G-Decoder dim                                     512               512
              D depth                                             6                 6
              D #heads                                            8                 8
              D dim                                             256               256
              GP (Mescheder et al., 2018)                       real              real
              λGP                                                10                10
              Learning rate                                    10−4              10−4
              Batch size                                        256               128
                               1
              Source ratio ∥S ∥/∥L∥                          Beta(0.5,3)       Beta(0.5,3)
                              1
              Target ratio ∥T   ∥/∥L\S1 ∥                    Beta(3,0.5)       Beta(3,0.5)
                                           2
              Communication source ratio ∥S ∥/∥S1 ∪T1 ∥      Beta(0.5,3)       Beta(0.5,3)

Overall, we find it’s quite straightforward to implement the MNIST experiments with the standard
implementations discussed in Sections B and C, without resorting to any “tricks” like warm-up or
gradient clipping. However, on the more complicated CelebA experiments, we find it’s necessary to
employ some, as detailed below.
       • We employ warm-up in the first 10 epochs for both the GAN generator and discriminator;
         after that, we use the constant learning rate given in Table 3.
       • We apply gradient clipping, with the max norm of 5, to both the generator and discriminator
         optimizers.
       • Similar to Lee et al. (2021), we also find it challenging to stabilize GAN training with
         a ViT-based discriminator. To deal with that, we additionally (i) overlap image patches
         (Lee et al., 2021) with e.g., 2 pixels at the input of the discriminator (different from the
         non-overlapping image patches used in the vanilla ViT); and (ii) use a larger hyperparameter
         ϵ = 10−5 in the AdamW optimizer.
Other empirical experiences are listed below.
       • We empirically find that the last normalization layers of both the GAN generator and discrim-
         inator have a significant influence on the learning stability and final performance. Specifi-
         cally, replacing the last LayerNorm of the G-Decoder of the generator with a LeakyReLU
         leads to improved generative performance, whereas replacing the last LayerNorm of the
         discriminator with other normalization/activation layers results in training collapse.
       • Employing an additional convolutional head (like a 3-layer CNN) to the output of the
         generator often leads to improved performance and training stability.
       • Instead of only introducing noise embeddings at the first layer of the G-Decoder of the
         generator, as shown in Fig. 7a, we find it’s beneficial to concatenate the same set of noise
         embeddings layer-wisely into the G-Decoder layers.


                                                  19
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


G    E MPIRICAL EVALUATIONS ON THE GLUE BENCHMARK

Concerning the empirical comparisons between existing methods for foundation models and the
presented big learning, intuitively, one would consider first using our big learning as the pretraining
strategy in place of existing ones, followed by applying the same naı̈ve fine-tuning on downstream
tasks, to evaluate the effectiveness of our big learning. Unfortunately, we cannot afford the pretraining
cost; for example, to pretrain a XLNet-Large takes about 5.5 days on 512 TPUs according to Yang
et al. (2019). We leave that to the community, as mentioned in the Conclusion.
To demonstrate the advantages of our big learning over existing methods for foundation models,
we alternatively consider leveraging it to serve as the less expensive fine-tuning strategy. It’s worth
highlighting that, from another perspective, such experiments also verify the advantages of the big
learning in the fields of supervised learning, when compared to existing supervised learning methods.
Specifically, we design experiments based on the Hugging Face transformers library Wolf et al.
(2020), the GLUE benchmark Wang et al. (2018), and the XLNET Yang et al. (2019) that outperforms
the BERT on many NLP tasks. We employ the same pretrained xlnet-base-cased model and
continually train it on the downstream RTE/MRPC/SST-2 classification tasks via (i) the naive fine-
tuning (i.e., identical to the original XLNET, termed FT) and (ii) our big learning (termed big-learn),
respectively. In other words, the pretraining phase (i.e., the permutation language modeling Yang
et al. (2019), a special case of our big learning) is the same and we compare our big-learn with the
naive FT during the finetuning phase.
Because the data of the downstream classification tasks contain both feature x and label y, we resort
to the big learning settings of Section 3.3 of the main manuscript. Specifically, X = (y, x) and the
universal foundation model pθ (X T′ |X S′ ) has a network architecture similar to the one shown in
Fig. 2 of the main manuscript. Note pθ (X T′ |X S′ ) consists of the pretrained XLNET backbone and
a task-specific head that is attached to the output of the <CLS> token; for simplicity, we abuse θ
to represent all the parameters. For a specific (S′ , T′ ) pair, pθ (X T′ |X S′ ) recovers pθ (y|x), i.e., a
conventional classifier.
With the above notations, we next formalize the objective for both FT and our big-learn.

       • FT. Often a cross-entropy is employed, which is identical to
                                    LFT (θ) = Eqdownstream (x,y) [− log pθ (y|x)],                           (17)
         where qdownstream (x, y) represents the training data of the downstream classification task.
       • Big-learn. For direct comparisons, we formalize the big-learn objective as
                                     Lbig-learn (θ) = LFT (θ) + βBigLearn L(θ),                              (18)
         where βBigLearn is a hyperparameter and
                              L(θ) = Eq(S′ ,T′ ) Eqdownstream (X) [− log pθ (X T′ |X S′ )],                  (19)
         with q(S′ , T′ ) denoting the sampling process of (S′ , T′ ). We simply reuse the same sampling
         process in Table 3.

Note Eq. (19) is equivalent to minimizing Eq(S′ ,T′ ) KL[qdownstream (X T′ |X S′ )||pθ (X T′ |X S′ )] by
referring to Eq. (1) of the main manuscript.

       Table 4: Tested hyperparameters when comparing FT with big-learn on the GLUE benchmark.

  Task\Hyperparameter        Learning Rate          #Epochs         WarmUp Steps               βBigLearn
  RTE                      [2e-5, 4e-5, 6e-5]   [3, 4, 7, 10, 15]      [0, 120]         [0., 0.2, 0.4, 0.6, 0.8]
  MRPC                     [2e-5, 4e-5, 6e-5]   [3, 4, 7, 10, 15]      [0, 120]         [0., 0.2, 0.4, 0.6, 0.8]
  SST-2                    [2e-5, 4e-5, 6e-5]       [2, 3, 4]         [0, 1200]              [0., 0.2, 0.4]


We extensively compare FT with big-learn on the downstream RTE/MRPC/SST-2 classification tasks,
by evaluating the accuracy and/or F1 score on the Dev set across the combinations of the tested


                                                     20
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


hyperparameters shown in Table 4. The hyperparameters are chosen following Devlin et al. (2018);
Yang et al. (2019).

Table 5: Empirical evaluations showing the superiority of big-learn to FT. The best/median metrics are calculated
among the combinations of the tested hyperparameters in Table 4.

                                         Metric                     Best Accuracy / F1                               Median Accuracy / IQR
                             Task                                   FT         big-learn                                 FT      big-learn
                             RTE                                   71.84         75.09                               66.06/2.34 70.75/1.44
                             MRPC                               88.97/92.09 90.20/93.03                              87.00/2.45 87.74/1.10
                             SST-2                                 94.15         95.18                               93.75/0.45 94.66/0.28


The best/median metrics are summarized in Table 5 and Fig. 9 shows the corresponding boxplots;
it’s clear that our big-learn consistently outperforms FT. Accordingly, our big learning can serve
as a superior fine-tuning strategy. It’s worth highlighting we did not carefully tune our big-learn;
therefore, it’s likely that its performance could be further improved by e.g., tuning the sampling
process q(S′ , T′ ).
                              Boxplot grouped by loss_betaBL                                                          Boxplot grouped by loss_betaBL
            0.750                                                                                       0.90
            0.725                                                                                       0.89
            0.700                                                                                       0.88

            0.675                                                                                       0.87
 Accuracy


                                                                                             Accuracy


            0.650                                                                                       0.86

            0.625                                                                                       0.85

            0.600                                                                                       0.84

            0.575                                                                                       0.83
                       0.0         0.2            0.4             0.6              0.8                         0.0           0.2        0.4        0.6   0.8
                                                BigLearn                                                                               BigLearn

                                         (a) RTE                              Boxplot grouped by loss_betaBL                       (b) MRPC

                                                        0.950


                                                        0.945
                                             Accuracy


                                                        0.940


                                                        0.935



                                                                        0.0                       0.2                  0.4
                                                                                                BigLearn

                                                                                         (c) SST-2

Figure 9: Boxplots of the Dev-set accuracies from FT and our big-learn. Note big-learn with βBigLearn = 0 is
identical to FT (see Eq. (18)). It’s clear that big-learn consistently outperforms FT on all three tasks.


We’d like to emphasize that our big learning can reduce the pretrain-finetuning gap because

                    • it can act as the pretraining and finetuning objectives, simultaneously;
                    • one can even rely on our big learning to completely merge the pretraining and finetuning
                      phases, leading to a zero gap.

Motivated by the performance boost from the BERT to the XLNET and our discussions “on the
generalization of model parameters and latent features” of Section 3.2 of the main manuscript, we
posit that our big learning can serve as better pretraining and finetuning strategies than existing


                                                                                            21
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


methods, leading to a universal machine learning paradigm. We leave the corresponding verification
as future research.

H     A DDITIONAL EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS
More experimental results, complementing the limited demonstrations of the main manuscript, are
given below. Please refer to the captions for details.


Figure 10: Demonstrating the generation/completion capabilities of big learning when gradually increasing
the ratio of S from 0 (joint generation) to 0.9, from left to right. Shown in the light-blue boxes of the first
row are the masks of xS applied in each column; white/black indicates S/T. The right-most column shows
ground-truth x shared in each row. Note each row also employs the same noise. It’s clear that the generations
become increasingly similar/dissimilar to the ground-truth x as the ratio of S increases/decreases, as expected.
See the category, style, and thickness of the MNIST generations as the ratio of S decreases, as well as the
identity, expression, hairstyle, and gender of the CelebA generations. Big learning produces realistic and diverse
generations/completions in all situations.


                                                       22
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Figure 11: More MNIST generations/completions from big learning when gradually increasing the ratio of S
from 0.0 to 0.9.


                                                  23
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Figure 12: More CelebA generations/completions from big learning when gradually increasing the ratio of S
from 0.0 to 0.9.


                                                   24
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Figure 13: The diverse generations/completions of big learning with (a)(c) various S settings and (b)(d) different
noises. Shown in red boxes are either the ground-truth images x or the source xS . Big learning delivers diverse
realistic generations w.r.t. different S/noise settings.


                                                       25
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Figure 14: The strong generalization capability of big learning w.r.t. anomalous testing cases out of the training
domain. Big learning generalizes well on xS s that are constructed with (a) random center patches replaced in the
upper-left corner, (b) random center patches replaced in the upper part, (c) random center patches duplicated
and replaced in the center, and (d) random patches and more complicated manipulations (including duplication,
relocation, and mix-up).


                                                       26
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Figure 15: The strong generalization capability of big learning w.r.t. anomalous/unseen testing cases out of the
training domain, on (a) CelebA, (b) Flowers, and (c) MetFaces. Big learning generalizes well on xS constructed
by (a) mixing-up patches from different CelebA images, (b) sampling out-of-domain image patches from the
Flowers dataset, and (c) sampling out-of-domain image patches from the MetFaces dataset.


                                                      27
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Figure 16: Out-of-domain generations/completions from big learning on the Flowers, when gradually increasing
the ratio of S from 0.0 to 0.9. The tested model is big-learned on the CelebA.


                                                    28
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Figure 17: Out-of-domain generations/completions from big learning on the MetFaces, when gradually increasing
the ratio of S from 0.0 to 0.9. The tested model is big-learned on the CelebA.


                                                     29
