Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


D ISTRIBUTIONAL R EINFORCEMENT L EARNING VIA
S INKHORN I TERATIONS
 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                             A BSTRACT

         Distributional reinforcement learning (RL) is a class of state-of-the-art algorithms
         that estimate the entire distribution of the total return rather than only its expecta-
         tion. The empirical success of distributional RL is determined by the representa-
         tion of return distributions and the choice of distribution divergence. In this paper,
         we propose a new class of Sinkhorn distributional RL (SinkhornDRL) algorithm
         that learns a finite set of statistics, i.e., deterministic samples, from each return
         distribution and then uses Sinkhorn iterations to evaluate the Sinkhorn distance
         between the current and target Bellmen distributions. Sinkhorn divergence fea-
         tures as the interpolation between the Wasserstein distance and Maximum Mean
         Discrepancy (MMD). SinkhornDRL finds a sweet spot by taking advantage of the
         geometry of optimal transport-based distance and the unbiased gradient estimate
         property of MMD. Finally, compared to state-of-the-art algorithms, Sinkhorn-
         DRL’s competitive performance is demonstrated on the suite of 55 Atari games.



1   I NTRODUCTION

Classical reinforcement learning (RL) algorithms are normally based on the expectation of dis-
counted cumulative rewards that an agent observes while interacting with the environment. Recently,
a new class of RL algorithms called distributional RL estimates the full distribution of total returns
and has exhibited the state-of-the-art performance in a wide range of environments (Bellemare et al.,
2017a; Dabney et al., 2018b;a; Yang et al., 2019; Zhou et al., 2020; Nguyen et al., 2020).
In distributional RL literature, it is easily recognized that algorithms based on either Wasserstein
distance or MMD have gained great attention due to their superior performance. Their mutual con-
nection from the perspective of mathematical properties intrigues us to explore further in order to
design new algorithms. Particularly, Wasserstein distance, long known to be a powerful tool to com-
pare probability distributions with non-overlapping supports, has recently emerged as an appealing
contender in various machine learning applications. It is known that Wasserstein distance was long
disregarded because of its computational burden in its original form to solve an expensive network
flow problem. However, recent works (Sinkhorn, 1967; Genevay et al., 2018) have shown that this
cost can be largely mitigated by settling for cheaper approximations through strongly convex regular-
izers. The benefit of this regularization has opened the path to wider applications of the Wasserstein
distance in relevant learning problems, including the design of distributional RL algorithms.
The Sinkhorn divergence (Sinkhorn, 1967) introduces the entropic regularization on the Wassertein
distance, allowing it tractable for the evaluation especially in high-dimensions. It has been suc-
cessfully applied in numerous crucial machine learning developments, including the Sinkhorn-
GAN (Genevay et al., 2018) and Sinkhorn-based adversarial training (Wong et al., 2019). More
importantly, it has been shown that Sinkhorn divergence interpolates Wasserstein ditance and MMD,
and their equivalence form can be well established in the limit cases (Feydy et al., 2019; Ramdas
et al., 2017; Nguyen et al., 2020). However, a Sinkhorn-based distributional RL algorithm has not
yet been formally proposed and its connection with algorithms based on Wasserstein distance and
MMD is also less studied. Therefore, a natural question is can we design a new class of distributional
RL algorithms via Sinkhorn divergence, thus bridging the gap between existing two main branches
of distributional RL algorithms? Moreover, the dominant quantile regression-based algorithms,
e.g., QR-DQN (Dabney et al., 2018b), aimed at approximating Wasserstein distance, suffers from


                                                   1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


the non-crossing issue in the quantile estimation (Zhou et al., 2020), while sample-based Sinkhorn
distributional algorithm can naturally circumvent this problem.
In this paper, we propose a novel distributional RL family based on Sinkhorn divergence. Firstly,
we show key roles of distribution divergence and value distribution representation in the design of
distributional RL algorithms. After a detailed introduction of our proposed SinkhornDRL algorithm,
with a non-trivial proof, we theoretically analyze the convergence property of distributional Bellman
operators under Sinkhorn divergence. A regularized MMD equivalence with Sinkhorn divergence
is also established, interpreting its empirical success in real applications. Finally, we compare the
performance of our SinkhornDRL algorithm with typical baselines on 55 Atari games, verifying
the competitive performance of our proposal. Our method inspires researchers to find a trade-off
that simultaneously leverages the geometry of the Wasserstein distance and the favorable unbiased
gradient estimate property of MMD while designing new distributional RL algorithms in the future.

2     P RELIMINARY K NOWLEDGE
2.1   D ISTRIBUTIONAL R EINFORCEMENT L EARNING

In classical RL, an agent interacts with an environment via a Markov decision process (MDP),
a 5-tuple (S, A, R, P, γ), where S and A are the state and action spaces, respectively. P is the
environment transition dynamics, R is the reward function and γ ∈ (0, 1) is the discount factor.
From Value function to Value distribution.
                                    P∞        Given a policy π, the discounted sum of future rewards
is a random variable Z π (s, a) = t=0 γ t R(st , at ), where s0 = s, a0 = a, st+1 ∼ P (·|st , at ),
and at ∼ π(·|st ). In the control setting, expectation-based RL is based on the action-value func-
tion Qπ (s, a), which is the expectation of Z π (s, a), i.e., Qπ (s, a) = E [Z π (s, a)]. By contrast,
distributional RL focuses on the action-value distribution, the full distribution of Z π (s, a). The
incorporation of additional distributional knowledge intuitively interprets its empirical success.
Distributional Bellman operators. For the policy evaluation in expectation-based RL, the action-
value function is updated via Bellman operator T π Q(s, a) = E[R(s, a)] + γEs0 ∼p,π [Q (s0 , a0 )]. In
distributional RL, the distribution of Z π (s, a) is updated via the distributional Bellman operator Tπ
                                                D
                                 Tπ Z(s, a) := R(s, a) + γZ (s0 , a0 ) ,                            (1)
        0                    0          0
where s ∼ P (·|s, a) and a ∼ π (·|s ). The equality implies random variables of both sides are
equal in distribution. The distributional Bellman operator Tπ is contractive under certain distribution
divergence metrics. We provide a detailed discussion about more related works in Appendix A.

2.2   D IVERGENCES BETWEEN M EASURES

Optimal Transport (OT) and Wasserstein Distance. The optimal transport (OT) metric between
two probability measures (µ, ν) is defined as the solution of the linear program:
                                             Z
                                      min       c(x, y)dΠ(x, y),                       (2)
                                     Π∈Π(µ,ν)

where c is the cost function and Π is the joint distribution with marginals (µ, ν). Wasserstein distance
(a.k.a. earth mover distance) is a special case of optimal transport with the Euclidean norm as the
cost function. In particular, given two scalar random variables X and Y , p-Wasserstein metric Wp
between the distributions of X and Y can be simplified as
                                         Z 1                              1/p
                                                  −1          −1     p
                         Wp (X, Y ) =           FX (ω) − FY (ω) dω             ,                     (3)
                                            0
            −1
where F      is the inverse cumulative distribution function of a random variable. The desirable
geometric property of Wasserstein distance allows it to recover full support of measures, but it
suffers from the curse of dimension (Genevay et al., 2019; Arjovsky et al., 2017).
Maximum Mean Discrepancy. The squared Maximum Mean Discrepancy (MMD) MMD2k with
the kernel k is formulated as
                     MMD2k = E [k (X, X 0 )] + E [k (Y, Y 0 )] − 2E [k(X, Y )] ,                    (4)

                                                    2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


where k(·, ·) is a continuous kernel on X . X 0 (resp. Y 0 ) is a random variable independent of X
(resp. Y ). If k is a trivial kernel, MMD degenerates to the energy distance. Mathematically, the
“flat” geometry that MMD induces on the space of probability measures does not faithfully lift the
ground distance (Feydy et al., 2019), but MMD is cheaper to compute than OT and has a smaller
sample complexity, i.e., approximating the distance with samples of measures (Genevay et al., 2019).
We provide the detailed introduction of more distribution divergences in Appendix B.

3     ROLES OF D ISTRIBUTION D IVERGENCE AND R EPRESENTATION
3.1     D ISTRIBUTIONAL RL: F ROM N EURAL F ITTED Q TO Z I TERATION

Neural Fitted Q-Iteration. It is known that Deep Q Networks (Mnih et al., 2015) can be simplified
into Neural Fitted Q-Iteration (Fan et al., 2020) under tricks of experience replay and the target
network, where we update Qθ (s, a) parameterized by θ in each iteration k:
                                                         n
                                                      1 X                       2
                                 Qk+1
                                  θ   = argmin              yi − Qkθ (si , ai ) ,                                     (5)
                                               Qθ     n i=1

where the target yi = r(si , ai ) + γ maxa∈A Qkθ∗ (s0i , a) is fixed within every Ttarget steps to up-
date target network Qθ∗ with parameters θ∗ by letting θ∗ = θ and the experience buffer induces
independent samples {(si , ai , ri , s0i )}i∈[n] . In an ideal case that neglects the non-convexity and TD
approximation errors, we have Qk+1  θ      = T Qkθ , which is exactly equivalent to the updating rule under
Bellman optimality operator.
Neural Fitted Z-Iteration. Analogous to Neural Fitted Q-iteration, we can also simplify value-
based distributional RL methods based on a parameterized Zθ into a Neural Fitted Z-Iteration as
                                                 n
                                   k+1        1X
                                  Zθ = argmin       dp (Yi , Zθk (si , ai )),                                         (6)
                                         Zθ   n i=1

where the target Yi = R(si , ai ) + γZθk∗ (s0i , πZ (s0 )) with πZ (s0 ) = argmaxa0 E Zθk∗ (s0 , a0 ) is

fixed within every Ttarget steps to update target network Zθ∗ , and dp is the distribution divergence.

3.2     K EY ROLES OF dp AND Zθ

Within the Neural Fitted Z-Iteration framework proposed in Eq. 6, we observe that the choice of
representation manner on Zθ and the metric dp are pivotal for the distributional RL algorithms. For
instance, QR-DQN (Dabney et al., 2018b) approximates Wasserstein distance Wp , which leverages
quantiles to represent the distribution of Zθ . C51 (Bellemare et al., 2017a) represents Zθ via a
categorical distribution under the convergence of Cramér distance (Bellemare et al., 2017b; Rowland
et al., 2018), while MMD distributional RL (MMDDRL) (Nguyen et al., 2020) learns samples to
represent the distribution of Zθ based on MMD. We compare characteristics of these distribution
divergence, including the convergence rate and sample complexity, in Table 1. Theoretical results
regarding Sinkhorn divergence is based on (Genevay et al., 2019) and the detailed convergence proof
of other distances is also provided in Appendix B. In summary, we argue that dp and Zθ are two
crucial factors in distributional RL design, based on which we introduce Sinkhorn distributional RL.

     Algorithm    dp Distribution Divergence   Representation Zθ   Convergence Rate of Tπ   Sample Complexity of dp
                                                                             √
        C51             Cramér distance          Histogram                     γ
                                                                                                           1
     QR-DQN          Wasserstein distance          Quantiles                   γ                   O(n− d )
     MMDDRL                 MMD                    Samples           γ α/2 with kernel kα          O(1/n)
                                                                                                     κ
                                                                                                    eε √
    SinkhornDRL                                                           γ (ε → 0)          O(n εbd/2c n ) (ε → 0)
                     Sinkhorn divergence            Samples
        (ours)                                                         γ α/2 (ε → ∞)                 1
                                                                                              O(n− 2 ) (ε → ∞)


Table 1: Comparison between typical distributional RL algorithms under different distribution di-
vergences and represention of Zθ . kα = −kx − ykα in MMDDRL, d is the sample dimension and
κ = 2βd + kck∞ , where the cost function c is β-Lipschitz (Genevay et al., 2019). Sample complex-
ity of MMD can be improved to O(1/n) using kernel herding technique (Chen et al., 2012).


                                                           3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


4     S INKHORN D ISTRIBUTIONAL RL (S INKHORN DRL)
In this section, we firstly introduce Sinkhorn divergence and apply it in distributional RL. Next,
we conduct a theoretical analysis about the convergence and a new moment matching manner of
our algorithm under the Sinkhorn divergence. Finally, a practical Sinkhorn iteration algorithm is
introduced to evaluate the Sinkhorn divergence.

4.1   S INKHORN D IVERGENCE AND G ENETIC A LGORITHM

We design Sinkhorn distributional RL algorithm via Sinkhorn divergence. Sinkhorn diver-
gence (Sinkhorn, 1967) is a tractable loss to approximate the optimal transport problem by leverag-
ing an entropic regularization to turn the original Wasserstein distance into a differentiable and more
robust quantity. The resulting loss can be computed using Sinkhorn fixed point iterations, which is
naturally suitable for modern deep learning frameworks. In particular, the entropic smoothing gen-
erates a family of losses interpolating between MMD. As such, it allows us to find a sweet trade-off
that simultaneously leverages the geometry of Wasserstein distance on the one hand, and the favor-
able high-dimensional sample complexity and unbiased gradient estimates of MMD. We introduce
the entropic regularized Wassertein distance Wc,ε (µ, ν) as
                                      Z
                              min        c(x, y)dΠ(x, y) + εKL(Π|µ ⊗ ν),                            (7)
                            Π∈Π(µ,ν)

                        R         Π(x,y)
where KL(Π|µ ⊗ ν) = log dµ(x)dν(y)          dΠ(x, y) is a strongly convex regularization. The impact
of this entropy regularization is similar to `2 ridge regularization in linear regression. Next, the
sinkhorn loss (Feydy et al., 2019; Genevay et al., 2018) between two measures µ and ν is defined as
                       W c,ε (µ, ν) = 2Wc,ε (µ, ν) − Wc,ε (µ, µ) − Wc,ε (ν, ν).                       (8)

As demonstrated by (Feydy et al., 2019), the Sinkhorn divergence W c,ε (µ, ν) is convex, smooth
and positive definite that metrizes the convergence in law. In statistical physics, Wc,ε (µ, ν) can be
re-factored as a projection problem:
                                 Wc,ε (µ, ν) :=     min      KL (Π|K) ,                               (9)
                                                  Π∈Π(µ,ν)

                                                                                      c(x,y)
where K is the Gibbs distribution and its density function satisfies dK(x, y) = e− ε dµ(x)dν(y).
This problem is often referred to as the “static Schrödinger problem” (Léonard, 2013; Rüschendorf
& Thomsen, 1998) as it was initially considered in statistical physics.
Distributional RL with Sinkhorn Divergence and Particle Representation. The key of applying
Sinkhorn divergence in distributional RL is to simply leverage the Sinkhorn loss W c,ε to mea-
sure the distance between the current action-value distribution Zθ (s, a) and the target distribution
Tπ Zθ (s, a), yielding W c,ε (Zθ (s, a), Tπ Zθ (s, a)) for each s, a pairs. In terms of the representation
for Zθ (s, a), we employ the unrestricted statistics, i.e., deterministic samples, due to its superiority
in MMDDRL (Nguyen et al., 2020), instead of using predefined statistic functionals, e.g., quantiles
in QR-DQN (Dabney et al., 2018b) or categorical distribution in C51 (Bellemare et al., 2017a).


Algorithm 1 Generic Sinkhorn distributional RL Update
Require: Number of generated samples N , the cost function c and hyperparameter ε.
Input: Sample transition (s, a, r0 , s0 )
 1: if Policy evaluation then
 2:    a∗ ∼ π(·|s0 ).
 3: else                      PN
 4:    a∗ ← arg maxa0 ∈A N1 i=1 Zθ (s0 , a0 )i
 5: end if
 6: TZi ← r + γZθ∗ (s0 , a∗ )i , ∀1 ≤ i ≤ N

                            N                  N
Output: W c,ε {Zθ (s, a)i }i=1 , {TZθ (s, a)j }j=1


                                                    4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


More concretely, we use neural networks to generate samples that approximate the value distribu-
tion. This can be expressed as Zθ (s, a) := {Zθ (s, a)i }N
                                                         i=1 , where N is the number of generated
samples. We refer to the samples {Zθ (s, a)i }Ni=1 as particles. Then we leverage the Dirac mix-
      1
         PN
ture N i=1 δZθ (s,a)i to approximate the true density function of Z π (s, a), thus minimizing the
Sinkhorn divergence between the approximate distribution and its distributional Bellman target. A
detailed and generic distributional RL algorithm with Sinkhorn divergence and particle representa-
tion is provided in Algorithm 1.
Remark. From the general algorithm framework in Algorithm 1, our SinkhornDRL generally mod-
ifies the distribution divergence comparing the state-of-the-art MMDDRL (Nguyen et al., 2020),
but SinkhornDRL fundamentally falls into Wasserstein distance-based distributional RL family as
discussed in Appendix A. As such, QR-DQN and MMDDRL are direct counterparts for Sinkhorn-
DRL, and the follow-up works IQN (Dabney et al., 2018a) and FQF (Yang et al., 2019) can naturally
extend both MMDDRL and SinkhornDRL as discussed in (Nguyen et al., 2020).

4.2   T HEORETICAL A NALYSIS UNDER S INKHORN D IVERGENCE
                                                                                    ∞
Convergence. Firstly, we denote the supreme form of Sinkhorn divergence as W c,ε (µ, ν):
                             ∞
                          W c,ε (µ, ν) =     sup       W c,ε (µ(x, a), ν(x, a)).                  (10)
                                           (x,a)∈S×A

               ∞
We will use W c,ε (µ, ν) to establish the convergence of Tπ in Theorem 1.
Theorem 1. If we leverage Sinkhorn loss W c,ε (µ, ν) in Eq. 8 as the distribution divergence in
distributional RL, and choose the unrectified kernel kα := −kx − ykα as −c (α > 0), it holds that
                                                                                        ∞
(1) (ε → 0) W c,ε (µ, ν) → 2Wα (µ, ν). When ε = 0, Tπ is a γ-contraction under W c,ε .
                                                                                                  ∞
(2) (ε → +∞) W c,ε (µ, ν) → MMD2kα (µ, ν). When ε = +∞, Tπ is γ α/2 -contractive under W c,ε .
                                                               ∞
(3) (ε ∈ (0, +∞)), Tπ is a contractive operator under W c,ε . The related non-constant contraction
factor ∆(γ, α) < 1 also depends on the distribution sequence in distributional Bellman iterations.

We provide the long yet rigorous proof of Theorem 1 in Appendix C. Theorem 1 (1) and (2) are
follow-up conclusions in terms of the convergence behavior of Tπ based on the interpolation rela-
tionship between Sinkhorn divergence with Wasserstein distance and MMD (Genevay et al., 2018).
Our key theoretical contribution is for the general ε ∈ (0, ∞), in which we conclude that Tπ is
a contractive operator. The crux of the proof is two-fold. Firstly, we show the a variant of scale
sensitive property of Sinkhorn divergence when c = −κα , where the resulting non-constant scaling
factor is also determined by the specified two probability measures. Next, we propose a new distri-
bution Contraction mapping theorem in Theorem 2 of Appendix C, based on which we eventually
                                                                        ∞
arrive at the convergence of distributional Bellman operator under W c,ε . Intriguingly yet reason-
ably, the contraction factor ∆(γ, α) is non-constant but a function less than 1 that also depends on
the distribution sequence while iteratively applying distribution Bellman updates. Our non-trivial
proof about Sinkhorn divergence can even contribute to the optimal transport literature.
Consistency with Related Conclusions. As Sinkhorn divergence interpolates between Wasserstein
distance and MMD, its contraction property when the cost function holds c = −kα for the general
ε ∈ [0, ∞] is intuitive. Note that if we choose Gaussian kernels as the cost function, there will be no
concise and consistent contraction results as Theorem 1 (3). This conclusion is also consistent with
MMDDRL (Nguyen et al., 2020), where Tπ is generally not a contraction operator under MMD
equipped with Gaussian kernels as a counterexample has been pointed out in MMDDRL (when
ε → +∞). To be consistent with the contraction property analyzed in our theory (Theorem 1 (3)),
we employ the rectified kernel kα as the cost function in our experiments and set α = 2, under
which SinkhornDRL suggests a favorable performance in Section 5.
Regularized Moment Matching under Sinkhorn Divergence Associated with Gaussian Ker-
nels. We further examine the potential connection between SinkhornDRL with existing distribu-
tional RL families. Inspired by the similar manner in MMDDRL (Nguyen et al., 2020), we find
that the Sinkhorn divergence with the Gaussian kernel can also promote to match all moments be-


                                                   5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


tween two distributions. More specifically, the Sinkhorn divergence can be rewritten as a regularized
moment matching form in Proposition 1.
Proposition 1. For ε ∈ (0, +∞), Sinkhorn divergence W c,ε (µ, ν) associated with Gaussian kernels
k(x, y) = exp(−(x − y)2 /(2σ 2 )) as −c, is equivalent to
                     ∞
                                                                     (Π∗ε (X, Y ))2
                                                    2
                    X      1
    W c,ε (µ, ν) :=             M̃n (µ) − M̃n (ν) + εE log ∗                                ,    (11)
                    n=0
                        σ 2n n!                                 Πε (X, X 0 )Π∗ε (Y, Y 0 )

where Π∗ε denotes the optimal Π determined
                                        h     by ε by ievaluating the Sinkhorn divergence via
                                           −x2 /(2σ 2 ) n
minΠ∈Π(µ,ν) W c,ε (µ, ν). M̃n (µ) = Ex∼µ e             x , and similarly for M̃n (ν).

We provide the proof of Proposition 1 in Appendix D. Similar to MMDDRL associated with a
Gaussian kernel (Nguyen et al., 2020), Sinkhorn divergence approximately performs a regularized
                                2   2
moment matching scaled by e−x /(2σ ) .
Equivalence to Regularized MMD Distributional RL. Based on Proposition 1, we can immedi-
ately establish the connection between Sinkhorn divergence and MMD in Corollary 1, indicating
that minimizing Sinkhorn divergence between two distributions is equivalent to minimizing a regu-
larized squared MMD.
Corollary 1. For ε ∈ (0, +∞) and denote Π∗ε as the optimal Π by evaluating the Sinkhorn diver-
gence, it holds that
                                                         (Π∗ε (X, Y ))2

                     W c,ε := MMD2−c (µ, ν) + εE log ∗                           ,           (12)
                                                     Πε (X, X 0 )Π∗ε (Y, Y 0 )
where we use W c,ε to replace W c,ε (µ, ν) for short.

Proof of Corollary 1 is provided in Appendix D. It is worthy of noting that this equivalence is
established for the general case when ε ∈ (0, +∞), and it does not hold in the limit cases when
ε → 0 or +∞. For example, when ε → +∞, the second part including ε in Eq. 12 is not expected
to dominate. This is owing to the fact that the regularization term would be 0 as Π∗ε → µ ⊗ ν when
ε → +∞. In summary, even though the Sinkhorn divergence was initially proposed to serve as
an entropy regularized Wasserterin distance when the cost function c = κα , it turns out that it is
equivalent to a regularized MMD if associated with Gaussian kernels, as revealed in Corollary 1.

4.3   D ISTRIBUTIONAL RL VIA S INKHORN I TERATIONS

The theoretical analysis in Section 4.2 sheds light on the behavior of distributional RL with Sinkhorn
divergence, but another crucial issue we need to address is how to evaluate the Sinkhorn loss effec-
tively. Due to the advantages of Sinkhorn divergence that both enjoys geometry property of optimal
transport and the computational effectiveness of MMD, we can utilize Sinkhorn’s algorithm, i.e.,
Sinkhorn Iterations (Sinkhorn, 1967; Genevay et al., 2018), to evaluate the Sinkhorn loss. Notably,
Sinkhorn iteration with L steps yields a differentiable and solvable efficiently loss function as the
main burden involved in it is the matrix-vector multiplication, which streams well on the GPU with
simply adding extra differentiable layers on the typical deep neural network, such as a DQN archi-
tecture.
                                                 N           N
Specifically, given two sample sequences {Zi }i=1 , {TZj }j=1 in the distributional RL algorithm,
the optimal transport distance is equivalent to the form:
                                      hP, ĉi; P 1N = 1N , P > 1N = 1N ,

                             min                                                              (13)
                                 ×N
                           P ∈RN
                               +


where the empirical cost function ĉi,j = c(Zi , TZj ). By adding entropic regularization on opti-
mal transport distance, Sinkhorn divergence can be viewed to restrict the search space of P in the
following scaling form:
                                         Pi,j = ai Ki,j bj ,                                  (14)
where Ki,j = e−ĉi,j /ε is the Gibbs kernel defined in Eq. 9. This allows us to leverage iterations
regarding the vectors a and b. More specifically, we initialize b0 = 1N , and then the Sinkhorn


                                                  6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                                          N           N
Algorithm 2 Sinkhorn Iterations to Approximate W c,ε {Zi }i=1 , {TZj }j=1
                                     N           N
Input: Two samples sequences {Zi }i=1 , {TZj }j=1 , number of Sinkhorn iterations L and hyperpa-
rameter ε.
 1: ĉi,j = c(Zi , TZj ) for ∀i = 1, ..., N, j = 1, ..., N
 2: Ki,j = exp(−ĉi,j /ε)
 3: b0 ← 1N
 4: for l = 1, 2, ..., L do
 5:     al ← Kb1l−1
                 N           1N
                     , bl ← Ka l
 6: end for
                  N            N
 7: W c,ε {Zi }i=1 , {TZj }j=1 = h(K ĉ)b, ai
    c

                        N          N
Return: W  c
             c,ε {Zi }i=1 , {TZj }j=1


iterations are expressed as
                                       1N                         1N
                              al+1 ←          and       bl+1 ←    >
                                                                        ,                       (15)
                                       Kbl                       K al+1
where ·· indicates an entry-wise division. It has been proven that Sinkhorn iteration asymptotically
converges to the true loss in a linear rate (Genevay et al., 2018; Franklin & Lorenz, 1989; Cuturi,
2013; Jason Altschuler, 2017). We provide a detailed algorithm description of Sinkhorn iterations
in Algorithm 2. With the efficient and differential Sinkhorn iterations, we can easily evaluate the
Sinkhorn divergence and thus let our algorithm enjoy its theoretical advantages. In practice, we need
to choose L and ε, and we conduct a rigorous sensitivity analysis in Section 5.

5     E XPERIMENTS
We demonstrate the effectiveness of SinkhornDRL as described in Algorithm 1 on the full 55 Atari
2600 games. Specifically, we leverage the same architecture as QR-DQN (Dabney et al., 2018b),
and replace the quantiles output with N particles, i.e., samples. In contrast to MMDDRL, Sinkhorn-
DRL only changes the distribution divergence from MMD to Sinkhorn divergence, and therefore the
potential superiority in the performance can be attributed to the advantages of Sinkhorn divergence.
Baselines. Due to the interpolation feature of Sinkhorn divergence between Wassertein distance
and MMDDRL, we choose three typical distributional RL algorithms as classic baselines, including
QR-DQN (Dabney et al., 2018b) that approximates the Wasserstein distance, C51 (Bellemare et al.,
2017a) and MMDDRL (Nguyen et al., 2020), as well as DQN (Mnih et al., 2015). MMDDRL
algorithm is implemented with the same architecture as QRDQN, and leverages Gaussian kernels
kh (x, y) = exp(−(x−y)2 /h) with the kernel mixture trick covering a range of bandwidths h, which
is same as the basic setting in the original MMDDQN paper (Nguyen et al., 2020). We deploy all
algorithms on 55 Atari 2600 games, and reported results are averaged over 3 seeds with the shade
indicating the standard deviation. We runs 10M time steps (40M frames) for the computation cost
reason, but we report learning curves across all games to make results convincing enough.
Hyperparameter settings. For a fair comparison with QR-DQN, C51 and MMDDRL, we used
the same hyperparamters: the number of generated samples N = 200, Adam optimizer with
lr = 0.00005,  Adam = 0.01/32. We used a target network to compute the distributional Bellman
target, which fits well in the Neural Fitted Z-Iteration framework. In addition, we choose number of
Sinkhorn iterations L = 10 and smoothing hyperparameter ε = 10.0 in Section 5.1 as they are not
sensitive within a proper interval as demonstrated in Section 5.2. We choose the unrectified kernel
as the cost function, i.e.,−c = kα , and select α = 2 in kα in our SinkhornDRL algorithm.

5.1   P ERFORMANCE OF S INKHORN DRL

Figure 1 illustrates that SinkhornDRL can achieve the competitive performance across 55 Atari
games compared with various baseline algorithms with different metrics dp and representation man-
ners on Zθ . On a large number of games, e.g., Tennis, Seaquest and Atlantis, SinkhornDRL can


                                                    7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                                                                                                7HQQLV                                                                                                                      6HDTXHVW                                                                                                                         H                                                  $WODQWLV
                                                                                                                                                                                                                '41
                                                                                '41                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      '41
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     &
                                                                                &                                                                                                                          45'41                                                                                                                                                                            &
                                                                                  45'41                                                                                                                         00'                                                                                                                                                                                   45'41


                                                                                                                                                               $YHUDJH 5HWXUQ
                   $YHUDJH 5HWXUQ
                                                                                 00'


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  $YHUDJH 5HWXUQ
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     6LQNKRUQ                                                                                                                                                                      00'
                                                                                  6LQNKRUQ
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        6LQNKRUQ


                                                                                                      7LPH 6WHSV   H                                                                                                      7LPH 6WHSV   H                                                                                                                                                              7LPH 6WHSV   H

                                                                                                               %UHDNRXW                                                                                                                       3RQJ                                                                                                                                                                  6SDFH,QYDGHUV
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        '41
                                                                                '41                                                                                                                          '41                                                                                                                                                                                                 &
                                                                                   &                                                                                                                              &


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        $YHUDJH 5HWXUQ
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            45'41


                                                                                                                                                           $YHUDJH 5HWXUQ
                                                                                   45'41
            $YHUDJH 5HWXUQ


                                                                                                                                                                                                                  45'41                                                                                                                                                                                             00'
                                                                                   00'                                                                                                                          00'
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            6LQNKRUQ
                                                                                   6LQNKRUQ                                                                                                                  6LQNKRUQ


                                                                                                      7LPH 6WHSV   H                                                                                                    7LPH 6WHSV   H                                                                                                                                                              7LPH 6WHSV   H
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  3KRHQL[
                                                                                                     1DPH7KLV*DPH

                                                                                                                                                                                                                   '41
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   &
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      :L]DUG2I:RU
                                                                       '41
                                                                            &                                                                                                                                   45'41                                                                                                                                                                                 '41
                                                                                                                                                                                                              00'
                                                                            45'41
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   6LQNKRUQ                                                                                                                                                                                &
                                                                                                                                                               $YHUDJH 5HWXUQ


                                                                            00'


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    $YHUDJH 5HWXUQ
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          45'41
$YHUDJH 5HWXUQ


                                                                            6LQNKRUQ
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               00'
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          6LQNKRUQ


                                                                                                       7LPH 6WHSV   H                                                                                                    7LPH 6WHSV   H                                                                                                                                                                7LPH 6WHSV   H

Figure 1: Learning curves of SinkhornDRL algorithm compared with DQN, C51, QR-DQN and
MMD, on nine typical Atari games over 3 seeds.


significantly outperform other baselines, especially on Tennis where other algorithms even fail to
converge. The improvement of SinkhornDRL over MMDDRL empirically verifies the regulariza-
tion advantage of the Sinkhorn as analyzed in Corollary 1. On some games, e.g., Breakout, Pong and
SpaceInvaders, SinkhornDRL is on par with MMDDRL and other baselines, while on the last row
in Figure 1, SinkhornDRL is slightly inferior to the state-of-the-art algorithm. We provide learn-
ing curves of all typical distributional RL algorithms on all 55 Atari games in Appendix F, where
SinkhornDRL still achieves the competitive performance in general.


                                                                                                      6LQNKRUQ   45'41                                                                                                                                                                                       6LQNKRUQ   00'
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            5DWLR ,PSURYPHQW
                   5DWLR ,PSURYPHQW


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             9HQWXUH


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               :L]DUG2I:RU
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 <DUV5HYHQJH
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               7HQQLV


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 9LGHR3LQEDOO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        7LPH3LORW


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     7XWDQNKDP
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      3ULYDWH(\H
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            $WODQWLV
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             *RSKHU
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             =D[[RQ
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              6SDFH,QYDGHUV
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          6HDTXHVW
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           *UDYLWDU
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        5RERWDQN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  5RDG5XQQHU
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             .XQJ)X0DVWHU
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                )LVKLQJ'HUE\
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     %DWWOH=RQH
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         5LYHUUDLG
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              HQGXUR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     0V3DFPDQ
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 .UXOO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     -DPHVERQG
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  SRQJ
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          )UHHZD\
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      &KRSSHU&RPPDQG
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            %HU]HUN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          EUHDNRXW
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    6WDU*XQQHU
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             %R[LQJ
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      ,FH+RFNH\
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             $PLGDU
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  +HUR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                $OLHQ
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       %DQN+HLVW
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             $VVDXOW
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          1DPH7KLV*DPH
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               6NLLQJ
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        .DQJDURR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        &HQWLSHGH
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     %HDP5LGHU
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            3KRHQL[
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          )URVWELWH
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             $VWHUL[
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         $VWHURLGV
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      8S1'RZQ
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              6RODULV
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               'HPRQ$WWDFN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                4EHUW
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               &UD]\&OLPEHU
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          %RZOLQJ
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     0RQWH]XPD5HYHQJH
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 'RXEOH'XQN
                                                                                                         9HQWXUH


                                                                                           :L]DUG2I:RU
                                                                                             <DUV5HYHQJH
                                                                                                           7HQQLV


                                                                                             9LGHR3LQEDOO
                                                                                                    7LPH3LORW


                                                                                                 7XWDQNKDP
                                                                                           'HPRQ$WWDFN
                                                                                                      6HDTXHVW
                                                                                                         =D[[RQ
                                                                                                        3KRHQL[
                                                                                                         *RSKHU
                                                                                                        $WODQWLV
                                                                                                        %HU]HUN
                                                                                                          HQGXUR
                                                                                          6SDFH,QYDGHUV
                                                                                                     5LYHUUDLG
                                                                                                          6RODULV
                                                                                                       *UDYLWDU
                                                                                                6WDU*XQQHU
                                                                                                            $OLHQ
                                                                                  &KRSSHU&RPPDQG
                                                                                         .XQJ)X0DVWHU
                                                                                                              SRQJ
                                                                                                      EUHDNRXW
                                                                                                  8S1'RZQ
                                                                                              5RDG5XQQHU
                                                                                                           6NLLQJ
                                                                                                      )UHHZD\
                                                                                                         %R[LQJ
                                                                                                         $VWHUL[
                                                                                                             .UXOO
                                                                                                 0V3DFPDQ
                                                                                                    5RERWDQN
                                                                                                 %HDP5LGHU
                                                                                                         $PLGDU
                                                                                                 %DWWOH=RQH
                                                                                                   %DQN+HLVW
                                                                                      1DPH7KLV*DPH
                                                                                            )LVKLQJ'HUE\
                                                                                                    &HQWLSHGH
                                                                                                              +HUR
                                                                                                  3ULYDWH(\H
                                                                                                    .DQJDURR
                                                                                                            4EHUW
                                                                                                  ,FH+RFNH\
                                                                                                         $VVDXOW
                                                                                           &UD]\&OLPEHU
                                                                                                      )URVWELWH
                                                                                                 -DPHVERQG
                                                                                                     $VWHURLGV
                                                                                 0RQWH]XPD5HYHQJH
                                                                                                      %RZOLQJ
                                                                                             'RXEOH'XQN


                                                                                                         (a) Sinkhorn vs QRDQN                                                                                                                                                                                                  (b) Sinkhorn vs MMDDRL

Figure 2: Ratio improvement of return for Sinkhorn distributional RL algorithm over QRDQN (left)
and MMDDRL (right) over 3 seeds. For example, the ratio improvement is calculated by (Sinkhorn
- QRDQN) / QRDQN in the left.


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


We conduct a ratio improvement comparison across 55 Atari games between SinkhornDRL with
QRDQN and MMDDRL, respectively. Figure 2 showcases that by comparing with QRDQN (left),
SinkhornDRL achieves better performance across almost half of considered games and the superior-
ity of SinkhornDRL is significant across a large amount of games, including Venture, Seaquest, Ten-
nis and Phoenix. This empirical outperformance verifies the effectiveness of smoothing Wassertein
distance in distributional RL. In contrast with MMDDRL, the advantage of SinkhornDRL is reduced
with the performance improvement on a smaller proportion of games, but a remarkable performance
improvement for SinkhornDRL on a large amount of games can be easily observed. We also report
mean and median of best human-normalized scores in Table 2 of Appendix E, where SinkhornDRL
achieves almost state-of-the-art performance as MMDDRL on average.
Therefore, we conclude that SinkhornDRL is competitive with the state-of-the-art distributional RL
algorithms, e.g., MMDDRL, and can be extremely superior over existing algorithms on a large
proportion of games. This empirical success can be owing to theoretical advantage of Sinkhorn
divergence that simultaneously makes full use of the data geometry from Wasserstein distance and
the unbiased gradient estimate property from MMD, which coincides with results in Theorem 1.

                                                                    6HDTXHVW                                                                                     6HDTXHVW                                                                                           %UHDNRXW
                                                                                                                                                           6DPSOHV                                                                                 /
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       /
                                                                                                                                                          6DPSOHV                                                                                    /
                                                                                                            $YHUDJH 5HWXUQ


                                                                                                                                                        6DPSOHV                                                                                   /
$YHUDJH 5HWXUQ


                                                                                                                                                                                                                 $YHUDJH 5HWXUQ
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             /
                                                   45'41                                                                                                6DPSOHV
                                              00'                                                                                               6DPSOHV


                                                                                                                                                                     7LPH 6WHSV   H

                                                                7LPH 6WHSV   H                                                                                                                                                                                 7LPH 6WHSV   H

                                                 (a) Hyper-parameter ε                                                                                  (b) Number of Samples                                                                                 (c) Sinkhorn Iterations L

Figure 3: Sensitivity analysis of SinkhornDRL on Breakout regarding ε, number of samples, and
number of iteration L. Learning curves are reported over 3 seeds.


5.2                                          S ENSITIVITY A NALYSIS AND C OMPUTATIONAL C OST

The limit behavior connection in Theorem1 (1) and (2) between SinkhornDRL with QR-DQN and
MMDDRL may not be rigorously verified in numerical experiments as an overly large or small ε
will lead to numerical instability of Sinkhorn iterations in Algorithm 2, worsening its performance,
as shown in Figure 3 (a). In practice, we choose a proper ε = 10 across all games. SinkhornDRL
also requires a proper number of iterations L and samples N . For example, a small N , e.g., N = 2
in Seaquest in Figure 3 (b) leads to the divergence of algorithms, while an overly large N can
degrade the performance and meanwhile increases the computational burden (Appendix G). We
conjecture that using larger networks to represent more samples is more likely to suffer from the
overfitting issue, yielding the instability in the RL training (Bjorck et al., 2021). Therefore, we
choose N = 200 to attain an appealing performance with the computational effectiveness. For the
computation cost (Appendix G), SinkhornDRL increases around 50% computation cost compared
with QR-DQN and C51, but only slightly increases the overhead (by around 20%) in contrast to
MMDDRL. Please refer to Appendix G for more detailed results and discussion.

6                                     D ISCUSSIONS AND C ONCLUSION
To extend our algorithm for better performance, implicit generative models, including parameteriz-
ing the cost function in Sinkhorn loss, can be further incorporated. We leave it as the future work.
Moreover, other divergences, e.g., those that can also smooth Wassertein distance, can also be ap-
plied into the design of distributional RL algorithms in the future.
In this paper, a novel family of distributional RL algorithms based on Sinkhorn divergence is pro-
posed that accomplishes a competitive performance compared with the-state-of-the-art distributional
RL algorithms on 55 Atari games. Theoretical analysis about the convergence and moment match-
ing behavior is provided along with a rigorous empirical verification. Sinkhorn distributional RL
will lead to an important contribution among the research community.


                                                                                                                                                                               9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Ethics Statement. Our study is about the design of distributional RL algorithms, which is not
involved with any ethics issue.

Reproducibility Statement. Our results is based on the public implementation released in (Zhang,
2018) with necessary implementation details given in Appendix F. We also provide the detailed
proof from Appendix C to Appendix D.

R EFERENCES
Martin Arjovsky, Soumith Chintala, and Léon Bottou. Wasserstein generative adversarial networks.
 In International conference on machine learning, pp. 214–223. PMLR, 2017.
Marc G Bellemare, Will Dabney, and Rémi Munos. A distributional perspective on reinforcement
 learning. International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML), 2017a.
Marc G Bellemare, Ivo Danihelka, Will Dabney, Shakir Mohamed, Balaji Lakshminarayanan,
 Stephan Hoyer, and Rémi Munos. The cramer distance as a solution to biased wasserstein gradi-
 ents. arXiv preprint arXiv:1705.10743, 2017b.
Nils Bjorck, Carla P. Gomes, and Kilian Q. Weinberger. Towards deeper deep reinforcement learning
  with spectral normalization. Advances in neural information processing systems, 34, 2021.
Pablo Samuel Castro, Subhodeep Moitra, Carles Gelada, Saurabh Kumar, and Marc G Bellemare.
  Dopamine: A research framework for deep reinforcement learning. CoRR abs/1812.06110, 2018.
Yutian Chen, Max Welling, and Alex Smola. Super-samples from kernel herding. UAI, 109–116.
  AUAI Press, 2012.
Marco Cuturi. Sinkhorn distances: Lightspeed computation of optimal transport. Advances in neural
 information processing systems, 26, 2013.
Will Dabney, Georg Ostrovski, David Silver, and Rémi Munos. Implicit quantile networks for
 distributional reinforcement learning. International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML),
 2018a.
Will Dabney, Mark Rowland, Marc G Bellemare, and Rémi Munos. Distributional reinforcement
 learning with quantile regression. Association for the Advancement of Artificial Intelligence
 (AAAI), 2018b.
Odin Elie and Charpentier Arthur. Dynamic Programming in Distributional Reinforcement Learn-
  ing. PhD thesis, Université du Québec à Montréal, 2020.
Jianqing Fan, Zhaoran Wang, Yuchen Xie, and Zhuoran Yang. A theoretical analysis of deep q-
   learning. In Learning for Dynamics and Control, pp. 486–489. PMLR, 2020.
Jean Feydy, Thibault Séjourné, François-Xavier Vialard, Shun-ichi Amari, Alain Trouvé, and
  Gabriel Peyré. Interpolating between optimal transport and mmd using sinkhorn divergences.
  In The 22nd International Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Statistics, pp. 2681–2690.
  PMLR, 2019.
Joel Franklin and Jens Lorenz. On the scaling of multidimensional matrices. Linear Algebra and its
  applications, 114:717–735, 1989.
Aude Genevay, Gabriel Peyré, and Marco Cuturi. Learning generative models with sinkhorn di-
  vergences. In International Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Statistics, pp. 1608–1617.
  PMLR, 2018.
Aude Genevay, Lénaic Chizat, Francis Bach, Marco Cuturi, and Gabriel Peyré. Sample complexity
  of sinkhorn divergences. In The 22nd International Conference on Artificial Intelligence and
  Statistics, pp. 1574–1583. PMLR, 2019.
Philippe Rigollet Jason Altschuler, Jonathan Weed. Near-linear time approximation algorithms for
  optimal transport via sinkhorn iteration, 2017.

                                               10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Christian Léonard. A survey of the schr\” odinger problem and some of its connections with optimal
  transport. arXiv preprint arXiv:1308.0215, 2013.
Yudong Luo, Guiliang Liu, Haonan Duan, Oliver Schulte, and Pascal Poupart. Distributional rein-
  forcement learning with monotonic splines. In International Conference on Learning Represen-
  tations, 2021.
Volodymyr Mnih, Koray Kavukcuoglu, David Silver, Andrei A Rusu, Joel Veness, Marc G Belle-
  mare, Alex Graves, Martin Riedmiller, Andreas K Fidjeland, Georg Ostrovski, et al. Human-level
  control through deep reinforcement learning. nature, 518(7540):529–533, 2015.
Thanh Tang Nguyen, Sunil Gupta, and Svetha Venkatesh. Distributional reinforcement learning with
  maximum mean discrepancy. Association for the Advancement of Artificial Intelligence (AAAI),
  2020.
Nguyen-Tang. Distributional reinforcement learning via moment matching. https://github.
  com/thanhnguyentang/mmdrl, 2021.
Aaditya Ramdas, Nicolás Garcı́a Trillos, and Marco Cuturi. On wasserstein two-sample testing and
  related families of nonparametric tests. Entropy, 19(2):47, 2017.
Mark Rowland, Marc Bellemare, Will Dabney, Rémi Munos, and Yee Whye Teh. An analysis
 of categorical distributional reinforcement learning. In International Conference on Artificial
 Intelligence and Statistics, pp. 29–37. PMLR, 2018.
Ludger Rüschendorf and Wolfgang Thomsen. Closedness of sum spaces andthe generalized
  schrödinger problem. Theory of Probability & Its Applications, 42(3):483–494, 1998.
Richard Sinkhorn. Diagonal equivalence to matrices with prescribed row and column sums. The
  American Mathematical Monthly, 74(4):402–405, 1967.
Gábor J Székely. E-statistics: The energy of statistical samples. Bowling Green State University,
  Department of Mathematics and Statistics Technical Report, 3(05):1–18, 2003.
Eric Wong, Frank Schmidt, and Zico Kolter. Wasserstein adversarial examples via projected
  sinkhorn iterations. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 6808–6817. PMLR,
  2019.
Derek Yang, Li Zhao, Zichuan Lin, Tao Qin, Jiang Bian, and Tie-Yan Liu. Fully parameterized quan-
  tile function for distributional reinforcement learning. Advances in neural information processing
  systems, 32:6193–6202, 2019.
Shangtong Zhang. Modularized implementation of deep rl algorithms in pytorch. https://
  github.com/ShangtongZhang/DeepRL, 2018.
Fan Zhou, Jianing Wang, and Xingdong Feng. Non-crossing quantile regression for distributional
  reinforcement learning. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 33, 2020.
Florian Ziel. The energy distance for ensemble and scenario reduction.              arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2005.14670, 2020.


                                                11
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


A    R ELATED W ORK

Based on the choice of distribution divergence and the distribution representation manner of Zθ ,
distributional RL algorithms can be mainly categorized into three classes, including categorical,
Wasserstein Distance and MMD distributional RL. Finally, we discuss their relationships with
our proposed SinkhornDRL.

Categorical Distributional RL. As the first successful distributional RL family, categorical distri-
butional RL (Bellemare et al., 2017a) represents the value distribution η by the categorical distribu-
           PN
tion η̂ = i=1 pi δzi , where {zi }Ni=1 (z1 < ... < zN ) is the fixed supports within the pre-specified
interval [l, u] and pi is the approximated categorical probability in each bin, respectively. Within
this algorithm family, C51 (Bellemare et al., 2017a) leverages a neural network to approximate the
categorical probabilities pi and apply a projected KL divergence between the target and current cat-
egorical value distributions. C51 has also been shown the theoretical contraction under the Cramér
distance (Bellemare et al., 2017b; Rowland et al., 2018), and empirically performs favorably in the
suite of Atari games.

Wasserstein Distance Distributional RL. As directly solving wasserstein distance in Eq. 16 is
tricky, QR-DQN (Dabney et al., 2018b) firstly proposed to use quantile regression to approximate
Wasserstein distance Wp . QR-DQN leverages quantiles to represent the distribution η of Zθ , i.e.,
     PN
η̂ = i=1 δzi , where {zi }N i=1 is the learnable support atoms as the quantile values of a fixed quantile
{ 2i−1
   2N  } N
         i=1 . Implicit Quantile Networks (IQN) utilizes an implicit model to output quantile values
{zi }N
     i=1  more   expressively, instead  of the given ones in QRDQN. IQN also incorporates the risk
measure in the framework of distributional RL. A follow-up work Fully parameterized Quantile
Function (FQF) (Yang et al., 2019) improves IQN by proposing a more expressive quantile network,
achieving better performance on Atari games. Non-crossing issue in quantile-regression has been
raised and addressed properly in (Zhou et al., 2020) that further improves QR-DQN. The monotonic
rational-quadratic splines are also used to learn smooth continuous quantile functions (Luo et al.,
2021).

MMD Distributional RL. MMD distributional RL (MMDDRL) (Nguyen et al., 2020) learns
samples to represent the value distribution of Zθ based on maximum mean discrepancy (MMD)
in Eq. 20, achieving the state-of-the-art performance on Atari games.

Discussion about SinkhornDRL. As a complementary Wasserstein distance-based distributional
RL, our SinkhornDRL allows to solve Wasserstein Distance by incorporating the entropic regular-
ization and circumstance the non-crossing issue in quantile regression intrinsically. Moreover, the
cost function in SinkhornDRL can be further parameterized similar to IQN and FQF, which can
intuitively achieve better performance. We leave the investigation towards this direction as future
works. Meanwhile, SinkhornDRL is also closely linked with MMDDRL as Sinkhorn divergence
interpolates between Wasserstein distance and MMD, and also learns the unrestricted statistics, i.e.,
samples, akin to MMDDRL.


B    D EFINITION OF DISTANCES AND C ONTRACTION

Definition of distances. Given two random variables X and Y , p-Wasserstein metric Wp between
the distributions of X and Y is defined as
                             Z 1                         1/p
                                     −1       −1    p              −1
               Wp (X, Y ) =         FX (ω) − FY (ω) dω        = kFX   − FY−1 kp ,         (16)
                                 0

which F −1 is the inverse cumulative distribution function of a random variable with the cumulative
distribution function as F . Further, `p distance (Elie & Arthur, 2020) is defined as
                                  Z ∞                             1/p
                                                           p                                        (17)
                 `p (X, Y ) :=            |FX (ω) − FY (ω)| dω          = kFX − FY kp
                                     −∞


                                                   12
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


The `p distance and Wassertein metric are identical at p = 1, but are otherwise distinct. Note that
when p = 2, `p distance is also called Cramér distance (Bellemare et al., 2017b) dC (X, Y ). Also,
the Cramér distance has a different representation given by
                                                 1                1
                     dC (X, Y ) = E|X − Y | − E |X − X 0 | − E |Y − Y 0 | ,                      (18)
                                                 2                2
where X 0 and Y 0 are the i.i.d. copies of X and Y . Energy distance (Székely, 2003; Ziel, 2020) is a
natural extension of Cramér distance to the multivariate case, which is defined as
                                                 1                 1
                   dE (X, Y) = EkX − Yk − EkX − X0 k − EkY − Y0 k,                               (19)
                                                 2                 2
where X and Y are multivariate. Moreover, the energy distance is a special case of the maximum
mean discrepancy (MMD), which is formulated as
                                                                                       1/2
                MMD(X, Y; k) = (E [k (X, X0 )] + E [k (Y, Y0 )] − 2E[k(X, Y)])                       (20)
where k(·, ·) is a continuous kernel on X . In particular, if k is a trivial kernel, MMD degener-
ates to energy distance. Additionally, we further define the supreme MMD, which is a functional
P(X )S×A × P(X )S×A → R defined as
                         MMD∞ (µ, ν) =        sup      MMD∞ (µ(x, a), ν(x, a))                       (21)
                                           (x,a)∈S×A


We further present the convergence rate under different distribution divergences.

        • T π is γ-contractive under the supreme form of Wassertein distance Wp .
        • T π is γ 1/p -contractive under the supreme form of `p distance.
        • T π is γ α/2 -contractive under MMD∞ with the kernel kα (x, y) = −kx − ykα , ∀α > 0.

Proof of Contraction.

        • Contraction under supreme form of Wasserstein diatance is provided in Lemma 3 (Belle-
          mare et al., 2017a).
        • Contraction under supreme form of `p distance can refer to Theorem 3.4 (Elie & Arthur,
          2020).
        • Contraction under MMD∞ is provided in Lemma 6 (Nguyen et al., 2020).

C      P ROOF OF T HEOREM 1
Proof. 1. ε → 0 and c = −kα It is obvious to observe that Sinkhorn loss degenerates to the
wasserstein distance. We also have the conclusion that the distributional Bellman operator Tπ is
γ-contractive under the supreme form of Wasserstein diatance, the proof of which is provided in
Lemma 3 (Bellemare et al., 2017a). Since the above conclusion is made directly based on the
limiting case when ε = 0, for an unspecified ε, we need a more rigorous proof. We show that their
distance difference is at most an infinitesimal δ.
Firstly, as Wc,ε → Wα and the regularization term is non-negative, using the language of (ε, δ)
definition, we have: for ∀δ, there exists a small positive constant a, such that Wc,ε − Wα < δ when
  ≤ a. Based on that, we have the contraction conclusion:
      ∞                           ∞
    W −κα ,ε (Tπ Z1 , Tπ Z2 ) = W −κα ,ε (Tπ Z1 , Tπ Z2 ) − Wα∞ (Tπ Z1 , Tπ Z2 ) + Wα∞ (Tπ Z1 , Tπ Z2 )
                            ≤ δ + Wα∞ (Tπ Z1 , Tπ Z2 ),
                                                                                               (22)
where the second term Wα∞ (Tπ Z1 , Tπ Z2 ) is contractive, and thus for the unspecified ε, the only
difference from the limting ε = 0 is an infinitesimal δ, which will vanish as ε → 0 or a → 0.
2. ε → ∞. Our complete proof is inspired by (Ramdas et al., 2017; Genevay et al., 2018). Recap
the definition of squared MMD is
                             E [k (X, X0 )] + E [k (Y, Y0 )] − 2E[k(X, Y)]


                                                    13
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


When the kernel function k degenerates to a unrectified kα (x, y) := −kx − ykα for α ∈ (0, 2), the
squared MMD would degenerate to
                          EkX − X0 kα + EkY − Y0 kα − 2EkX − Ykα

On the other hand, we have the Sinkhorn loss as
                     W c,∞ (µ, ν) = 2Wc,∞ (µ, ν) − Wc,∞ (ν, ν) − Wc,∞ (µ, ν)
Denoting Πε be the unique minimizer for W c,ε , itRholds that Πε → µ ⊗ ν as ε → ∞. That being
                                        + 0 = c(x, y)dµ(x)dν(y). If c = −kα = kx − ykα ,
                    R
said, Wc,∞ (µ, ν) → c(x, y)dµ(x)dν(y)
we eventually have W−kα ,∞ (µ, ν) → kx − ykα dµ(x)dν(y) = EkX − Ykα . Finally, we can have
                                   R

                   W −kα ,∞ → 2EkX − Ykα − EkX − X0 kα − EkY − Y0 kα
which is exactly the form of squared MMD. Now the key is prove that Πε → µ ⊗ ν as ε → ∞.
                                          R
Firstly, it is apparent that Wc,ε (µ, ν) ≤ c(x, y)dµ(x)dν(y) as µ⊗ν ∈ Π(µ, ν). Let {εk } be a pos-
itive sequence that diverges to ∞, and Πk be the corresponding sequence
                                                                      R   of unique minimizers for
Wc,ε .RAccording to the optimality condition, it must be the case that c(x, y)dΠk + εk KL(Πk , µ ⊗
ν) ≤ c(x, y)dµ ⊗ ν + 0 (when Π(µ, ν) = µ ⊗ ν). Thus,
                                                Z              Z
                                            1
                         KL (Πk , µ ⊗ ν) 6        c dµ ⊗ ν − c dΠk → 0.
                                            εk

Besides, by the compactness of Π(µ, ν), we can extract a converging subsequence Πnk → Π∞ .
Since KL is weakly lower-semicontinuous, it holds that
                        KL (Π∞ , µ ⊗ ν) 6 lim inf KL (Πnk , µ ⊗ ν) = 0
                                                 k→∞

Hence Π∞ = µ⊗ν. That being said that the optimal coupling is simply the product of the marginals,
indicating that Πε → µ ⊗ ν as ε → ∞. As a special case, when α = 1, W −k1 ,∞ (u, v) is equivalent
to the energy distance
                    dE (X, Y) := 2EkX − Yk − EkX − X0 k − EkY − Y0 k.                             (23)

In summary, if the cost function is the rectified kernel kα , it is the case that W −kα ,ε converges to
the squared MMD as ε → ∞. According to (Nguyen et al., 2020), Tπ is γ α/2 -contractive in the
supreme form of MMD with the rectified kernel kα .
For the unspecified ε, we can get the similar result to the case of ε → 0. For ∀δ, there exists a large
positive constant M , such that MMD2kα − Wc,ε < δ when   ≥ M . Based on that, we have the
contraction conclusion:
  ∞                           ∞
W −κα ,ε (Tπ Z1 , Tπ Z2 ) = W −κα ,ε (Tπ Z1 , Tπ Z2 ) − MMD2∞ (Tπ Z1 , Tπ Z2 ) + MMD2∞ (Tπ Z1 , Tπ Z2 )
                        ≤ MMD2∞ (Tπ Z1 , Tπ Z2 ) − δ,
                                                 α
                                                                                                (24)
where the first term MMD2∞ (Tπ Z1 , Tπ Z2 ) is γ 2 -contractive, and thus for the unspecified ε, the
only difference from the limiting ε = ∞ is an infinitesimal δ, which will vanish as ε → +∞ or
(M → +∞).
3. For ε ∈ (0, +∞), the contraction property needs a long proof. The proof pipeline is firstly we
prove the three properties of Sinkhorn divergence, and then we show the contraction of distributional
Bellman operator under Sinkhorn divergence based on its properties. Most importantly, we analyzed
the contraction under a new non-constant factor.
3.1 Properties of Sinkhorn Divergence. We recap three crucial properties of a divergence metric.
The first is scale sensitive (S) (of order β, β > 0), i.e., dp (cX, cY ) ≤ |c|β dp (X, Y ). The second
property is shift invariant (I), i.e., dp (A + X, A + Y ) ≤ dp (X, Y ). The last one is unbiased
gradient (U). A key observation for the analysis is that the Sinkhorn divergence would degenerate
to a two-dimensional KL divergence, and therefore embraces a similar convergence behavior to KL
divergence. Concretely, according to the equivalent form of Wc,ε (µ, ν) in Eq. 9, it can be expressed


                                                  14
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


as the KL divergence between an optimal joint distribution and a Gibbs distribution associated with
the cost function:
                              Wc,ε (µ, ν) := KL (Π∗ (µ, ν)|K(µ, ν)) ,                           (25)
where Π∗ is the optimal joint distribution. Thus, the total Sinkhorn divergence is expressed as
   W c,ε (µ, ν) := 2KL (Π∗ (µ, ν)|K(µ, ν)) − KL (Π∗ (µ, µ)|K(µ, µ)) − KL (Π∗ (ν, ν)|K(ν, ν)) .
                                                                                            (26)
Due to the form of W c,ε (µ, ν), the convergence behavior is determined by Wc,ε (µ, ν), which is
similar to the behavior of KL divergence. Thus, we will focus on the convergence analysis of
Wc,ε (µ, ν). According to the fact that KL divergence has unbiased gradient estimates (U) and shift
invariant (I), and Sinkkhorn divergence can be viewed as a two-dimensional KL divergence, both
properties of U and I can be extended to Sinkhorn divergence. However, we find the non scale
sensitive (S) property can not directly apply to Sinkhorn divergence due to the minimum nature of
Wc,ε (µ, ν) as the optimal joint distribution Π∗ (µ, ν) could be different from Π0 (aµ, aν) where a is
the scale factor. We need a new rigorous proof of scale sensitive property as follows.
3.2 Scale Sensitive Property of Sinkhorn Divergence.
We show Sinkhorn divergence satisfies a variant of scale sensitive property when c = −kα that
corresponds to a non-constant scale factor ∆(a, α) that is not only a function of the vanilla scale
factor a and α in kα , but also the two specified probability measures (U, V ). By definition, the pdf
                −c(x,y)
of K(U, V ) ∝ e ε µ(x)ν(y). After a scaling transformation, the pdf of aU and aV with respect
                                                                  −c(x,y)
to x and y would be a1 µ( xa ) and a1 ν( ay ). Thus K(aU, aV ) ∝ e ε a1 µ( xa ) a1 ν( ay ). We denote Π∗
and Π0 as the optimal joint distribution of Wc,ε (µ, ν) and Wc,ε (aµ, aν).

                   Z
Wc,ε (aU, aV ) =       c(x, y)dΠ0 (x, y) + εKL(Π0 |aµ ⊗ aν)
                   Z
               ≤    c(x, y)dΠ∗ (x, y) + εKL(Π∗ |aµ ⊗ aν)
                                                                                1 ∗ x y
                                                                               a2 π ( a , a )
                     Z                                Z
               c=−kα            α 1 ∗ x y                 1 ∗ x y
                 =      (x − y) 2 π ( , )dxdy + ε           π   (  ,   ) log   1    x     y dxdy
                                 a      a a              a2       a a         a2 µ( a )ν( a )
                                                                    π ∗ (x, y)
                      Z                           Z
               = |a|α (x − y)α π ∗ (x, y)dxdy + ε π ∗ (x, y) log                dxdy
                                                                   µ(x)ν(y)
                 Z                                                           Z
               = (x − y)α π ∗ (x, y)dxdy + εKL(Π∗ |µ ⊗ ν) − (1 − |a|α ) (x − y)α π ∗ (x, y)dxdy
                                           Z
               = Wc,ε (U, V ) − (1 − |a|α ) (x − y)α dΠ∗ (x, y)

               = ∆U,V (a, α)Wc,ε (U, V )
                                                                                              (27)
                          (1−|a|α ) (x−y)α dΠ∗ (x,y)
                                    R
         U,V
where ∆ (a, α) = 1 −              Wc,ε (U,V )        ∈ (0, 1) for ε ∈ (0, +∞) and a < 1 due to the
fact that 0 < (1 − |a| ) (x − y) dΠ (x, y) < (x − y)α dΠ∗ (x, y) < Wc,ε (U, V ). ∆U,V (a, α)
                      α            α    ∗
                        R                         R
is function less than 1 that depends on the two margin distributions and the scale factor a. The
result implies that we have a new variant of scale sensitive property of Sinkhorn divergence with a
non-constant factor ∆U,V (a, α) < 1 when we choose c = −kα and |a| < 1.
3.3 A New Contraction Mapping Theorem.
We derive a new contraction mapping theorem based on the distribution distance d in order to prove
the convergence in 3.4.
Theorem 2. (Distribution Contraction Mapping Theorem with a Non-constant Factor) Consider a
distribution distance d and a function g : P → P. The mapping d is a contraction: There exists a
function q(X, Y ) < 1 such that for ∀ distributions X and Y :
                               d(g(X), g(Y )) ≤ q(X, Y )d(X, Y )                                   (28)
                                           ∗           ∗      ∗
Then there exists a unique distribution X with g(X ) = X .


                                                  15
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Proof. We consider the convergence of the distribution sequence X k . We have the updating rule as

                    d(X k+1 , X k ) = d(g(X k ), g(X k−1 )) ≤ qk,k−1 d(X k , X k−1 ),                      (29)

where we use qk,k−1 = q(X k , X k−1 ) for short. Hence, we have

                                     d(X k+1 , X k ) ≤ Πki=1 qi,i−1 d(X 1 , X 0 ).                         (30)

Let d0 = d(X 1 , X 0 ). From the triangle inequality, we have

               d(X k+l , X k ) ≤ d(X k+1 , X k ) + ... + d(X k+l , X k+l−1 ),
                                   ≤ Πki=1 qi,i−1 d0 + .. + Πk+l−1
                                                             i=1   qi,i−1 d0
                                                                                                           (31)
                                   ≤ Πki=1 qi,i−1 (1 + qk+1,k + ... + Πk+l−1
                                                                       i=k+1 qi,i−1 )d0
                                   ≤ Πki=1 qi,i−1 (1 + qk+1,k + ... + Πk+l−1
                                                                       i=k+1 qi,i−1 + ...)d0

                                               k+l−1
For the infinite series 1 + qk+1,k + ... + Πi=k+1    qi,i−1 + ..., which we denote as ui for i-the term,
according to the ratio convergence judgment method of infinite series, limk→∞ uui+1   i
                                                                                         < 1. Thus, the
infinite series is convergent. Due to the fact Πi=1 qi,i−1 → 0 as k → ∞, we have d(X k+1 , X k ) → 0
                                                 k

as k → ∞. Therefore, it must converge to a limit distribution X ∗ that satisfies g(X ∗ ) = X ∗ .



3.4 Contraction of Distributional Bellman Operator under Sinkhorn Divergence.
According to the equation of W c,ε , it holds the same properties as Wc,ε , i.e., shift invariant and scale
sensitive. Thus, we derive the convergence of distributional Bellman operator Tπ under the supreme
                        ∞
form of W c,ε , i.e., W c,ε :

                     ∞
                  W c,ε (Tπ Z1 , Tπ Z2 )
                   = sup W c,ε (Tπ Z1 (s, a), Tπ Z2 (s, a))
                      s,a

                   = W c,ε (R(s, a) + γZ1 (s0 , a0 ), R(s, a) + γZ2 (s0 , a0 ))
                   c=−kα               0   0        0   0
                     ≤         ∆Z1 (s ,a ),Z2 (s ,a ) (γ, α)W c,ε (Z1 (s0 , a0 ), Z2 (s0 , a0 ))           (32)
                                 Z1 (s0 ,a0 ),Z2 (s0 ,a0 )                           0   0       0   0
                   ≤ sup ∆                                   (γ, α) sup W c,ε (Z1 (s , a ), Z2 (s , a ))
                      s0 ,a0                                        s0 ,a0

                   ≤∆    Z1 ,Z2
                                  (γ, α) sup W −kα ,ε (Z1 (s0 , a0 ), Z2 (s0 , a0 ))
                                        s0 ,a0
                         Z1 ,Z2             ∞
                   =∆             (γ, α)W −kα ,ε (Z1 , Z2 )

where the first inequality comes from the scale sensitive property proof of Sinkhorn divergence and
                                        0 0        0 0
we let ∆Z1 ,Z2 (γ, α) = sups0 ,a0 ∆Z1 (s ,a ),Z2 (s ,a ) (γ). If ∆Z1 ,Z2 (γ, α) is only a constant function
in terms of γ and α, we can directly arrive the conclusion that distributional Bellman operator is
∆Z1 ,Z2 (γ, α)-contractive based on existing Banach fixed point theorem. However, the fact is that
∆Z1 ,Z2 (γ, α) also depends on Z1 and Z2 , and thus we need a new contraction mapping theorem
to guarantee the convergence of fixed distribution iteration. According to Theorem 2 in 3.3 that we
                                                                       ∞
specifically figure out for the our contraction proof, we have W c,ε can guarantee the convergence
via distributional Bellman iterations. In summary, we conclude that Tπ is a contractive operator
when we use the −kα as the cost function and γ ≤ 1, while the contraction factor, which is short
for ∆(γ, α) < 1, is not only a function of α and γ, but also depends on distribution sequence
in the while iterations.



                                                                  16
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


D    P ROOF OF P ROPOSITION 1 AND C OROLLARY 1
Proof. As we leverage Π∗ to denote the optimal Π by evaluating the Sinkhorn divergence via
minΠ∈Π(µ,ν) W c,ε (µ, ν; k), the Sinkhorn divergence can be composed in the following form:
W c,ε (µ, ν; k)
= 2KL (Π∗ (µ, ν)|K−k (µ, ν)) − KL (Π∗ (µ, µ)|K−k (µ, µ)) − KL (Π∗ (ν, ν)|K−k (ν, ν))
                               1                                                1
= 2(EX,Y [log Π∗ (µ, ν)]) + EX,X 0 [c(X, Y )]) − (EX,X 0 [log Π∗ (µ, ν)]) + EX,Y [c(X, Y )])
                               ε                                                ε
                  ∗          1                0
− (EY,Y 0 [log Π (ν, ν)]) + EY,Y 0 [c(Y, Y )])
                             ε
                        (Π∗ (X, Y ))2

                                                1
= EX,X 0 ,Y,Y 0 log ∗                         + (EX,X 0 [k(X, X 0 )] + EY,Y 0 [k(Y, Y 0 )] − 2EX,X 0 [k(X, Y )])
                    Π (X, X 0 )Π∗ (Y, Y 0 )     ε
                           ∗        2

                        (Π (X, Y ))             1
= EX,X 0 ,Y,Y 0 log ∗                         + MMD2−c (µ, ν)
                    Π (X, X 0 )Π∗ (Y, Y 0 )     ε
                                                                                                 (33)
where the cost function c in the Gibbs distribution K is minus Gaussian kernel, i.e., c(x, y) =
                        2
−k(x, y) = e−(x−y)/(2σ ) . Till now, we have shown the result in Corollary 1.
Next, we use Taylor expansion to prove the moment matching of MMD. Firstly, we have the follow-
ing equation:


 MMD2−c (µ, ν) = EX,X 0 [k(X, X 0 )] + EY,Y 0 [k(Y, Y 0 )] − 2EX,X 0 [k(X, Y )]
               = EX,X 0 φ(X)> φ(X 0 ) + EY,Y 0 φ(Y )> φ(Y 0 ) − 2EX,X 0 φ(X)> φ(Y ) (34)


                 = Ekφ(X) − φ(Y )k2
We expand the Gaussian kernel via Taylor expansion, i.e.,
                                                    2        2
                          k(x, y) = e−(x−y) /(2σ )
                                             x2         y2       xy
                                    = e− 2σ2 e− 2σ2 e σ2
                                                     ∞
                                          x2     y2 X     1 x    1 y
                                    = e− 2σ2 e− 2σ2      √ ( )n √ ( )n
                                                          n! σ   n! σ                                (35)
                                                    n=0
                                         ∞
                                         X       x2  1 x       y2  1 y
                                    =        e− 2σ2 √ ( )n e− 2σ2 √ ( )n
                                         n=0         n! σ          n! σ
                                    = φ(x)> φ(y)
Therefore, we have
                             ∞                                                            i 2
                                     1               h   2    2
                                                                   i      h   2    2
                                                 Ex∼µ e−x /(2σ ) xn − Ex∼ν e−y /(2σ ) y n
                             X
         MMD2−c (µ, ν) =
                             n=0
                                   σ 2n n!
                              ∞                                    2                                 (36)
                             X       1
                         =                       M̃n (µ) − M̃n (ν)
                             n=0
                                   σ 2n n!
              h   2    2
                            i
M̃n (µ) = Ex∼µ e−x /(2σ ) xn , and similarly for M̃n (ν). The conclusion is the same as the
moment matching in (Nguyen et al., 2020). Finally, due to the equivalence of W c,ε (µ, ν) after
multiplying ε, we have

                                                        (Π∗ (X, Y ))2

        W c,ε (µ, ν; k) := MMD2−c (µ, ν) + εE
                                                  Π∗ (X, X 0 )Π∗ (Y, Y 0 )
                          ∞                                                                          (37)
                                                                          (Π∗ (X, Y ))2
                         X 1                               2
                       =               M̃ n (µ) − M̃ n (ν)   +  εE                               ,
                         n=0
                             σ 2n n!                                  Π∗ (X, X 0 )Π∗ (Y, Y 0 )


                                                             17
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


This result is also equivalent to Theorem 1, where Π∗ would degenerate to µ ⊗ ν as ε → +∞. In
that case, the first regularization term would vanish, and thus the Sinkhorn divergence degrades to a
MMD loss, i.e., MMD2−c (µ, ν).



E     H UMAN - NORMALIZED S CORES

                                       Mean      Median      > Human       >DQN
                      DQN            438.7 %      43.6 %        17           0
                      C51           1043.4 %     103.7 %        26          42
                   QR-DQN-1         1286.4 %     108.6 %        31          47
                   MMDDRL            924.6 %     117.5 %        27          43
                   QRDQN(tf)         535.1 %     108.2 %        28          40
                  MMDDRL(tf)         665.0 %      99.8 %        27          39
                  SinkhornDRL       1435.8 %     113.0 %        27          42

Table 2: Mean and median of best human-normalized scores across 55 Atari 2600 games. The
results for all considered algorithms are averaged over 3 seeds. DQN, C51, QR-DQN-1, MMDDRL
are based on our Pytorch implementation after 10M time steps adapted from (Zhang, 2018), while
QRDQN(tf) and MMDDRL(tf) are training results also after 10M time steps from the tensorflow
Dopamine framework of MMDDRL (Nguyen et al., 2020) released in (Nguyen-Tang, 2021).

Human normalized score equation is (algorithm - randomplay) / (human - randomplay). Our im-
plementation of DQN, QRDQN-1, C51, MMDDRL, Sinkhorn is based on (Zhang, 2018) and all
the experimental settings, including parameters are identical to the distributional RL baselines im-
plemented by (Zhang, 2018). The results about mean and median human-normalized scores of all
considered distributional RL algorithms are reported in Table 2. We also compare the performance
of QRDQN(tf) and MMDDRL(tf) after the same 10M time steps based on tensorflow implemen-
tation on Dopamine framework (Castro et al., 2018). These results are averaged over training data
released in (Nguyen-Tang, 2021). We argue that Human-normalized scores may be limited to eval-
uate the superiority of algorithms as mean can be highly affected by the performance on games with
high-level returns. For example, in Figure 2, MMDDRL is superior to QR-DQN as Sinkhorn out-
performs MMDDRL on a smaller portion of games compared with QRDQN, but the mean score
for MMDDRL in Table 2 is lower than QRDQN. By contrast, SinkhornDRL is superior in terms of
mean score and competitive in terms of median. We also provide all average results in Table 3 of
Appendix H and all learning curves of our implemented algorithms in Appendix F.

F     M ORE EXPERIMENTAL R ESULTS
We provide learning curves of DQN, QRDQN, C51, MMD and SinkhornDRL algorithms on all
55 Atari games in Figures 4 5 6 7 8 9. It illustrates that SinkhornDRL dramatically surpasses the
other distributional RL algorithms on a large amount of environments, e.g., Venture, Atlantis, Tennis
and SpaceInvader, and presents competitive performance or is only slightly inferior as opposed to
the state-of-the-art baselines on other games. Note that the average improvement of SinkhornDRL
on Venture game is significant owing to one to two times convergence of SinkhornDRL algorithm
over 3 seeds, while the other baselines do not converge over the considered seeds. Although this
improvement may also suffer from the instability issue, its occasional success for our SinkhornDRL
algorithm also presents huge potential on some complicated environments. We leave the further
exploration on the advantage and potential of SinkhornDRL algorithm as the future work.

G     S ENSITIVITY A NALYSIS AND C OMPUTATIONAL C OST
G.1    M ORE RESULTS IN S ENSITIVITY A NALYSIS

Decreasing ε. We argue that the limit behavior connection as stated in Theorem 1 may not be
able to be verified rigorously via numeral experiments due to the numerical instability of Sinkhorn


                                                 18
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                                                                 %UHDNRXW                                                                                                                          (QGXUR                                                                                                                      3RQJ
                                                   '41                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                '41
                                                                                                                                                                                          '41
                                                      &                                                                                                                                    &                                                                                                                            &


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           $YHUDJH 5HWXUQ
                                                      45'41
 $YHUDJH 5HWXUQ


                                                                                                                                                                                       45'41                                                                                                                      45'41
                                                                                                                                           $YHUDJH 5HWXUQ

                                                      00'                                                                                                                                  00'                                                                                                                        00'
                                                      6LQNKRUQ                                                                                                                    6LQNKRUQ                                                                                                                6LQNKRUQ


                                                                           7LPH 6WHSV   H                                                                                                        7LPH 6WHSV   H                                                                                              7LPH 6WHSV   H

                                                                           <DUV5HYHQJH                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   %DWWOH=RQH
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            '41
                                                            '41                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               &
                                                            &                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            45'41

 $YHUDJH 5HWXUQ


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           $YHUDJH 5HWXUQ
                                                            45'41                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           00'
                                                            00'                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          6LQNKRUQ
                                                       6LQNKRUQ


                                                                            7LPH 6WHSV   H                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       7LPH 6WHSV   H

                                                                                       %HU]HUN                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     6SDFH,QYDGHUV
                                                   '41

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                4EHUW                                                                                     '41
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   &
                                                       &                                                                                                                                             '41
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           $YHUDJH 5HWXUQ


                                                       45'41                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             45'41
                                                                                                                                                                                                        &
                                                                                                                                            $YHUDJH 5HWXUQ


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                00'
 $YHUDJH 5HWXUQ


                                                       00'
                                                                                                                                                                                                   45'41
                                                       6LQNKRUQ                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            6LQNKRUQ
                                                                                                                                                                                                   00'
                                                                                                                                                                                                     6LQNKRUQ


                                                                           7LPH 6WHSV   H                                                                                                        7LPH 6WHSV   H                                                                                              7LPH 6WHSV   H

Figure 4: Performance of SinkhornDRL compared with DQN, C51, QRDQN and MMD on Break-
out, Enduro, Pong, YarRevenge, Alien, BattleZone, Berzerk, Qbert and SpaceInvader.


                                                                                                                                                                                                                           19
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                                                                                    8S1'RZQ
                                                                            '41
                                                                                 &
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             $VWHUL[                                                                                                                                   $VWHURLGV
                                                                                                                                                                                                         '41                                                                                                                              '41
                                                                                 45'41                                                                                                              &
   $YHUDJH 5HWXUQ


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       &
                                                                                 00'                                                                                                                  45'41                                                                                                                              45'41
                                                                                                                                                                                                         00'
                                                                                 6LQNKRUQ                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                00'
                                                                                                                                            $YHUDJH 5HWXUQ



                                                                                                                                                                                                    6LQNKRUQ                                                                                                                        6LQNKRUQ


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       $YHUDJH 5HWXUQ


                                                                                             7LPH 6WHSV   H                                                                                                     7LPH 6WHSV   H                                                                                                                       7LPH 6WHSV   H

                                                                                                    %HDP5LGHU                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              &UD]\&OLPEHU
                                                              '41
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   &HQWLSHGH                                                                                                  '41
                                                              &                                                                                                                                '41                                                                                                                                                     &
                                                                                                                                                                                         &                                                                                                                                                       45'41
                                                              45'41
                                                                                                                                                                                                  45'41

                                                              00'                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         00'
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         $YHUDJH 5HWXUQ
                                                              6LQNKRUQ                                                                                                                00'
                                                                                                                                                                                                  6LQNKRUQ                                                                                                                                     6LQNKRUQ
 $YHUDJH 5HWXUQ


                                                                                                                                            $YHUDJH 5HWXUQ


                                                                                                7LPH 6WHSV   H                                                                                                  7LPH 6WHSV   H                                                                                                                       7LPH 6WHSV   H
                                                                                               )LVKLQJ'HUE\                                                                                                              )URVWELWH
                                                                 '41
                                                               &
                                                                                                                                                                                                     '41
                                                                                                                                                                                                     &                                                                                                                                                                           5LYHUUDLG
                                                                 45'41                                                                                                                          45'41                                                                                                                                  '41
                                                                                                                                                                                               00'
                                                                 00'                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          &
                                                                                                                                                                                                     6LQNKRUQ                                                                                                                            45'41
                                                                 6LQNKRUQ
 $YHUDJH 5HWXUQ


                                                                                                                                            $YHUDJH 5HWXUQ


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       00'
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            $YHUDJH 5HWXUQ


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 6LQNKRUQ


                                                                                               7LPH 6WHSV   H                                                                                                   7LPH 6WHSV   H
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                7LPH 6WHSV   H

Figure 5: Performance of SinkhornDRL compared with DQN, C51, QRDQN and MMD on UpN-
Down, Asterix, Asteriods, BeamRider, Centipede, FishingDerby, Frostbite and Riverraid.


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      20
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                                                                              7LPH3LORW                                                                                                                 6WDU*XQQHU                                                                                                                          6HDTXHVW
                                                                  '41                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     '41
                                                                                                                                                                                                   '41
                                                                  &                                                                                                                                 &                                                                                                                                       &
                                                                  45'41                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            45'41
                                                                                                                                                                                                       45'41
    $YHUDJH 5HWXUQ


                                                              00'                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          00'


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         $YHUDJH 5HWXUQ
                                                                                                                                                                                                       00'
                                                                                                                                                     $YHUDJH 5HWXUQ


                                                                  6LQNKRUQ                                                                                                                6LQNKRUQ                                                                                                                           6LQNKRUQ


                                                                                     7LPH 6WHSV   H                                                                                                            7LPH 6WHSV   H                                                                                                          7LPH 6WHSV   H
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        3KRHQL[
                                                                                     1DPH7KLV*DPH
                                                                                                                                                                                                        '41
                                                                                                                                                                                                        &
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 7HQQLV
                                                                                                                                                                                                        45'41                                                                                                                            '41
                                                             '41
                                                                                                                                                                                              00'                                                                                                                                  &
                                                             &
                                                                                                                                                                                                        6LQNKRUQ
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              45'41
                                                                                                                                                     $YHUDJH 5HWXUQ


                                                             45'41

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         $YHUDJH 5HWXUQ
                                                        00'                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       00'
   $YHUDJH 5HWXUQ


                                                             6LQNKRUQ                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   6LQNKRUQ


                                                                                         7LPH 6WHSV   H                                                                                                        7LPH 6WHSV   H                                                                                                        7LPH 6WHSV   H

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        9HQWXUH                                                                                                                     9LGHR3LQEDOO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        '41
                                                                                                                                                                                                            '41
                                                                                         7XWDQNKDP                                                                                             &
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        &
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        45'41
                                                          '41                                                                                                                                            45'41
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        00'
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         $YHUDJH 5HWXUQ
                                                                                                                                                      $YHUDJH 5HWXUQ


                                                       &                                                                                                                                              00'
                                                          45'41                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           6LQNKRUQ
                                                          00'                                                                                                                                            6LQNKRUQ
 $YHUDJH 5HWXUQ


                                                       6LQNKRUQ


                                                                                      7LPH 6WHSV   H                                                                                                       7LPH 6WHSV   H                                                                                                              7LPH 6WHSV   H

Figure 6: Performance of SinkhornDRL compared with DQN, C51, QRDQN and MMD on TimePi-
lot, StarGuner, Seaquest, NameThisGame, Phoenix, Tennix, Tutankham, Venture and VideoPinball.


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        21
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                                                               5RDG5XQQHU                                                                                                 -DPHVERQG
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                ,FH+RFNH\
                                                           '41                                                                                                                                                                                                                                '41

                                                                                                                                                                              '41
                                                           &                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     &
                                                                                                                                                                              &
                                                           45'41                                                                                                      45'41                                                                                                            45'41
                                                                                                                           $YHUDJH 5HWXUQ


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              $YHUDJH 5HWXUQ
 $YHUDJH 5HWXUQ


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                00'
                                                           00'                                                                                                             00'
                                                           6LQNKRUQ                                                                                                6LQNKRUQ                                                                                                       6LQNKRUQ


                                                                              7LPH 6WHSV   H                                                                                      7LPH 6WHSV   H                                                                                            7LPH 6WHSV   H
                                                                                                                                                                                                    %DQN+HLVW
                                                                                            +HUR
                                                                                                                                                                                 '41                                                                                                 H                                       $WODQWLV

                                                   '41                                                                                                                   &                                                                                                                '41
                                                        &                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   &
                                                        45'41                                                                                                               45'41                                                                                                          45'41
                                                                                                                           $YHUDJH 5HWXUQ


                                                    00'                                                                                                                   00'
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              $YHUDJH 5HWXUQ
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  00'
 $YHUDJH 5HWXUQ


                                                        6LQNKRUQ                                                                                                      6LQNKRUQ                                                                                                    6LQNKRUQ


                                                                               7LPH 6WHSV   H                                                                                    7LPH 6WHSV   H                                                                                             7LPH 6WHSV   H

                                                                                                                                                                                                        $PLGDU                                                                                                                  $VVDXOW

                                                                                                                                                                              '41                                                                                                                    '41
                                                                              :L]DUG2I:RU                                                                       &                                                                                                                           &
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             45'41
                                                                                                                                                                              45'41
                                                          '41
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              $YHUDJH 5HWXUQ


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             00'
                                                                                                                           $YHUDJH 5HWXUQ


                                                               &                                                                                                        00'
                                                                                                                                                                              6LQNKRUQ                                                                                                           6LQNKRUQ
  $YHUDJH 5HWXUQ


                                                           45'41
                                                               00'
                                                           6LQNKRUQ


                                                                              7LPH 6WHSV   H                                                                                     7LPH 6WHSV   H                                                                                              7LPH 6WHSV   H


Figure 7: Performance of SinkhornDRL compared with DQN, C51, QRDQN and MMD on Road-
Runner, Jamesbond, IceHockey, Hero, BankHeist, Atlantis, WizardOfWor, Amidar and Assault.


                                                                                                                                                                                                       22
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                                                                      %RZOLQJ                                                                                                            %R[LQJ
                                                         '41
                                                                                                                                                                                 '41                                                                                                                                'RXEOH'XQN

                                                                                                                                                                                  &                                                                                                               '41
                                                         &                                                                                                                       45'41
                                                       45'41                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    &
                                                                                                                                 $YHUDJH 5HWXUQ

                                                                                                                                                                                  00'
 $YHUDJH 5HWXUQ


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      $YHUDJH 5HWXUQ
                                                         00'                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      45'41
                                                                                                                                                                                  6LQNKRUQ
                                                         6LQNKRUQ                                                                                                                                                                                                                            00'
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   6LQNKRUQ


                                                                                7LPH 6WHSV   H                                                                                         7LPH 6WHSV   H                                                                                     7LPH 6WHSV   H


                                                                                     )UHHZD\
                                                             '41
                                                           &
                                                             45'41
      $YHUDJH 5HWXUQ


                                                             00'
                                                           6LQNKRUQ


                                                                            7LPH 6WHSV   H
                                                                                                                                                                                                       .XQJ)X0DVWHU
                                                                                                .UXOO                                                                             '41                                                                                                                     0RQWH]XPD5HYHQJH
                                                             '41                                                                                                               &                                                                                                          '41

                                                             &                                                                                                                      45'41                                                                                                    &
                                                         45'41                                                                                                                                                                                                                              45'41
                                                                                                                                                                                       00'
                                                                                                                                 $YHUDJH 5HWXUQ
     $YHUDJH 5HWXUQ


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      $YHUDJH 5HWXUQ


                                                             00'                                                                                                               6LQNKRUQ                                                                                              00'
                                                         6LQNKRUQ                                                                                                                                                                                                                        6LQNKRUQ


                                                                                 7LPH 6WHSV   H                                                                                           7LPH 6WHSV   H                                                                                  7LPH 6WHSV   H


Figure 8: Performance of SinkhornDRL compared with DQN, C51, QRDQN and MMD on Bowl-
ing, Boxing, DoubleDunk, Freeway, Gravitar, Kangaroo, Krull, KunFuMaster and MontezumaRe-
venge.


                                                                                                                                                                                                               23
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                                                                                                                                                                                                  3LWIDOO                                                                                                         3ULYDWH(\H
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 '41
                                                                                                                                                                                  '41
                                                                                                                                                                                  &                                                                                                                            &
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   45'41
                                                                                                                                                                                  45'41


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                $YHUDJH 5HWXUQ


                                                                                                                         $YHUDJH 5HWXUQ
                                                                                                                                                                                  00'                                                                                                                              00'

                                                                                                                                                                                  6LQNKRUQ                                                                                                                6LQNKRUQ


                                                                                                                                                                                                      7LPH 6WHSV   H                                                                                                7LPH 6WHSV   H
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            6RODULV
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     '41
                                                                               5RERWDQN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  6NLLQJ                                                                                   &
                                                       '41                                                                                                                    '41                                                                                                                              45'41


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                $YHUDJH 5HWXUQ
                                                       &
                                                                                                                                                                                 &                                                                                                                            00'
 $YHUDJH 5HWXUQ


                                                       45'41                                                                                                                45'41                                                                                                                          6LQNKRUQ
                                                                                                                         $YHUDJH 5HWXUQ


                                                                                                                                                                               00'
                                                       00'
                                                                                                                                                                                 6LQNKRUQ
                                                     6LQNKRUQ


                                                                           7LPH 6WHSV   H                                                                                              7LPH 6WHSV   H                                                                                              7LPH 6WHSV   H

                                                                                     =D[[RQ                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           *RSKHU

                                                              '41                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              '41

                                                              &                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     &
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  45'41
                                                         45'41
 $YHUDJH 5HWXUQ


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                $YHUDJH 5HWXUQ


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       00'
                                                         00'                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               6LQNKRUQ
                                                              6LQNKRUQ


                                                                            7LPH 6WHSV   H                                                                                                                                                                                                                         7LPH 6WHSV   H
                                                                                                                                                                                                    'HPRQ$WWDFN
                                                                                                                                                                             '41
                                                                                                                                                                                   &
                                                                                                                                                                                   45'41
                                                                                                                          $YHUDJH 5HWXUQ


                                                                                                                                                                                   00'
                                                                                                                                                                             6LQNKRUQ


                                                                                                                                                                                                      7LPH 6WHSV   H

Figure 9: Performance of SinkhornDRL compared with DQN, C51, QRDQN and MMD on MsPac-
man, Pitfall, PrivateEye, Robotank, Skiing, Solaris, Zaxxon, ChopperCommand, Gopher and De-
monAttack.


                                                                                                                                                                                                            24
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                                                                                   %UHDNRXW
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      %UHDNRXW


                                                                                                                                                    $YHUDJH 5HWXUQ


 $YHUDJH 5HWXUQ

                                                              45'41                                                                                                                                   00'


                                                                                              7LPH 6WHSV   H

                                                                                                                                                                                                                 7LPH 6WHSV   H
                                                    (a) Small ε in SinkrhornDRL vs QRDQN                                                                                        (b) Large ε in SinkrhornDRL vs MMDDRL
                                                                                                 %UHDNRXW                                                                                                      6HDTXHVW



                 $YHUDJH 5HWXUQ


                                                                                                                                             $YHUDJH 5HWXUQ

                                                                                                                                                                                                45'41
                                                                                                                                                                                              00'


                                                                                            7LPH 6WHSV   H                                                                                         7LPH 6WHSV   H
                                                                                         (c) ε on Breakout                                                                                                (d) ε on Seaquest

Figure 10: (a) Sensitivity analysis w.r.t. a small level of ε SinkhornDRL to compare with QR-DQN
that approximates Wasserstein distance on Breakout. (b) Sensitivity analysis w.r.t. a large level of ε
SinkhornDRL algorithm to compare with MMDDRL on Breakout. All learning curves are reported
over 2 seeds. (c) and (d) are results for a general ε on Breakout and Seaquest, respectively.



Iteration in Algorithm 2. From Figure 10 (a), we can observe that if we gradually decline ε to 0,
SinkhornDRL’s performance tends to degrade and approach to QR-DQN. Note that an overly small
ε will lead to a trivial almost 0 Ki,j in Sinkhorn iteration in Algorithm 2, and will cause 10 numerical
instability issue for al and bl in Line 5 of Algorithm 2. In addition, we also conducted experiments
on Seaquest, the similar result is also observed in Figure 10 (d). As shown in Figure 10 (d), the
performance of SinkhornDRL is robust when ε = 10, 100, 500, but a small   = 1 tends to worsen
the performance.


Increasing ε. Moreover, for breakout, if we increase ε, the performance of SinkhornDRL tends to
degrade and be close to MMDDRL as suggested in Figure 10 (b). It is also noted that an overly large
ε will let the Ki,j explode to ∞. This also leads to numerical instability issue in Sinkhorn iteration
in Algorithm 2.


Samples N . We find that SinkhornDRL requires a proper number of samples N to perform fa-
vorably, and the sensitivity w.r.t N depends on the environment. As suggested in Figure 11 (a), a
smaller N , e.g., N = 2 on breakout has already achieved favorably performance and even acceler-
ates the convergence in the early phase, while N = 2 on Seaquest will lead to the divergence issue.
Meanwhile, an overly large N worsens the performance across two games. We conjecture that using
larger network networks to generate more samples may suffer from the overfitting issue, yielding
the training instability (Bjorck et al., 2021). In practice, we choose a proper number of sample, i.e.,
N = 200 across all games.


                                                                                                                                            25
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                                                                                                      %UHDNRXW                                                                                                                 6HDTXHVW

                                                                                   6DPSOHV                                                                                                                                   6DPSOHV
                                                                                6DPSOHV                                                                                                                                        6DPSOHV


                                                                                                                                                                    $YHUDJH 5HWXUQ
                                                                                   6DPSOHV
    $YHUDJH 5HWXUQ                                                   6DPSOHV                                                                                                                                  6DPSOHV

                                                                                   6DPSOHV                                                                                                                                      6DPSOHV
                                                                                   6DPSOHV                                                                                                                                      6DPSOHV


                                                                                                                  7LPH 6WHSV   H

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   7LPH 6WHSV   H
                                                                                                     (a) Samples on Breakout                                                                                                             (b) Samples on Seaquest

Figure 11: Sensitivity analysis of Sinkhorn in terms of the number of samples N on Breakout (a)
and Seaquest (b).


G.2                                    C OMPARISON WITH THE C OMPUTATIONAL C OST

We evaluate the computational time every 10,000 iterations across the whole training process of
all considered distributional RL algorithms and make a comparison in Figure 12. It suggests that
SinkhornDRL indeed increases around 50% computation cost compared with QR-DQN and C51,
but only slightly increases the the cost in contrast to MMDDRL on both Breakout and Qbert games.
We argue that this additional computational burden can be tolerant in view of the significant outper-
formance of SinkhornDRL in a large amount of environments.
In addition, we also find that the number of Sinkhorn iterations L is negligible to the computation
cost, while an overly large samples N , e.g., 500, will lead to a large computational burden as il-
lustrated in Figure 13. This can be intuitively explained as the computation complexity of the cost
function ci,j is O(N 2 ) in SinkhornDRL, which is particularly heavy in computation if N is large
enough.

                                                                                                                                    %UHDNRXW                                                                                                 4EHUW
                                                 $YHUDJH &RPSXWDWLRQ 7LPH


                                                                                                                                                                   $YHUDJH &RPSXWDWLRQ 7LPH


                                                                                                              '41 45 '41 &   00' 6LQNKRUQ                                                               '41 45 '41 &   00' 6LQNKRUQ

Figure 12: Average computational cost per 10,000 iterations of all considered distributional RL
algorithm, where we select ε = 10, L = 10 and number of samples N = 200 in SinkhornDRL
algorithm.


H                                  R AW S CORE TABLES ACROSS A LL ATARI G AMES A FTER 10
                                   T IME S TEPS (40M F RAMES )
For distributional Rl algorithms, results are averaged over 3 seeds after 10 timeSteps, i.e., 40M
Frames. Results of DQN, C51, QRDQN, MMD and Sinkhorn are based on our implementa-
tion on Pytorch, which is adapted from the reliable open-source implementation (Zhang, 2018).
QRDQN(tf) and MMD(tf) are from training results after 40M frames from the implementation of
MMDDRL (Nguyen et al., 2020) in (Nguyen-Tang, 2021).


                                                                                                                                                              26
       Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                                                                                          %UHDNRXW                                                                                                                                                                     4EHUW
$YHUDJH &RPSXWDWLRQ 7LPH  V


                                                                                                                                                                                $YHUDJH &RPSXWDWLRQ 7LPH  V


                                                                         6LQNKRUQ          6LQNKRUQ           6LQNKRUQ           6LQNKRUQ                                                                                6LQNKRUQ          6LQNKRUQ           6LQNKRUQ           6LQNKRUQ
                                                                     VDPSOHV      VDPSOHV       VDPSOHV       VDPSOHV                                                                             VDPSOHV      VDPSOHV       VDPSOHV       VDPSOHV

       Figure 13: Average computational cost per 10,000 iterations of SinkhornDRL algorithm over differ-
       ent samples.


                                                                                                                                                                            27
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


 GAMES              RANDOM      HUMAN         DQN         C51      QRDQN      QRDQN(tf)     MMD      MMD(tf)    Sinkhorn
 Alien                  211.9    7,127.7     1334.0     1946.0      1625.0       1425.8     2218.0    1683.1      1873.0
 Amidar                  2.34    1,719.5      400.2      354.5       554.6       870.2      706.4      694.7       506.7
 Assault                283.5     742.0      5651.8     3368.1      7593.6       7931.8     6001.5    8947.5      3771.0
 Asterix                268.5    8,503.3     5490.0    31860.0      7660.0      17126.8    15890.0    36411.5     7610.0
 Asteroids            1008.6    47,388.7     1246.0      826.0      1660.0       1610.7     1095.0    1460.9       624.0
 Atlantis              22188    29,028.1    18990.0   1490040.0   2520080.0    859419.7    80920.0   935273.3   3417430.0
 BankHeist                14      753.1       657.0      948.0      1000.0       936.7      1034.0     982.8       849.0
 BattleZone             3000    37,187.5    22100.0    28400.0     37800.0      25223.2    28400.0    20089.1    27000.0
 BeamRider              414.3   16,926.5     9519.0    13069.2      8043.8       9728.9    14072.6    16889.1     9865.6
 Berzerk                165.6    2,630.4      746.0      824.0       928.0       766.3      959.0      802.3      1029.0
 Bowling                23.48     160.7        29.6      30.3        35.5          33.8      60.0       37.3       12.6
 Boxing                 -0.69     12.1         96.0      91.8        98.3          97.9      96.9       92.3       96.7
 Breakout                1.5      30.5        313.4      373.0       361.4       391.0      405.9      486.9       402.5
 Centipede            2064.77   12,017.0     4548.1     6090.9      5508.0       5866.0     5152.0    5885.6      4952.2
 ChopperCommand          794     7,387.8     2780.0     4360.0      5490.0       3575.7     6760.0    2465.8      6520.0
 CrazyClimber           8043    35,829.4    15960.0    158070.0    69430.0      85543.6   112130.0   115997.2    16000.0
 DemonAttack          162.25     1,971.0    58324.5    41656.5     63889.0      94433.0   437760.5    98849.8    195827.0
 DoubleDunk            -18.14     -16.4         0.2        0.6        -0.4        -15.1      -0.4      -14.9        -2.2
 Enduro                  0.01     860.5      1961.3     1507.5      2832.5       1912.4     3248.2    1839.5      4272.0
 FishingDerby          -93.06     -38.7        15.8      26.0        33.4          18.9      24.5       21.6       24.6
 Freeway                 0.01     29.6         30.9      32.6        34.0          33.1      33.6       33.2       34.0
 Frostbite               73.2    4,334.7     1767.0     3317.0      4487.0       3359.6     2874.0    3671.9      2632.0
 Gopher                  364     2,412.5     7058.0     9314.0      6466.0       3854.7     6412.0    4966.6     15168.0
 Gravitar               226.5    3,351.4      110.0      325.0       565.0       509.5      345.0      547.7       470.0
 Hero                    551    30,826.4     4657.5     8098.0     11673.5       9779.7     7215.0    8382.4      7476.0
 IceHockey              -10.3       0.9       -13.0      -11.4        -3.6         -3.7      -4.5       -2.4        -4.6
 Jamesbond                27      302.8       320.0      625.0      1995.0       694.0      480.0      657.4       450.0
 Kangaroo                 54     3,035.0      660.0     9870.0     13440.0      14398.2    14720.0    8548.1     10680.0
 Krull               1,566.59    2,665.5     9191.1     9366.9      9918.7       9293.1     8732.7    6069.8      9549.0
 KungFuMaster            451    22,736.3    62800.0    55060.0     36020.0      27786.9    36940.0    28394.6    42600.0
 MontezumaRevenge        0.0     4,753.3        1.0        1.0         1.0          0.0       1.0       0.0          0.0
 MsPacman               242.6    6,951.6     3230.0     2168.0      2673.0       2557.7     2568.0    3244.8      2568.0
 NameThisGame         2404.9     8,049.0     4702.0     6278.0     11739.0      11161.7    12394.0    10859.2     9200.0
 Phoenix                757.2    7,242.6     5398.0    12043.0     12324.0      21813.7    32086.0    30561.7    18558.0
 Pitfall                -265     6,463.7        1.0        1.0         1.0        -37.4       1.0      -82.8         0.0
 Pong                  -20.34     14.6         20.0      20.7        20.8          20.5      20.9       20.3       21.0
 PrivateEye             34.49   69,571.3      100.0      100.0       100.0         62.1     100.0      284.2       100.0
 Qbert                188.75    13,455.0     8150.0    16575.0     13830.0       12307     15782.5    13325.7     6530.0
 RiverRaid            1575.4    17,118.0     8350.0    10232.0      8714.0      10102.4     9350.0    10975.4    11998.0
 RoadRunner               7      7,845.0    44950.0    54490.0     54620.0      43574.9    42530.0    37909.9    52600.0
 Robotank                2.24     11.9         13.2      22.5        48.1          52.4      34.4       48.4       48.1
 Seaquest                88.2   42,054.7     1444.0    10666.0      2640.0       4424.3    11685.0    1745.2     14795.0
 Skiing              -16267.9   -4,336.9   -13340.4    -19040.3    -29970.3    -27543.7    -8983.3   -23701.6    -29970.3
 Solaris              2346.6    12,326.7      582.0      192.0       956.0       1220.5     3336.0     996.8       792.0
 SpaceInvaders        136.15     1,668.7     1005.0     1725.5      1826.5       1794.6     1216.0     991.8      2302.5
 StarGunner              631    10,250.0     1270.0    22600.0     38380.0      52937.6    52050.0    46658.3    43820.0
 Tennis                -23.92      -8.3        -5.7       -1.5       -11.9        -11.3      -1.5      -13.7       13.3
 TimePilot              3682     5,229.2     1420.0     3260.0      6030.0       6338.7     7900.0    4516.2      7060.0
 Tutankham              15.56     167.6       206.6      186.0       178.3       153.8      205.2      190.5       202.8
 UpNDown                604.7   11,693.2    19145.0    16046.0     17074.0      14402.2    44746.0    19350.3    20063.0
 Venture                 0.0     1,187.5        1.0        1.0         1.0          3.9       1.0       39.3      1370.0
 VideoPinball        15720.98   17,667.9   270050.9    477206.8    388106.7     44599.9   288137.2   152686.0    164597.3
 WizardOfWor             534     4,756.5     1440.0     1620.0      4890.0       8670.1     4480.0    5095.3      3250.0
 YarsRevenge          3271.42   54,576.9    12507.9    15954.4     17593.8      12336.1     8516.8    13420.7    13507.3
 Zaxxon                   8      9,173.3        1.0     5910.0      7410.0       9077.0     4640.0    8557.9     10320.0


          Table 3: Scores of all algorithms averaged over 3 seeds across 55 Atari games.


                                                       28
