Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


T OWARDS D ISCOVERING N EURAL A RCHITECTURES
FROM S CRATCH

 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                            A BSTRACT

         The discovery of neural architectures from scratch is the long-standing goal of
         Neural Architecture Search (NAS). Searching over a wide spectrum of neural
         architectures can facilitate the discovery of previously unconsidered but well-
         performing architectures. In this work, we take a large step towards discover-
         ing neural architectures from scratch by expressing architectures algebraically.
         This algebraic view leads to a more general method for designing search spaces,
         which allows us to compactly represent search spaces that are 100s of orders of
         magnitude larger than common spaces from the literature. Further, we propose a
         Bayesian Optimization strategy to efficiently search over such huge spaces, and
         demonstrate empirically that both our search space design and our search strategy
         can be superior to existing baselines. We open source our algebraic NAS approach
         and provide APIs for PyTorch and TensorFlow.


1   I NTRODUCTION

Neural Architecture Search (NAS), a field with over 1 000 papers in the last two years (Deng &
Lindauer, 2022), is widely touted to automatically discover novel, well-performing architectural
patterns. However, while state-of-the-art performance has already been demonstrated in hundreds of
NAS papers (prominently, e.g., (Tan & Le, 2019; 2021; Liu et al., 2019a)), success in automatically
finding truly novel architectural patterns has been very scarce (Ramachandran et al., 2017; Liu et al.,
2020). For example, novel architectures, such as transformers (Vaswani et al., 2017; Dosovitskiy
et al., 2021) have been crafted manually and were not found by NAS.
There is an accumulating amount of evidence that over-engineered, restrictive search spaces (e.g.,
cell-based ones) are major impediments for NAS to discover truly novel architectures. Yang et al.
(2020b) showed that in the DARTS search space (Liu et al., 2019b) the manually-defined macro
architecture is more important than the searched cells, while Xie et al. (2019) and Ru et al. (2020)
achieved competitive performance with randomly wired neural architectures that do not adhere to
common search space limitations. As a result, there are increasing efforts to break these impedi-
ments, and the discovery of novel neural architectures has been referred to as the holy grail of NAS.
Hierarchical search spaces are a promising step towards this holy grail. In an initial work, Liu et al.
(2018) proposed a hierarchical cell, which is shared across a fixed macro architecture, imitating the
compositional neural architecture design pattern widely used by human experts. However, subse-
quent works showed the importance of both layer diversity (Tan & Le, 2019) and macro architecture
(Xie et al., 2019; Ru et al., 2020).
In this work, we introduce a general formalism for the representation of hierarchical search spaces,
allowing both for layer diversity and a flexible macro architecture. The key observation is that any
neural architecture can be represented algebraically; e.g., two residual blocks followed by a fully-
connected layer in a linear macro topology can be represented as the algebraic term
 ω = Linear(Residual(conv, id, conv), Residual(conv, id, conv), fc)                              . (1)
We build upon this observation and employ Context-Free Grammars (CFGs) to construct large
spaces of such algebraic architecture terms. Although a particular search space is of course limited
in its overall expressiveness, with this approach, we could effectively represent any neural architec-
ture, facilitating the discovery of truly novel ones.


                                                  1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Due to the hierarchical structure of algebraic terms, the number of candidate neural architectures
scales exponentially with the number of hierarchical levels, leading to search spaces 100s of orders
of magnitudes larger than commonly used ones. To search in these huge spaces, we propose an
efficient search strategy, Bayesian Optimization for Algebraic Neural Architecture Terms (BANAT),
which leverages hierarchical information, capturing the topological patterns across the hierarchical
levels, in its tailored kernel design.
Our contributions are as follows:

       • We present a novel technique to construct hierarchical NAS spaces based on an algebraic
         notion views neural architectures as algebraic architecture terms and CFGs to create alge-
         braic search spaces (Section 2).
       • We propose BANAT, a Bayesian Optimization (BO) strategy that uses a tailored modeling
         strategy to efficiently and effectively search over our huge search spaces (Section 3).
       • After surveying related work (Section 4), we empirically show that search spaces of alge-
         braic architecture terms perform on par or better than common cell-based spaces on dif-
         ferent datasets, show the superiority of BANAT over common baselines, demonstrate the
         importance of incorporating hierarchical information in the modeling, and show that we
         can find novel architectural parts from basic mathematical operations (Section 5).

We open source our code and provide APIs for PyTorch (Paszke et al., 2019) and TensorFlow (Abadi
et al., 2015) at https://anonymous.4open.science/r/iclr23_tdnafs.

2     A LGEBRAIC NEURAL ARCHITECTURE SEARCH SPACE CONSTRUCTION

In this section we present an algebraic view on Neural Architecture Search (NAS) (Section 2.1) and
propose a construction mechanism based on Context-Free Grammars (CFGs) (Section 2.2 and 2.3).

2.1   A LGEBRAIC ARCHITECTURE TERMS FOR NEURAL ARCHITECTURE SEARCH

We introduce algebraic architecture terms as a string representation for neural architectures from a
(term) algebra. Formally, an algebra (A, F) consists of a non-empty set A (universe) and a set of
operators f : An → A ∈ F of different arities n ≥ 0 (Birkhoff, 1935). In our case, A corresponds
to the set of all (sub-)architectures and we distinguish between two types of operators: (i) nullary
operators representing primitive computations (e.g., conv() or fc()) and (ii) k-ary operators with
k > 0 representing topological operators (e.g., Linear(·, ·, ·) or Residual(·, ·, ·)). For sake of
notational simplicity, we omit parenthesis for nullary operators (i.e., we write conv). Term algebras
(Baader & Nipkow, 1999) are a special type of algebra mapping an algebraic expression to its string
representation. E.g., we can represent a neural architecture as the algebraic architecture term ω as
shown in Equation 1. Term algebras also allow for variables xi that are set to terms themselves that
can be re-used across a term. In our case, the intermediate variables xi can therefore share patterns
across the architecture, e.g., a shared cell. For example, we could define the intermediate variable
x1 to map to the residual block in ω from Equation 1 as follows:
             ω ′ = Linear(x1 , x1 , fc),      x1 = Residual(conv, id, conv) .                     (2)

Algebraic NAS We formulate our algebraic view on NAS, where we search over algebraic archi-
tecture terms ω ∈ Ω representing their associated architectures Φ(ω), as follows:
                                      arg min f (Φ(ω))       ,                                    (3)
                                        ω∈Ω

where f (·) is an error measure that we seek to minimize, e.g., final validation error of a fixed
training protocol. For example, we can represent the popular cell-based NAS-Bench-201 search
space(Dong & Yang, 2020) as algebraic search space Ω. The algebraic search space Ω is char-
acterized by a fixed macro architecture Macro(. . .) that stacks 15 instances of a shared cell
Cell(pi , pi , pi , pi , pi , pi ), where the cell has six edges, on each of which one of five primi-
tive computations can be placed (i.e., pi for i ∈ {1, 2, 3, 4, 5} corresponding to zero, id,
conv1x1, conv3x3, or avg pool, respectively). By leveraging the intermediate variable x1


                                                 2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


        Algebraic architecture terms                             Neural architectures
                                                             S              S          S
      Linear(S, S, S)                                                                         Level 1
                                                             S              S
      Linear(Residual(S, S, S),                          S       S      S       S     fc      Level 2
      Residual(S, S, S), fc)
                                                           id        id
      Linear(Residual(conv, id, conv),
      Residual(conv, id, conv), fc)                    conv conv conv conv            fc      Level 3

Figure 1: Derivations from Equation 6 of algebraic architecture terms (left) correspond to edge
replacements (Habel & Kreowski, 1983; 1987; Drewes et al., 1997) in the associated architecture
(right). Appendix A provides the vocabulary for topological operators and primitive computations.


we can effectively share the cell topology across the architecture. For example, we can express an
architecture ωi ∈ Ω from the NAS-Bench-201 search space Ω as:

               ωi = Macro(x1 , x1 , ..., x1 ),   x1 = Cell(p1 , p2 , p1 , p5 , p4 , p3 ) .           (4)
                          |     {z        }
                                   15×

Algebraic NAS over such algebraic architecture terms then amounts to finding the best-performing
primitive computation pi for each edge, as the macro architecture is fixed. In contrast to this simple
cell-based algebraic space, the search spaces we consider can be much more expressive and, e.g., al-
low for layer diversity and a flexible macro architecture over several hierarchical levels (Section 5.1).

2.2     C ONSTRUCTING NEURAL ARCHITECTURE TERMS WITH CONTEXT- FREE GRAMMARS

We propose to use Context-Free Grammars (CFGs) (Chomsky, 1956) since they can naturally gen-
erate (hierarchical) algebraic architecture terms. Compared to other search space designs, CFGs
give us a formally grounded way to naturally and compactly define very expressive hierarchical
search spaces (e.g., see Section 5.1). We can also unify popular search spaces from the literature
with our general search space design in one framework (Appendix E). They give us further a simple
mechanism to evolve architectures while staying within the defined search space (Section 3).
Formally, a CFG G = ⟨N, Σ, P, S⟩ consists of a finite set of nonterminals N and terminals Σ with
N ∩ Σ = ∅, a finite set of production rules P = {A → β|A ∈ N, β ∈ (N ∪ Σ)∗ }, where the asterisk
∗ denotes the Kleene star operation (Kleene et al., 1956), and a start symbol S ∈ N . To generate an
algebraic architecture term, starting from the start symbol S, we recursively replace nonterminals of
the current algebraic term with a right-hand side of a production rule consisting of nonterminals and
terminals, until the resulting string does not contain any nonterminals. For example, consider the
following CFG in extended Backus-Naur form (Backus, 1959) (see Appendix B for background):

             S ::= Linear(S, S, S) | Residual(S, S, S) | conv | id | fc                              (5)

From this CFG, we can derive the algebraic architecture term ω (with three hierarchical levels) from
Equation 1 as follows:

S → Linear(S, S, S)                                                                             Level 1
  → Linear(Residual(S, S, S), Residual(S, S, S), fc)                                            Level 2
                                                                                                     (6)
  → Linear(Residual(conv, id, conv), Residual(conv, id, conv), fc)                              Level 3

Figure 1 makes the above derivation and the connection to the associated architecture explicit. The
set of all (potentially infinite) algebraic terms generated by a CFG G is the language L(G), which
naturally forms our search space Ω. Thus, the algebraic NAS problem from Equation 3 becomes:

                                         arg min f (Φ(ω)) .                                          (7)
                                          ω∈L(G)


                                                   3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


2.3   E XTENSIONS TO THE CONSTRUCTION MECHANISM

Constraints In many search space designs, we want to adhere to some constraints, e.g., to limit
the number of nodes or to ensure that for all architectures in the search space there exists at least one
path from the input to the output. We can simply do so by allowing only the application of production
rules which guarantee compliance to such constraints. For example, to ensure that there is at least
one path from the input to the output, it is sufficient to ensure that each derivation connects its input
to the output due to the recursive nature of CFGs. Note that this makes CFGs context-sensitive w.r.t.
those constraints. For more details, please refer to Appendix D.

Fostering regularity through substitution To implement intermediate variables xi (Section 2.1)
we leverage that context-free languages are closed under substitution: we map terminals, represent-
ing the intermediate variables xi , from one language to algebraic terms of other languages, e.g., a
shared cell. For example, we can split a CFG G, constructing entire algebraic architecture terms, into
the CFGs Gmacro and Gcell for the macro- or cell-level, respectively. Further, we add a single (or
multiple) intermediate terminal(s) x1 to Gmacro which maps to an algebraic term ω1 ∈ L(Gcell ), e.g.,
the searchable cell. Thus, we effectively search over the macro-level as well as a single, shared cell.
Note that by using a fixed macro architecture (i.e., |L(Gmacro )| = 1), we can represent cell-based
search spaces, e.g., NAS-Bench-201 (Dong & Yang, 2020), while also being able to represent more
expressive search spaces (e.g., see Section 5.1). More generally, we could extend this by adding
further intermediate terminals which map to other languages L(Gj ), or by adding intermediate ter-
minals to G2 which map to languages L(Gj̸=1 ). In this way, we can effectively foster regularity.

Representing common architecture patterns for object recognition Neural architectures for
object recognition commonly build a hierarchy of features that are gradually downsampled, e.g., by
pooling operations. However, previous works in NAS were either limited to a fixed macro architec-
ture (Zoph et al., 2018), only allowed for linear macro architectures (Liu et al., 2019a), or required
post-sampling testing for resolution mismatches (Stanley & Miikkulainen, 2002; Ru et al., 2020).
While this produced impressive performance on popular benchmarks (Tan & Le, 2019; 2021; Liu
et al., 2019a), it is an open research question whether a different type of macro architecture (e.g.,
one with multiple branches) could yield even better performance.
To accommodate flexible macro architectures, we propose to overload the nonterminals. In par-
ticular, the nonterminals indicate how often we apply downsampling operations in the subsequent
derivations of the nonterminal. Consider the production rule D2 → Residual(D1, D2, D1),
where Di with i ∈ {1, 2} are a nonterminals which indicate that i downsampling operations have to
be applied in their subsequent derivations. That is, in both paths of the residual the input features will
be downsampled twice and, consequently, the merging paths will have the same spatial resolution.
Thereby, this mechanism distributes the downsampling operations recursively across the architec-
ture. For the channels, we adopted the common design to double the number of channels whenever
we halve the spatial resolution in our experiments. Note that we could also handle a varying number
of channels by using, e.g., depthwise concatenation as merge operation.


3     BAYESIAN O PTIMIZATION FOR ALGEBRAIC NEURAL ARCHITECTURE
      SEARCH

We propose a BO strategy, Bayesian Optimization for Algebraic Neural Architecture Terms (BA-
NAT), to efficiently search in the huge search spaces spanned by our algebraic architecture terms:
we introduce a novel surrogate model which combines a Gaussian Process (GP) surrogate with a
tailored kernel that leverages the hierarchical structure of algebraic neural architecture terms (see
below), and adopt expected improvement as the acquisition function (Mockus et al., 1978). Given
the discrete nature of architectures, we adopt ideas from grammar-guided genetic programming
(McKay et al., 2010; Moss et al., 2020) for acquisition function optimization. Furthermore, to
reduce wallclock time by leveraging parallel computing resources, we adapt the Kriging Believer
(Ginsbourger et al., 2010) to select architectures at every search iteration so that we can train and
evaluate them in parallel. Specifically, Kriging Believer assigns hallucinated values (i.e., posterior
mean) of pending evaluations at each iteration to avoid redundant evaluations. For a more detailed
explanation of BANAT, please refer to Appendix F.


                                                    4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Hierarchical Weisfeiler-Lehman kernel (hWL) Inspired by the state-of-the-art BO approach for
NAS (Ru et al., 2021), we adopt the WL graph kernel (Shervashidze et al., 2011) in a GP surrogate,
modeling performance of the algebraic architecture terms ωi with the associated architectures Φ(ωi ).
However, modeling solely based on the final architecture ignores the useful hierarchical information
inherent in our algebraic representation. Moreover, the large size of the architectures also makes it
difficult to use a single WL kernel to capture the more global topological patterns.
Since our hierarchical construction can be viewed as a series of gradually unfolding architectures,
with the final architecture containing only primitive computations, we propose a novel hierarchical
kernel design assigning a WL kernel to each hierarchy and combine them in a weighted sum. To
this end, we introduce fold operators Fl , that removes algebraic terms beyond the l-th hierarchical
level. For example, the fold operators F1 , F2 and F3 yield for the algebraic term ω (Equation 1)
F3 (ω) = ω = Linear(Residual(conv, id, conv), Residual(conv, id, conv), fc),
                                                                          (8)
F2 (ω) = Linear(Residual, Residual, fc) ,                        F1 (ω) = Linear      .
Note the similarity to the derivations in Figure 1. Furthermore note that, in practice, we also add
the corresponding nonterminals to integrate information from our hierarchical construction process.
We define our hierarchical WL kernel (hWL) for two architectures Φ(ωi ) and Φ(ωj ) with algebraic
architecture terms ωi or ωj , respectively, constructed over a hierarchy of L levels, as follows:
                                         L
                                         X
                    khW L (ωi , ωj ) =         λl · kW L (Φ(Fl (ωi )), Φ(Fl (ωj )))   ,            (9)
                                         l=2

where the weights λl govern the importance of the learned graph information at different hierarchical
levels (granularities of the architecture) and can be tuned (along with other hyperparameters of the
GP) by maximizing the marginal likelihood. We omit l = 1 in the additive kernel as F1 (ω) does not
contain any edge features which are required for our WL kernel kW L . For more details on our novel
hierarchical kernel design, please refer to Appendix F.2. Our proposed kernel efficiently captures
the information in all algebraic term construction levels, which substantially improves its search and
surrogate regression performance on our search space as demonstrated in Section 5.

Acquisition function optimization To optimize the acquisition function, we adopt ideas from
grammar-based genetic programming (McKay et al., 2010; Moss et al., 2020). For mutation, we
randomly replace a sub-architecture term with a new randomly generated term, using the same non-
terminal as start symbol. For crossover, we randomly swap two sub-architecture terms with the same
corresponding nonterminal. We consider two crossover operators: a novel self-crossover operation
swaps two sub-terms of a single architecture term, and the common crossover operation swaps sub-
terms of two different architecture terms. Importantly, all evolutionary operations by design only
result in valid terms. We provide examples for the evolutionary operations in Appendix F.

4   R ELATED WORK
We discuss related works in NAS below and discuss works beyond NAS in Appendix G.

Neural Architecture Search Neural Architecture Search (NAS) aims to automatically discover
architectural patterns (or even entire architectures) (Elsken et al., 2019). Previous approaches, e.g.,
used reinforcement learning (Zoph & Le, 2017; Pham et al., 2018), evolution (Real et al., 2017),
gradient descent (Liu et al., 2019b), or Bayesian Optimization (BO) (Kandasamy et al., 2018; White
et al., 2021; Ru et al., 2021). To enable the effective use of BO on graph-like inputs for NAS,
previous works have proposed to use a GP with specialized kernels (Kandasamy et al., 2018; Ru
et al., 2021), encoding schemes (Ying et al., 2019; White et al., 2021), or graph neural networks as
surrogate model (Ma et al., 2019; Shi et al., 2020; Zhang et al., 2019). Different to prior works, we
explicitly leverage the hierarchical construction of architectures for modeling.

Searching for novel architectural patterns Previous works mostly focused on finding a shared
cell (Zoph et al., 2018) with a fixed macro architecture while only few works considered more ex-
pressive hierarchical search spaces (Liu et al., 2018; 2019a; Tan et al., 2019). The latter works


                                                       5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


considered hierarchical assembly (Liu et al., 2018), combination of a cell- and network-level search
space (Liu et al., 2019a; Zhang et al., 2020), evolution of network topologies (Miikkulainen et al.,
2019), factorization of the search space (Tan et al., 2019), parameterization of a hierarchy of ran-
dom graph generators (Ru et al., 2020), a formal language over computational graphs (Negrinho
et al., 2019), or a hierarchical construction of TensorFlow programs (So et al., 2021). Similarly,
our formalism allows to design search spaces covering a general set of architecture design choices,
but also permits the search for macro architectures with spatial resolution changes and multiple
branches. We also handle spatial resolution changes without requiring post-hoc testing or resizing
of the feature maps unlike prior works (Stanley & Miikkulainen, 2002; Miikkulainen et al., 2019;
Stanley et al., 2019). Other works proposed approaches based on string rewriting systems (Kitano,
1990; Boers et al., 1993), cellular (or tree-structured) encoding schemes (Gruau, 1994; Luke &
Spector, 1996; De Jong & Pollack, 2001; Cai et al., 2018), hyperedge replacement graph grammars
Luerssen & Powers (2003); Luerssen (2005), attribute grammars (Mouret & Doncieux, 2008), CFGs
(Jacob & Rehder, 1993; Couchet et al., 2007; Ahmadizar et al., 2015; Ahmad et al., 2019; Assunção
et al., 2017; 2019; Lima et al., 2019; de la Fuente Castillo et al., 2020), or And-Or-grammars (Li
et al., 2019). Different to these prior works, we construct entire architectures with spatial resolu-
tion changes across multiple branches, and propose techniques to incorporate constraints and foster
regularity. Orthogonal to the aforementioned approaches, Roberts et al. (2021) searched over neural
(XD-)operations, which is orthogonal to our approach, i.e., our predefined primitive computations
could be replaced by their proposed XD-operations.

5     E XPERIMENTS
In this section, we investigate potential benefits of hierarchical search spaces and our search strategy
BANAT. More specifically, we address the following questions:
      Q1 Can hierarchical search spaces yield on par or superior architectures compared to cell-based
         search spaces with a limited number of evaluations?
      Q2 Can our search strategy BANAT improve performance over common baselines?
      Q3 Does leveraging the hierarchical information improve performance?
      Q4 Do zero-cost proxies work in vast hierarchical search spaces?
      Q5 Can we discover novel architectural patterns (e.g., activation functions)?
To answer questions Q1-Q4, we introduce a hierarchical search space based on the popular NAS-
Bench-201 search space (Dong & Yang, 2020) in Section 5.1. To answer question Q5, we search
for activation functions (Ramachandran et al., 2017) and defer the search space definition to Ap-
pendix J.1. We provide complementary results and analyses in Appendix I.2 and J.3.

5.1    H IERARCHICAL NAS-B ENCH -201

We propose a hierarchical variant of the popular cell-based NAS-Bench-201 search space (Dong
& Yang, 2020) by adding a hierarchical macro space (i.e., spatial resolution flow and wiring at the
macro-level) and parameterizable convolutional blocks (i.e., choice of convolutions, activations, and
normalizations). We express the hierarchical NAS-Bench-201 search space with CFG Gh as follows:
    D2      ::=   Linear3(D1, D1, D0) | Linear3(D0, D1, D1) | Linear4(D1, D1, D0, D0)
    D1      ::=   Linear3(C, C, D) | Linear4(C, C, C, D) | Residual3(C, C, D, D)
    D0      ::=   Linear3(C, C, CL) | Linear4(C, C, C, CL) | Residual3(C, C, CL, CL)
     D      ::=   Linear2(CL, down) | Linear3(CL, CL, down) | Residual2(C, down, down)
     C      ::=   Linear2(CL, CL) | Linear3(CL, CL) | Residual2(CL, CL, CL)
   CL       ::=   Cell(OP, OP, OP, OP, OP, OP)
   OP       ::=   zero | id | BLOCK | avg pool
BLOCK       ::=   Linear3(ACT, CONV, NORM)
  ACT       ::=   relu | hardswish | mish
 CONV       ::=   conv1x1 | conv3x3 | dconv3x3
 NORM       ::=   batch | instance | layer .
                                                                                     (10)


                                                   6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


See Appendix A for the terminal vocabulary of topological operators and primitive computations.
The productions with the nonterminals {D2, D1, D0, D} define the spatial resolution flow and
together with {C} define the macro architecture containing possibly multiple branches. The produc-
tions for {CL, OP} construct the NAS-Bench-201 cell and {BLOCK, ACT, CONV, NORM}
parameterize the convolutional block. To ensure that we use the same distribution over the primi-
tive computations as in NAS-Bench-201, we reweigh the sampling probabilities of the productions
generated by the nonterminal OP, i.e., all production choices have sampling probability of 20 %,
but BLOCK has 40 %. Note that we omit the stem (i.e., 3x3 convolution followed by batch nor-
malization) and classifier (i.e., batch normalization followed by ReLU, global average pooling, and
fully-connected layer) for simplicity. We implemented the merge operation as element-wise summa-
tion. Different to the cell-based NAS-Bench-201 search space, we exclude degenerated architectures
by introducing a constraint that ensures that each subterm maps the input to the output (i.e., in the
associated computational graph there is at least one path from source to sink).
Our search space consists of ca. 10446 algebraic architecture terms (please refer to Appendix C on
how to compute the search space size), which is significantly larger than other popular search spaces
from the literature. For comparison, the cell-based NAS-Bench-201 search space is just a minuscule
subspace of size 104.18 , where we apply only the blue-colored production rules and replace the CL
nonterminals with a placeholder terminal x1 that will be substituted by the searched, shared cell.

5.2   E VALUATION DETAILS

For all search experiments, we compared the search strategies BANAT, Random Search (RS), Regu-
larized Evolution (RE) (Real et al., 2019; Liu et al., 2018), and BANAT (WL) (Ru et al., 2021). For
implementation details of the search strategies, please refer to Appendix H. We ran search for a total
of 100 evaluations with a random initial design of 10 on three seeds {777, 888, 999} on the hierar-
chical NAS-Bench-201 search space or 1000 evaluations with a random initial design of 50 on one
seed {777} on the activation function search space using 8 asynchronous workers each with a single
NVIDIA RTX 2080 Ti GPU. In each evaluation, we fully trained the architectures and recorded
their last validation error. For training details on the hierarchical NAS-Bench-201 search space and
activation function search space, please refer to Appendix I.1 or Appendix J.2, respectively.
To assess the modeling performance of our surrogate, we compared regression performance of GPs
with different kernels, i.e., our hierarchical WL kernel (hWL), (standard) WL kernel (Ru et al.,
2021), and NASBOT’s kernel (Kandasamy et al., 2018). We also tried the GCN encoding (Shi et al.,
2020) but it could not capture the mapping from the complex graph space to performance, resulting
in constant performance predictions. Further, note that the adjacency encoding (Ying et al., 2019)
and path encoding (White et al., 2021) cannot be used in our hierarchical search spaces since the
former requires the same amount of nodes across graphs and the latter scales exponentially in the
number of nodes. We ran 20 trials over the seeds {0, 1, ..., 19} and re-used the data from the search
runs. In every trial, we sampled a training and test set of 700 or 500 architecture and validation
error pairs, respectively. We fitted the surrogates with a varying number of training samples by
randomly choosing samples from the training set without replacement, and recorded Kendall’s τ
rank correlation between the predicted and true validation error. To assess zero-cost proxies, we
re-used the data from the search runs and recorded Kendall’s τ rank correlation.

5.3   R ESULTS

In the following we answer all of the questions Q1-Q5. Figure 2 compares the results of the cell-
based and hierarchical search space design using our search strategy BANAT. Results with BANAT
are on par on CIFAR-10/100, superior on ImageNet-16-120, and clearly superior on CIFARTile and
AddNIST (answering Q1). We emphasize that the NAS community has engineered the cell-based
search space to achieve strong performance on those popular image classification datasets for over
a decade, making it unsurprising that our improvements are much larger for the novel datasets. Yet,
our best found architecture on ImageNet-16-120 from the hierarchical search space also achieves
an excellent test error of 52.78 % with only 0.626 MB parameters (Appendix I.2); this is superior
to the architecture found by the state-of-the-art method Shapley-NAS (i.e., 53.15 %) (Xiao et al.,
2022) and on par with the optimal architecture of the cell-based NAS-Bench-201 search space
(i.e., 52.69 % with 0.866 MB). Figure 3 shows that our search strategy BANAT is also superior


                                                  7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                         CIFAR-10              CIFAR-100        ImageNet-16-120            CIFARTile             AddNIST


    Val error [%]
                    11                    32                    58                    60
                                                                                      50                    10
                    10                    30                    56
                                                                                                             9
                                                                54                    40
                     9                    28                                                                 8
                                                                52                    30                     7
                     8                    26
                         0 25 50 75 100        0 25 50 75 100        0 25 50 75 100        0 25 50 75 100        0 25 50 75 100

                         Evaluations           Evaluations     Evaluations      Evaluations                      Evaluations
                                                     hierarchical          cell-based
Figure 2: Cell-based vs. hierarchical search space. We plot mean and ±1 standard error of the
validation error on the hierarchical (solid blue) and cell-based (dashed orange) NAS-Bench-201
search space. We compare results using the other search strategies in Appendix I.2.

                         CIFAR-10              CIFAR-100        ImageNet-16-120            CIFARTile             AddNIST
    Val error [%]


                    11                                          58                    50                    10
                                          31
                    10                                          56                                           9
                                                                                      40
                                          29                    54                                           8
                     9
                                                                                      30                     7
                                          27                    52
                     8
                         0 25 50 75 100        0 25 50 75 100        0 25 50 75 100        0 25 50 75 100        0 25 50 75 100

                         Evaluations  Evaluations                Evaluations    Evaluations   Evaluations
                              BANAT (ours)                      RS           RE          BANAT (WL)
Figure 3: Comparison of search strategies on the hierarchical search space. We plot mean and ±1
standard error of the validation error on the hierarchical NAS-Bench-201 search space for our search
strategy BANAT (solid blue), RS (dashed orange), RE (dotted green), and BANAT (WL) (dash-
dotted red). We report test errors, best architectures, and conduct further analyses in Appendix I.2.


to common baselines (answering Q2) and leveraging hierarchical information clearly improves per-
formance (answering Q3). Further, the evaluation of surrogate performance in Figure 4 shows that
incorporating hierarchical information with our hierarchical WL kernel (hWL) improves modeling,
especially on smaller amounts of training data (further answering Q3). Table 1 shows that the base-
line zero-cost proxies flops and l2-norm yield competitive (or often superior) results to more
sophisticated zero-cost proxies; making hierarchical search spaces an interesting future research di-
rection for them (answering Q4). Finally, Table 2 shows that we can find novel well-performing
activation functions from basic mathematical operations with BANAT (answering Q5).


6             D ISCUSSION AND LIMITATIONS

While our grammar-based construction mechanism is a pow-
erful mechanism to construct huge hierarchical search space,
                                                                  Search strategy Test error [%]
we can not construct any architecture with our grammar-based
construction approach (Section 2.2 and 2.3) since we are lim-     ReLU                  8.93
ited to context-free languages; e.g., architectures of the type   Swish                 8.61
{an bn cn |n ∈ N>0 } cannot be generated by CFGs (this can be
                                                                  RS                    8.91
proven using Odgen’s lemma (Ogden, 1968)). Further, due to
                                                                  RE                    8.47
the discrete nature of CFGs we can not easily integrate contin-
                                                                  BANAT (WL)            8.32
uous design choices, e.g., dropout probability. Furthermore,
                                                                  BANAT (ours)          8.31
our grammar-based mechanism does not (generally) support
simple scalability of discovered neural architectures (e.g., rep-
etition of building blocks) without special consideration in the Table 2: Results of the activation
search space design. Nevertheless, our search spaces still sig- function search on CIFAR-10 with
nificantly increase the expressiveness, including the ability to ResNet-20.
represent common search spaces from the literature (see Appendix E for how we can represent the
search spaces of DARTS, Auto-Deeplab, the hierarchical cell search space of Liu et al. (2018), the
Mobile-net search space, and the hierarchical random graph generator search space), as well as al-
lowing search for entire neural architectures based around the popular NAS-Bench-201 search space


                                                                       8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                        CIFAR-10              CIFAR-100       ImageNet-16-120                 CIFARTile                 AddNIST


    Kendall’s τ
                  0.7                                         0.7                       0.7
                                        0.6                                                                       0.7
                                                              0.6                       0.6
                  0.6                                                                                             0.6
                                        0.5                   0.5                       0.5                       0.5
                  0.5
                                                              0.4                       0.4                       0.4
                  0.4                   0.4
                                                              0.3                       0.3                       0.3
                        0   200   400         0   200   400         0       200   400         0      200   400          0    200    400

                   #train samples #train samples #train samples #train samples #train samples
                                   hWL           w/o hWL            NASBOT
Figure 4: Mean Kendall’s τ rank correlation with ±1 standard error achieved by a GP with our
hierarchical WL kernel (hWL), (standard) WL kernel (WL), and NASBOT (Kandasamy et al., 2018).

Table 1: Kendall’s τ rank correlation of zero-cost-proxies on our hierarchical NAS-Bench-201
space. Note that zen and nwot may not be suitable for our hierarchical search space, as they
are specifically designed for architectures with batch normalization and ReLU non-linearity, respec-
tively. We still report exemplary search results for NASWOT (Mellor et al., 2021) in Appendix I.2
since it is the best non-baseline zero-cost proxy across the datasets.

    Zero-cost proxy                                     CIFAR-10        CIFAR-100       ImageNet16-120           CIFARTile     AddNIST
    plain (Abdelfattah et al., 2021)                      -0.01               0.01                -0.08             -0.0            0.04
    params (Ning et al., 2021)                             0.39               0.31                 0.13            0.28              0.5
    flops (Ning et al., 2021)                              0.46               0.51                 0.47            0.47             0.49
    l2-norm (Abdelfattah et al., 2021)                      0.4               0.29                 0.23            0.34             0.51
    zen-score (Lin et al., 2021)                           0.47               0.41                 0.34            0.24              0.4
    fisher (Turner et al., 2020)                          -0.06              -0.03                -0.05            0.03              0.2
    grad-norm (Abdelfattah et al., 2021)                   0.09               0.04                 0.01            0.15             0.24
    grasp (Wang et al., 2020)                              0.08               0.17                 0.19            0.02             0.03
    snip (Lee et al., 2019)                                0.17               0.06                -0.01            0.21             0.29
    synflow (Tanaka et al., 2020)                          0.06               0.24                 0.28            -0.18           -0.08
    epe-nas (Lopes et al., 2021)                           0.34               0.29                 0.26            0.23             0.09
    jacov (Mellor et al., 2021)                             0.4               0.34                 0.34            0.25             0.12
    nwot (Mellor et al., 2021)                             0.32               0.44                 0.58            0.34            0.22



(Section 5). Thus, our search space design can facilitate the discovery of novel well-performing neu-
ral architectures in those huge search spaces of algebraic architecture terms.
However, there is an inherent trade-off between the expressiveness and the difficulty of search.
The much greater expressiveness facilitates search in a richer set of architectures that may include
better architectures than in more restrictive search spaces, which however need not exist. Besides
that, the (potential) existence of such a well-performing architecture does not result in a search
strategy discovering it, even with large amounts of computing power available. Note that the trade-
off manifests itself also in the acquisition function optimization of our search strategy BANAT.
In addition, a well-performing neural architecture may not work with current training protocols and
hyperparameters due to interaction effects, i.e., training protocols and hyperparameters may be over-
optimized for specific types of neural architectures. To overcome this limitation, one could consider
a joint optimization of neural architectures, training protocols, and hyperparameters. However, this
further fuels the trade-off between expressiveness and the difficulty of search.


7             C ONCLUSION

We introduced very expressive search spaces of algebraic architecture terms constructed with CFGs.
To efficiently search over the huge search spaces, we proposed BANAT, an efficient BO strategy
with a tailored kernel leveraging the available hierarchical information. Our experiments indicate
that both our search space design and our search strategy can yield strong performance over existing
baselines. Our results motivate further steps towards the discovery of neural architectures based on
even more atomic primitive computations. Furthermore, future works could (simultaneously) learn
the search space (i.e., learn the grammar) or improve search efficiency by means of multi-fidelity
optimization or gradient-based search strategies.


                                                                        9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


R EPRODUCIBILITY STATEMENT
To ensure reproducibility, we address all points of the best practices checklist for NAS research
(Lindauer & Hutter, 2020) in Appendix K.

E THICS STATEMENT
NAS has immense potential to facilitate systematic, automated discovery of high-performing (novel)
architecture designs. However, the restrictive cell-based search spaces most commonly used in NAS
render it impossible to discover truly novel neural architectures. With our general formalism based
on algebraic terms, we hope to provide fertile foundation towards discovering high-performing and
efficient architectures; potentially from scratch. However, search in such huge search spaces is
expensive, particularly in the context of the ongoing detrimental climate crisis. While on the one
hand, the discovered neural architectures, like other AI technologies, could potentially be exploited
to have a negative societal impact; on the other hand, our work could also lead to advances across
scientific disciplines like healthcare and chemistry.

R EFERENCES
Martı́n Abadi, Ashish Agarwal, Paul Barham, Eugene Brevdo, Zhifeng Chen, Craig Citro, Greg S.
 Corrado, Andy Davis, Jeffrey Dean, Matthieu Devin, Sanjay Ghemawat, Ian Goodfellow, An-
 drew Harp, Geoffrey Irving, Michael Isard, Yangqing Jia, Rafal Jozefowicz, Lukasz Kaiser, Man-
 junath Kudlur, Josh Levenberg, Dandelion Mané, Rajat Monga, Sherry Moore, Derek Murray,
 Chris Olah, Mike Schuster, Jonathon Shlens, Benoit Steiner, Ilya Sutskever, Kunal Talwar, Paul
 Tucker, Vincent Vanhoucke, Vijay Vasudevan, Fernanda Viégas, Oriol Vinyals, Pete Warden,
 Martin Wattenberg, Martin Wicke, Yuan Yu, and Xiaoqiang Zheng. TensorFlow: Large-Scale
 Machine Learning on Heterogeneous Systems, 2015.
Mohamed S Abdelfattah, Abhinav Mehrotra, Łukasz Dudziak, and Nicholas D Lane. Zero-Cost
 Proxies for Lightweight NAS. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2021.
Qadeer Ahmad, Atif Rafiq, Muhammad Adil Raja, and Noman Javed. Evolving MIMO multi-
  layered artificial neural networks using grammatical evolution. In Proceedings of the ACM Sym-
  posium on Applied Computing, 2019.
Fardin Ahmadizar, Khabat Soltanian, Fardin AkhlaghianTab, and Ioannis Tsoulos. Artificial neural
  network development by means of a novel combination of grammatical evolution and genetic
  algorithm. Engineering Applications of Artificial Intelligence, 2015.
Marcin Andrychowicz, Misha Denil, Sergio Gomez, Matthew W Hoffman, David Pfau, Tom Schaul,
 Brendan Shillingford, and Nando De Freitas. Learning to learn by gradient descent by gradient
 descent. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2016.
Filipe Assunção, Nuno Lourenço, Penousal Machado, and Bernardete Ribeiro. Automatic genera-
   tion of neural networks with structured grammatical evolution. In IEEE Congress on Evolutionary
   Computation, 2017.
Filipe Assunção, Nuno Lourenço, Penousal Machado, and Bernardete Ribeiro. DENSER: deep
   evolutionary network structured representation. Genetic Programming and Evolvable Machines,
   2019.
Franz Baader and Tobias Nipkow. Term rewriting and all that. Cambridge university press, 1999.
John Warner Backus. The syntax and semantics of the proposed international algebraic language of
  the zurich acm-gamm conference. In International Conference on Information Processing, 1959.
Irwan Bello, Barret Zoph, Vijay Vasudevan, and Quoc V. Le. Neural Optimizer Search with Rein-
  forcement Learning. In International Conference on Machine Learning, 2017.
Garrett Birkhoff. On the structure of abstract algebras. Mathematical Proceedings of the Cambridge
  Philosophical Society, 1935.


                                                 10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Egbert J. W. Boers, Herman Kuiper, Bart L. M. Happel, and Ida G. Sprinkhuizen-Kuyper. Biological
  Metaphors In Designing Modular Artificial Neural Networks. In International Conference on
  Artificial Neural Networks, 1993.
Eric Brochu, Vlad M. Cora, and Nando De Freitas. A Tutorial on Bayesian Optimization of Expen-
  sive Cost Functions, with Application to Active User Modeling and Hierarchical Reinforcement
  Learning. arXiv, 2010.
Han Cai, Jiacheng Yang, Weinan Zhang, Song Han, and Yong Yu. Path-Level Network Transforma-
  tion for Efficient Architecture Search. In International Conference on Machine Learning, 2018.
Tianlong Chen, Xiaohan Chen, Wuyang Chen, Howard Heaton, Jialin Liu, Zhangyang Wang, and
  Wotao Yin. Learning to Optimize: A Primer and A Benchmark. Journal of Machine Learning
  Research, 2022a.
Xiangning Chen, Chen Liang, Da Huang, Esteban Real, Yao Liu, Kaiyuan Wang, Cho-Jui Hsieh,
  Yifeng Lu, and Quoc V. Le. Evolved Optimizer for Vision. In First Conference on Automated
  Machine Learning (Late-Breaking Workshop), 2022b.
Yutian Chen, Matthew W Hoffman, Sergio Gómez Colmenarejo, Misha Denil, Timothy P. Lillicrap,
  Matt Botvinick, and Nando Freitas. Learning to Learn without Gradient Descent by Gradient
  Descent. In International Conference on Machine Learning, 2017.
Noam Chomsky. Three models for the description of language. IRE Transactions on information
  theory, 1956.
Patryk Chrabaszcz, Ilya Loshchilov, and Frank Hutter. A Downsampled Variant of ImageNet as an
  Alternative to the CIFAR Datasets. arXiv, 2017.
Jorge Couchet, Daniel Manrique, and Luis Porras. Grammar-Guided Neural Architecture Evolution.
  In International Work-Conference on the Interplay Between Natural and Artificial Computation,
  2007.
Guofeng Cui and He Zhu. Differentiable Synthesis of Program Architectures. In Advances in Neural
  Information Processing Systems, 2021.
Edwin D. De Jong and Jordan B. Pollack. Utilizing Bias to Evolve Recurrent Neural Networks. In
  International Joint Conference on Neural Networks, 2001.
Vı́ctor de la Fuente Castillo, Alberto Dı́az-Álvarez, Miguel-Ángel Manso-Callejo, and Francisco
   Serradilla Garcia. Grammar Guided Genetic Programming for Network Architecture Search and
   Road Detection on Aerial Orthophotography. Applied Sciences, 2020.
Difan Deng and Marius Lindauer. Literature on Neural Architecture Search. https://www.
  automl.org/automl/literature-on-neural-architecture-search/, 2022.
  [Online; accessed 25-September-2022].
Xuanyi Dong and Yi Yang. NAS-Bench-201: Extending the Scope of Reproducible Neural Archi-
  tecture Search. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2020.
Alexey Dosovitskiy, Lucas Beyer, Alexander Kolesnikov, Dirk Weissenborn, Xiaohua Zhai, Thomas
  Unterthiner, Mostafa Dehghani, Matthias Minderer, Georg Heigold, Sylvain Gelly, Jakob Uszko-
  reit, and Neil Houlsby. An Image is Worth 16x16 Words: Transformers for Image Recognition
  at Scale. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2021.
Frank Drewes, Hans-Jörg Kreowski, and Annegret Habel. Hyperedge replacement graph gram-
  mars. In Handbook Of Graph Grammars And Computing By Graph Transformation: Volume 1:
  Foundations. World Scientific, 1997.
Thomas Elsken, Jan Hendrik Metzen, and Frank Hutter. Neural Architecture Search: A Survey.
  Journal of Machine Learning Research, 2019.
Paul Erdős, Alfréd Rényi, et al. On the evolution of random graphs. Publ. Math. Inst. Hung. Acad.
  Sci, 1960.


                                                11
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Alexander L Gaunt, Marc Brockschmidt, Nate Kushman, and Daniel Tarlow. Differentiable pro-
  grams with neural libraries. In International Conference on Machine Learning, 2017.
Rob Geada, Stephen McGough, Amir A. Abarghouei, Isabelle Guyon, and Sébastien Treguer.
  CVPR-NAS-Datasets (codebase for the “CVPR-NAS 2021 Unseen Data Track“). https:
  //github.com/RobGeada/cvpr-nas-datasets, 2021.
David Ginsbourger, Rodolphe Le Riche, and Laurent Carraro. Kriging is well-suited to parallelize
  optimization. In Computational Intelligence in Expensive Optimization Problems. Springer, 2010.
Frederic Gruau. Neural Network Synthesis Using Cellular Encoding And The Genetic Algorithm.
  PhD thesis, Laboratoire de l’Informatique du Parallilisme, Ecole Normale Supirieure de Lyon,
  1994.
Annegret Habel and Hans-Jörg Kreowski. On context-free graph languages generated by edge re-
  placement. In Graph-Grammars and Their Application to Computer Science, 1983.
Annegret Habel and Hans-Jörg Kreowski. Characteristics of graph languages generated by edge
  replacement. Theoretical Computer Science, 1987.
Kaiming He, Xiangyu Zhang, Shaoqing Ren, and Jian Sun. Deep Residual Learning for Image
  Recognition. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
  Recognition, 2016.
Jie Hu, Li Shen, and Gang Sun. Squeeze-and-Excitation Networks. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF
   Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, 2018.
Christian Jacob and Jan Rehder. Evolution of neural net architectures by a hierarchical grammar-
  based genetic system. In Artificial Neural Nets and Genetic Algorithms, 1993.
Kirthevasan Kandasamy, Willie Neiswanger, Jeff Schneider, Barnabás Póczos, and Eric P. Xing.
  Neural Architecture Search with Bayesian Optimisation and Optimal Transport. In Advances in
  Neural Information Processing Systems, 2018.
Hiroaki Kitano. Designing neural networks using genetic algorithms with graph generation system.
  Complex systems, 1990.
Stephen C. Kleene et al. Representation of events in nerve nets and finite automata. Automata
  studies, 1956.
Alex Krizhevsky, Geoffrey Hinton, et al. Learning Multiple Layers of Features from Tiny Images,
  2009.
Namhoon Lee, Thalaiyasingam Ajanthan, and Philip HS Torr. SNIP: Single-shot Network Pruning
  based on Connection Sensitivity. International Conference on Learning Representations, 2019.
Ke Li and Jitendra Malik. Learning to Optimize. International Conference on Learning Represen-
  tations, 2017.
Liam Li and Ameet Talwalkar. Random search and reproducibility for neural architecture search. In
  Uncertainty in artificial intelligence, 2020.
Xilai Li, Xi Song, and Tianfu Wu. AOGNets: Compositional grammatical architectures for deep
  learning. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recogni-
  tion, 2019.
Ricardo H. R. Lima, Aurora T. R. Pozo, and Roberto Santana. Automatic Design of Convolutional
  Neural Networks using Grammatical Evolution. In Brazilian Conference on Intelligent Systems,
  2019.
Ming Lin, Pichao Wang, Zhenhong Sun, Hesen Chen, Xiuyu Sun, Qi Qian, Hao Li, and Rong Jin.
 Zen-NAS: A Zero-Shot NAS for High-Performance Image Recognition. In Proceedings of the
 IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision, 2021.


                                               12
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Marius Lindauer and Frank Hutter. Best practices for scientific research on neural architecture
 search. Journal of Machine Learning Research, 2020.
Chenxi Liu, Liang-Chieh Chen, Florian Schroff, Hartwig Adam, Wei Hua, Alan L. Yuille, and
  Li Fei-Fei. Auto-DeepLab: Hierarchical Neural Architecture Search for Semantic Image Segmen-
  tation. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition,
  2019a.
Hanxiao Liu, Karen Simonyan, Oriol Vinyals, Chrisantha Fernando, and Koray Kavukcuoglu. Hier-
  archical Representations for Efficient Architecture Search. In International Conference on Learn-
  ing Representations, 2018.
Hanxiao Liu, Karen Simonyan, and Yiming Yang. DARTS: Differentiable Architecture Search. In
  International Conference on Learning Representations, 2019b.
Hanxiao Liu, Andy Brock, Karen Simonyan, and Quoc V. Le. Evolving Normalization-Activation
  Layers. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2020.
Vasco Lopes, Saeid Alirezazadeh, and Luı́s A Alexandre. EPE-NAS: Efficient Performance Estima-
  tion Without Training for Neural Architecture Search. In International Conference on Artificial
  Neural Networks, 2021.
Ilya Loshchilov and Frank Hutter. Decoupled Weight Decay Regularization. In International Con-
   ference on Learning Representations, 2019.
Martin H. Luerssen. Graph Grammar Encoding and Evolution of Automata Networks. In Aus-
 tralasian Conference on Computer Science, 2005.
Martin H. Luerssen and David M. W. Powers. On the Artificial Evolution of Neural Graph Gram-
 mars. University of New South Wales, 2003.
Sean Luke and Lee Spector. Evolving Graphs and Networks with Edge Encoding: Preliminary
  Report. In Late-breaking Papers of the Genetic Programming 96 conference, 1996.
Lizheng Ma, Jiaxu Cui, and Bo Yang. Deep Neural Architecture Search with Deep Graph Bayesian
  Optimization. In IEEE/WIC/ACM International Conference on Web Intelligence. IEEE Computer
  Society Press, 2019.
Robert I. McKay, Nguyen Xuan Hoai, Peter A. Whigham, Yin Shan, and Michael O’neill. Grammar-
  based genetic programming: a survey. Genetic Programming and Evolvable Machines, 2010.
Joe Mellor, Jack Turner, Amos Storkey, and Elliot J Crowley. Neural Architecture Search without
  Training. In International Conference on Machine Learning, 2021.
Risto Miikkulainen, Jason Liang, Elliot Meyerson, Aditya Rawal, Daniel Fink, Olivier Francon,
  Bala Raju, Hormoz Shahrzad, Arshak Navruzyan, Nigel Duffy, et al. Evolving Deep Neural
  Networks. In Artificial Intelligence in the Age of Neural Networks and Brain Computing. Elsevier,
  2019.
Jonas Mockus, Vytautas Tiesis, and Antanas Zilinskas. The Application of Bayesian Methods for
  Seeking the Extremum. Towards Global Optimization, 1978.
Henry Moss, David Leslie, Daniel Beck, Javier González, and Paul Rayson. BOSS: Bayesian Opti-
  mization over String Spaces. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2020.
Jean-Baptiste Mouret and Stéphane Doncieux. MENNAG: a modular, regular and hierarchical en-
  coding for neural-networks based on attribute grammars. Evolutionary Intelligence, 2008.
Renato Negrinho, Matthew Gormley, Geoffrey J. Gordon, Darshan Patil, Nghia Le, and Daniel Fer-
  reira. Towards modular and programmable architecture search. Advances in Neural Information
  Processing Systems, 2019.
Xuefei Ning, Changcheng Tang, Wenshuo Li, Zixuan Zhou, Shuang Liang, Huazhong Yang, and
  Yu Wang. Evaluating Efficient Performance Estimators of Neural Architectures. Advances in
  Neural Information Processing Systems, 2021.


                                                13
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


William Ogden. A helpful result for proving inherent ambiguity. Mathematical systems theory,
 1968.
Adam Paszke, Sam Gross, Francisco Massa, Adam Lerer, James Bradbury, Gregory Chanan, Trevor
  Killeen, Zeming Lin, Natalia Gimelshein, Luca Antiga, Alban Desmaison, Andreas Kopf, Edward
  Yang, Zachary DeVito, Martin Raison, Alykhan Tejani, Sasank Chilamkurthy, Benoit Steiner,
  Lu Fang, Junjie Bai, and Soumith Chintala. PyTorch: An Imperative Style, High-Performance
  Deep Learning Library. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2019.
Hieu Pham, Melody Guan, Barret Zoph, Quoc V. Le, and Jeff Dean. Efficient Neural Architecture
  Search via Parameters Sharing. In International Conference on Machine Learning, 2018.
Prajit Ramachandran, Barret Zoph, and Quoc V. Le. Searching for Activation Functions. arXiv,
  2017.
Esteban Real, Sherry Moore, Andrew Selle, Saurabh Saxena, Yutaka Leon Suematsu, Jie Tan,
  Quoc V. Le, and Alexey Kurakin. Large-Scale Evolution of Image Classifiers. In International
  Conference on Machine Learning, 2017.
Esteban Real, Alok Aggarwal, Yanping Huang, and Quoc V. Le. Regularized Evolution for Image
  Classifier Architecture Search. In Proceedings of the National Conference on Artificial Intelli-
  gence, 2019.
Esteban Real, Chen Liang, David So, and Quoc V. Le. AutoML-Zero: Evolving Machine Learning
  Algorithms From Scratch. In International Conference on Machine Learning, 2020.
Nicholas Roberts, Mikhail Khodak, Tri Dao, Liam Li, Christopher Ré, and Ameet Talwalkar. Re-
  thinking Neural Operations for Diverse Tasks. Advances in Neural Information Processing Sys-
  tems, 2021.
Binxin Ru, Xingchen Wan, Xiaowen Dong, and Michael Osborne. Interpretable Neural Architecture
  Search via Bayesian Optimisation with Weisfeiler-Lehman Kernels. In International Conference
  on Learning Representations, 2021.
Robin Ru, Pedro Esperança, and Fabio Maria Carlucci. Neural architecture generator optimization.
  In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2020.
Mark Sandler, Andrew Howard, Menglong Zhu, Andrey Zhmoginov, and Liang-Chieh Chen. Mo-
 bileNetV2: Inverted Residuals and Linear Bottlenecks. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Confer-
 ence on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, 2018.
Ameesh Shah, Eric Zhan, Jennifer Sun, Abhinav Verma, Yisong Yue, and Swarat Chaudhuri. Learn-
 ing Differentiable Programs with Admissible Neural Heuristics. Advances in Neural Information
 Processing Systems, 2020.
Bobak Shahriari, Kevin Swersky, Ziyu Wang, Ryan P. Adams, and Nando De Freitas. Taking the
  Human Out of the Loop: A Review of Bayesian Optimization. Proceedings of the IEEE, 2015.
Nino Shervashidze, Pascal Schweitzer, Erik Jan Van Leeuwen, Kurt Mehlhorn, and Karsten M.
  Borgwardt. Weisfeiler-Lehman Graph Kernels. Journal of Machine Learning Research, 2011.
Han Shi, Renjie Pi, Hang Xu, Zhenguo Li, James Kwok, and Tong Zhang. Bridging the Gap
  between Sample-based and One-shot Neural Architecture Search with BONAS. In Advances in
  Neural Information Processing Systems, 2020.
David So, Wojciech Mańke, Hanxiao Liu, Zihang Dai, Noam Shazeer, and Quoc V. Le. Searching
  for Efficient Transformers for Language Modeling. In Advances in Neural Information Processing
  Systems, 2021.
Kenneth O. Stanley and Risto Miikkulainen. Evolving Neural Networks through Augmenting
  Topologies. Evolutionary Computation, 2002.
Kenneth O Stanley, Jeff Clune, Joel Lehman, and Risto Miikkulainen. Designing neural networks
  through neuroevolution. Nature Machine Intelligence, 2019.


                                               14
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Mingxing Tan and Quoc V. Le. EfficientNet: Rethinking Model Scaling for Convolutional Neural
 Networks. In International Conference on Machine Learning, 2019.
Mingxing Tan and Quoc V. Le. EfficientNetV2: Smaller Models and Faster Training. In Interna-
 tional Conference on Machine Learning, 2021.
Mingxing Tan, Bo Chen, Ruoming Pang, Vijay Vasudevan, Mark Sandler, Andrew Howard, and
 Quoc V. Le. MnasNet: Platform-Aware Neural Architecture Search for Mobile. In Proceedings
 of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, 2019.
Hidenori Tanaka, Daniel Kunin, Daniel L. Yamins, and Surya Ganguli. Pruning neural networks
  without any data by iteratively conserving synaptic flow. Advances in Neural Information Pro-
  cessing Systems, 2020.
Jack Turner, Elliot J Crowley, Michael O’Boyle, Amos Storkey, and Gavin Gray. BlockSwap:
  Fisher-guided Block Substitution for Network Compression on a Budget. International Confer-
  ence on Learning Representations, 2020.
Lazar Valkov, Dipak Chaudhari, Akash Srivastava, Charles Sutton, and Swarat Chaudhuri. Houdini:
  Lifelong Learning as Program Synthesis. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems,
  2018.
Ashish Vaswani, Noam Shazeer, Niki Parmar, Jakob Uszkoreit, Llion Jones, Aidan N. Gomez,
  Łukasz Kaiser, and Illia Polosukhin. Attention is All you Need. Advances in Neural Information
  Processing Systems, 2017.
Chaoqi Wang, Guodong Zhang, and Roger Grosse. Picking Winning Tickets Before Training by
  Preserving Gradient Flow. International Conference on Learning Representations, 2020.
Ruochen Wang, Yuanhao Xiong, Minhao Cheng, and Cho-Jui Hsieh. Efficient Non-Parametric
  Optimizer Search for Diverse Tasks. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2022.
Duncan J. Watts and Steven H. Strogatz. Collective dynamics of ‘small-world’ networks. Nature,
  1998.
Colin White, Willie Neiswanger, and Yash Savani. BANANAS: Bayesian Optimization with Neural
  Architectures for Neural Architecture Search. In Proceedings of the National Conference on
  Artificial Intelligence, 2021.
Han Xiao, Ziwei Wang, Zheng Zhu, Jie Zhou, and Jiwen Lu. Shapley-NAS: Discovering Operation
  Contribution for Neural Architecture Search. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on
  Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, 2022.
Saining Xie, Alexander Kirillov, Ross Girshick, and Kaiming He. Exploring Randomly Wired Neu-
  ral Networks for Image Recognition. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer
  Vision and Pattern Recognition, 2019.
Antoine Yang, Pedro M Esperança, and Fabio M Carlucci. Nas evaluation is frustratingly hard.
  International Conference on Learning Representations, 2020a.
Antoine Yang, Pedro M. Esperança, and Fabio M. Carlucci. NAS evaluation is frustratingly hard.
  In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2020b.
Chris Ying, Aaron Klein, Esteban Real, Eric Christiansen, Kevin Murphy, and Frank Hutter. NAS-
  Bench-101: Towards Reproducible Neural Architecture Search. In International Conference on
  Machine Learning, 2019.
Chris Zhang, Mengye Ren, and Raquel Urtasun. Graph HyperNetworks for Neural Architecture
  Search. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2019.
Haokui Zhang, Ying Li, Hao Chen, and Chunhua Shen. Memory-Efficient Hierarchical Neural Ar-
  chitecture Search for Image Denoising. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer
  Vision and Pattern Recognition, 2020.


                                              15
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Barret Zoph and Quoc V. Le. Neural Architecture Search with Reinforcement Learning. In Interna-
  tional Conference on Learning Representations, 2017.
Barret Zoph, Vijay Vasudevan, Jonathon Shlens, and Quoc V. Le. Learning Transferable Architec-
  tures for Scalable Image Recognition. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer
  Vision and Pattern Recognition, 2018.


                                              16
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


A    F ROM TERMINALS TO PRIMITIVE COMPUTATIONS AND TOPOLOGICAL
     OPERATORS

Table 3 and Figure 5 describe the primitive computations and topological operators used throughout
our experiments in Section 5 and Appendix I, respectively. Note that by adding more primitive
computations and/or topological operators we could construct even more expressive search spaces.

Table 3: Primitive computations. ”Name” corresponds to the string terminals in our CFGs and
”Function” is the associated implementation of the primitive computation in pseudocode. The sub-
scripts g, k, s, and p are abbreviations for groups, kernel size, strides, and padding, respectively.
During assembly of neural architectures Φ(ω), we replace string terminals with the associated prim-
itive computation.

 Name             Function
 avg pool         AvgPoolk=3,s=1,p=1 (x)
 batch            BN(x)
 conv1x1          Convk=1,s=1,p=0 (x)
 conv3x3          Convk=3,s=1,p=1 (x)
 dconv3x3         Convg=C,k=3,s=1,p=1 (x)
 down             conv3x3s=1 (conv3x3s=2 (x)) + Convk=1,s=1 (AvgPoolk=2,s=2 (x))
 hardswish        Hardswish(x)
 id               Identitiy(x)
 instance         IN(x)
 layer            LN(x)
 mish             Mish(x)
 relu             ReLU(x)
 zero             Zeros(x)


             a        b             a        b       c            a       b        c       d

        (a) Linear2(a, b).        (b) Linear3(a, b, c).           (c) Linear4(a, b, c, d).
                                                                          b   d
                                                 c                    a       c        f
                          b
                  a           c          a       b        d
                                                                                   e
          (d) Residual2(a, b, c). (e) Residual3(a, b, c, d).      (f) Cell(a, b, c, d, e, f).

Figure 5: Topological operators. Each subfigure makes the connection between the topogolocial
operator and associated computational graph explicit, i.e., the arguments of the graph operators (a,
b, ...) are mapped to the respective edges in the computational graph.



B    E XTENDED BACKUS -NAUR FORM

The (extended) Backus-Naur form (Backus, 1959) is a meta-language to describe the syntax of
CFGs. We use meta-rules of the form S ::= α where S ∈ N is a nonterminal and α ∈
(N ∪ Σ)∗ is a string of nonterminals and/or terminals. We denote nonterminals in UPPER CASE,
terminals corresponding to topological operators in Initial upper case/teletype, and
terminals corresponding to primitive computations in lower case/teletype, e.g., S ::=
Residual(S, S, id). To compactly express production rules with the same left-hand side nonter-
minal, we use the vertical bar | to indicate a choice of production rules with the same left-hand side,
e.g., S ::= Linear(S, S, S) | Residual(S, S, id) | conv.


                                                     17
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


C    S EARCH SPACE SIZE

In this section, we show how to efficiently compute the size of our search spaces constructed by
CFGs. There are two cases to consider: (i) a CFG contains cycles (i.e., part of the derivation can
be repeated infinitely many times) , yielding an open-ended, infinite search space; and (ii) a CFG
contains no cycles, yielding in a finite search space whose size we can compute.
Consider a production A → Residual(B, B, B) where Residual is a terminal, and A
and B are nonterminals with B → conv | id. Consequently, there are 23 = 8 possible in-
stances of the residual block. If we add another production choice for the nonterminal A, e.g.,
A → Linear(B, B, B), we would have 23 + 23 = 16 possible instances. Further, adding a
production C → Linear(A, A, A) would yield a search space size of (23 + 23 )3 = 4096.
More generally, we introduce the function PA that returns the set of productions for nonterminal
A ∈ N , and the function µ : P → N that returns all the nonterminals for a production p ∈ P . We
can then recursively compute the size of the search space as follows:
                                           1 Q             , µ(p) = ∅,
                                       (
                                  X
                        f (A) =                    f (A′ ) , otherwise .                     (11)
                                    p∈PA      A′ ∈µ(p)


When a CFG contains some constraint, we ensure to only account for valid architectures (i.e., com-
pliant with the constraints) by ignoring productions which would lead to invalid architectures.


D    M ORE DETAILS ON SEARCH SPACE CONSTRAINTS

During the design of the search space, we may want to comply with some constraints, e.g., only con-
sider valid neural architectures or impose structural constraints on architectures. We can guarantee
compliance with constraints by modifying sampling (and evolution): we only allow the application
of production rules, which guarantee compliance with the constraint(s). In the following, we show
exemplary how this can be implemented for the former constraint mentioned above. Note that other
constraints can be implemented in a similar manner
To implement the constraint ”only consider valid neural architectures”, we note that our search space
design only creates neural architectures where neither the spatial resolution nor the channels can be
mismatched; please refer to Section 2.3 for details. Thus, the only way a neural architecture can
become invalid is through zero operations, which could remove edges from the computational
graph and possibly disassociate the input from the output. Since we recursively assemble neural
architectures, it is sufficient to ensure that the derived algebraic architecture term (i.e., the associated
computational graph) is compliant with the constraint, i.e.,there is at least one path from input to
output. Thus, during sampling (and similarly during evolution), we modify the current production
rule choices when an application of the zero operation would disassociate the input from the output.


E    C OMMON SEARCH SPACES FROM THE LITERATURE

In Section 5.1, we demonstrated how to construct the popular NAS-Bench-201 search space within
our algebraic search space design, and below we show how to reconstruct the following popular
search spaces: DARTS search space (Liu et al., 2019b), Auto-DeepLab search space (Liu et al.,
2019a), hierarchical cell search space (Liu et al., 2018), Mobile-net search space (Tan et al., 2019),
and hierarchical random graph generator search space (Ru et al., 2020). For implementation details
we refer to the respective works.

DARTS SEARCH SPACE

The DARTS search space (Liu et al., 2019b) consists of a fixed macro architecture and a cell, i.e., a
seven node directed acyclic graph (Darts; see Figure 6 for the topological operator). We omit the
fixed macro architecture from our search space design for simplicity. Each cell receives the feature
maps from the two preceding cells as input and outputs a single feature map. All intermediate nodes


                                                    18
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                         c {k-1}                                      c {k-2}



                         Node3           Node4           Node5         Node6



                                                 c {k}

                     Figure 6: Visualization of the Darts topological operator.


(i.e., Node3, Node4, Node5, and Node6) is computed based on all of its predecessors. Thus, we
can define the DARTS search space as follows:
        DARTS     ::= Darts(NODE3, NODE4, NODE5, NODE6)
        NODE3     ::= Node3(OP, OP)
        NODE4     ::= Node4(OP, OP, OP)
        NODE5     ::= Node5(OP, OP, OP, OP)                                                          (12)
        NODE6     ::= Node6(OP, OP, OP, OP, OP)
           OP     ::= sep conv 3x3 | sep conv 5x5 | dil conv 3x3 | dil conv 5x5
                     | max pool | avg pool | id | zero ,
where the topological operator Node3 receives two inputs, applies the operations separately on
them, and sums them up. Similarly, Node4, Node5, and Node6 apply their operations separately to
the given inputs and sum them up. The topological operator Darts feeds the corresponding feature
maps into each of those topological operators and finally concatenates all intermediate feature maps.

AUTO -D EEP L AB SEARCH SPACE

Auto-DeepLab (Liu et al., 2019a) combines a cell-level with a network-level search space to search
for segmentation networks, where the cell is shared across the searched macro architecture, i.e., a
twelve step (linear) path across different spatial resolutions. The cell-level design is adopted from
Liu et al. (2019b) and, thus, we can re-use the CFG from Equation 12. For the network-level,
we introduce a constraint that ensures that the path is of length twelve, i.e., we ensure exactly
twelve derivations in our CFG. Further, we overload the nonterminals so that they correspond to
the respective spatial resolution level, e.g., D4 indicates that the original input is downsampled by
a factor of four; please refer to Section 2.3 for details on overloading nonterminals. For the sake of
simplicity, we omit the first two layers and atrous spatial pyramid poolings as they are fixed, and
hence define the network-level search space as follows:
                  D4   ::= Same(CELL, D4) | Down(CELL, D8)
                  D8   ::= Up(CELL, D4) | Same(CELL, D8) | Down(CELL, D16)
                                                                                                     (13)
                 D16   ::= Up(CELL, D8) | Same(CELL, D16) | Down(CELL, D32)
                 D32   ::= Up(CELL, D16) | Same(CELL, D32) ,
where the topological operators Up, Same, and Down upsample/halve, do not change/do not change,
or downsample/double the spatial resolution/channels, respectively. The placeholder variable CELL
maps to the shared DARTS cell from the language generated by the CFG from Equation 12.

H IERARCHICAL CELL SEARCH SPACE

The hierarchical cell search space (Liu et al., 2018) consists of a fixed (linear) macro architecture and
a hierarchically assembled cell with three levels which is shared across the macro architecture. Thus,
we can omit the fixed macro architecture from our search space design for simplicity. Their first,
second, and third hierarchical levels correspond to the primitive computations (i.e., id, max pool,
avg pool, sep conv, depth conv, conv, zero), six densely connected four node directed
acyclic graphs (DAG4), and a densely connected five node directed acyclic graph (DAG5), respec-
tively. The zero operation could lead to directed acyclic graphs which have fewer nodes. Therefore,


                                                   19
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


we introduce a constraint enforcing that there are always four (level 2) or five (level 3) nodes for
every directed acyclic graph. Further, since a densely connected five node directed acyclic graph
graph has ten edges, we need to introduce placeholder variables (i.e., M1, ..., M6) to enforce that
only six (possibly) different four node directed acyclic graphs are used, and consequently define a
CFG for the third level
                     LEVEL3 ::= DAG5(LEVEL2, ..., LEVEL2)
                                     |       {z        }
                                                      ×10                                          (14)
                     LEVEL2 ::= M1 | M2 | M3 | M4 | M5 | M6 | zero             ,
mapping the placeholder variables M1, ..., M6 to the six lower-level motifs constructed by the first
and second hierarchical level
 LEVEL2 ::= DAG4(LEVEL1, ..., LEVEL1)
                 |        {z        }
                                  ×6                                                               (15)
 LEVEL1 ::= id | max pool | avg pool | sep conv | depth conv | conv | zero                     .

M OBILE - NET SEARCH SPACE

Factorized hierarchical search spaces, e.g., the Mobile-net search space (Tan et al., 2019), allow
for layer diversity. They factorize a (fixed) macro architecture – often based on an already well-
performing reference architecture – into separate blocks (e.g., cells). For the sake of simplicity, we
assume here a three sequential blocks (Block) architecture (Linear). In each of those blocks,
we search for the convolution operations (CONV), kernel sizes (KSIZE), squeeze-and-excitation
ratio (SERATIO) (Hu et al., 2018), skip connections (SKIP), number of output channels (FSIZE),
and number of layers per block (#LAYERS), where the latter two are discretized using a reference
architecture, e.g., MobileNetV2 (Sandler et al., 2018). Consequently, we can express this search
space as follows:
          MACRO       ::= Linear(BLOCK, BLOCK, BLOCK)
           BLOCK      ::= Block(CONV, KSIZE, SERATIO, SKIP, FSIZE, #LAYERS)
            CONV      ::= conv | dconv | mbconv
            KSIZE     ::= 3 | 5
                                                                                                   (16)
         SERATIO      ::= 0 | 0.25
             SKIP     ::= pooling | id residual | no skip
            FSIZE     ::= 0.75 | 1.0 | 1.25
         #LAYERS      ::= -1 | 0 | 1 ,
where conv, donv and mbconv correspond to convolution, depthwise convolution, and mobile
inverted bottleneck convolution (Sandler et al., 2018), respectively.

H IERARCHICAL RANDOM GRAPH GENERATOR SEARCH SPACE

The hierarchical random graph generator search space (Ru et al., 2020) consists of three hierar-
chical levels of random graph generators (i.e., Watts-Strogatz (Watts & Strogatz, 1998) and
Erdõs-Rényi (Erdős et al., 1960)). We denote with Watts-Strogatz i the random graph
generated by the Watts-Strogatz model with i nodes. Thus, we can represent the search space as
follows:
              TOP ::= Watts-Strogatz 3(K, Pt)(MID, MID, MID) | ...
                        | Watts-Strogatz 10(K, Pt)(MID, ..., MID)
                                                         |       {z     }
                                                                    ×10
              MID ::= Erdõs-Rényi 1(Pm)(BOT) | ...
                      | Erdõs-Rényi 10(Pm)(BOT, ..., BOT)
                                             |    {z     }                                         (17)
                                                            ×10
             BOT ::= Watts-Strogatz 3(K, Pb)(NODE, NODE, NODE) | ...
                     | Watts-Strogatz 10(K, Pb)(NODE ..., NODE)
                                                |     {z     }
                                                                     ×10
                 K ::= 2 | 3 | 4 | 5 ,

                                                 20
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Algorithm 1 Bayesian Optimization algorithm (Brochu et al., 2010).
  Input: Initial observed data Dt , a black-box objective function f , total number of BO iterations
  T
  Output: The best recommendation about the global optimizer x∗
  for t = 1, . . . , T do
      Select the next xt+1 by maximizing acquisition function α(x|Dt )
      Evaluate the objective function at ft+1 = f (xt+1 )
      Dt+1 ← Dt ∪ (xt+1 , ft+1 )
      Update the surrogate model with Dt+1
  end for


where each terminal Pt, Pm, and Pb maps to a continuous number in [0.1, 0.9]1 and the placeholder
variable NODE maps to a primitive computation, e.g., separable convolution. Note that we omit other
hyperparameters, such as stage ratio, channel ratio etc., for simplicity.


F      M ORE DETAILS ON THE SEARCH STRATEGY

In this section, we provide more details and examples for our search strategy Bayesian Optimization
for Algebraic Neural Architecture Terms (BANAT) presented in Section 3.

F.1     BAYESIAN O PTIMIZATION

Bayesian Optimization (BO) is a powerful family of search techniques for finding the global opti-
mum of a black-box objective problem. It is particularly useful when the objective is expensive to
evaluate and thus sample efficiency is highly important (Brochu et al., 2010).
To minimize a black-box objective problem with BO, we first need to build a probabilistic surrogate
to model the objective based on the observed data so far. Based on the surrogate model, we design
an acquisition function to evaluate the utility of potential candidate points by trading off exploita-
tion (where the posterior mean of the surrogate model is low) and exploration (where the posterior
variance of the surrogate model is high). The next candidate points to evaluate is then selected
by maximizing the acquisition function (Shahriari et al., 2015). The general procedures of BO is
summarized in Algorithm 1.
We adopted the widely used acquisition function, expected improvement (EI) (Mockus et al., 1978),
in our BO strategy. EI evaluates the expected amount of improvement of a candidate point x over
the minimal value f ′ observed so far. Specifically, denote the improvement function as I(x) =
max(0, f ′ − f (x)), the EI acquisition function has the form
                                     Z f′
                                     (f ′ − f )N f ; µ(x|Dt ), σ 2 (x|Dt ) df

      αEI (x|Dt ) = E[I(x)|Dt ] =
                                 −∞
                 = (f − f )Φ f ; µ(x|Dt ), σ 2 (x|Dt ) + σ 2 (x|Dt )ϕ(f ′ ; µ(x|Dt ), σ 2 (x|Dt )) ,
                     ′        ′



where µ(x|Dt ) and σ 2 (x|Dt ) are the mean and variance of the predictive posterior distribution at a
candidate point x, and ϕ(·) and Φ(·) denote the PDF and CDF of the standard normal distribution,
respectively.
To make use of ample distributed computing resource, we adopted Kriging Believer (Ginsbourger
et al., 2010) which uses the predictive posterior of the surrogate model to assign hallucinated func-
tion values {f˜p }p∈{1, ..., P } to the P candidate points with pending evaluations {x̃p }p∈{1, ..., P } and
perform next BO recommendation in the batch by pseudo-augmenting the observation data with
D̃p = {(x̃p , f˜p )}p∈{1, ..., P } , namely D̃t = Dt ∪ D̃p . The algorithm of Kriging Believer at one BO
iteration to select a batch of recommended candidate points is summarized in Algorithm 2.

    1
      Theoretically, this is not possible with CFGs. However, we can extend the notion of substitution by substi-
tuting a string representation of a Python (float) variable for the placeholder variables Pt, Pm, and Pb.


                                                       21
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Algorithm 2 Kriging Believer algorithm to select one batch of points.
  Input: Observation data Dt , batch size b
                                         (1)       (b)
  Output: The batch points Bt+1 = {xt+1 , . . . , xt+1 }
  D̃t = Dt ∪ D̃p
  for j = 1, . . . , b do
                          (j)
      Select the next xt+1 by maximizing acquisition function α(x|D̃t )
                                                  (j)
      Compute the predictive posterior mean µ(xt+1 |D̃t )
                              (j)
      D̃t ← D̃t ∪ (xt+1 , µ(xt+1 |D̃t ))
  end for


Algorithm 3 Weisfeiler-Lehman subtree kernel computation (Shervashidze et al., 2011).
  Input: Graphs G1 , G2 , maximum iterations H
  Output: Kernel function value between the graphs
  Initialize the feature vectors ϕ(G1 ) = ϕ0 (G1 ), ϕ(G2 ) = ϕ0 (G2 ) with the respective counts of
  original node labels (i.e., the h = 0 WL features)
  for h = 1, . . . H do
      Assign a multiset Mh (v) = {lh−1 (u)|u ∈ N (v)} to each node v ∈ G, where lh−1 is the node
  label function of the h − 1-th WL iteration and N is the node neighbor function
      Sort elements in multiset Mh (v) and concatenate them to string sh (v)
      Compress each string sh (v) using the hash function f s.t. f (sh (v)) = f (sh (w)) ⇐⇒
  sh (v) = sh (u)
      Add lh−1 as prefix for sh (v)
      Concatenate the WL features ϕh (G1 ), ϕh (G2 ) with the respective counts of the new labels:
  ϕ(G1 ) = [ϕ(G1 ), ϕh (G1 )], ϕ(G2 ) = [ϕ(G2 ), ϕh (G2 )]
      Set lh (v) := f (sh (v)) ∀v ∈ G
  end for
  Compute inner product k = ⟨ϕh (G1 ), ϕh (G2 )⟩ between WL features ϕh (G1 ), ϕh (G2 ) in RKHS
  H


F.2   H IERARCHICAL W EISFEILER -L EHMAN KERNEL

Inspired by Ru et al. (2021), we adopted the Weisfeiler-Lehman (WL) graph kernel (Shervashidze
et al., 2011) in the GP surrogate model to handle the graph nature of neural architectures. The
basic idea of the WL kernel is to first compare node labels, and then iteratively aggregate labels of
neighboring nodes, compress them into a new label and compare them. Algorithm 3 summarizes
the WL kernel procedure.
Ru et al. (2021) identified three reasons for using the WL kernel: (1) it is able to compare la-
beled and directed graphs of different sizes, (2) it is expressive, and (3) it is relatively efficient
and scalable. Our search space design can afford a diverse spectrum of neural architectures with
very heterogeneous topological structure. Therefore, reason (1) is a very important property of the
WL kernel to account for the diversity of neural architectures. Moreover, if we allow many hier-
archical levels, we can construct very large neural architectures. Therefore, reasons (2) and (3) are
essential for accurate and fast modeling. However, neural architectures in our search spaces may
be significantly larger, which makes it difficult for a single WL kernel to capture the more global
topological patterns. Moreover, modeling solely based on the final neural architecture ignores the
useful macro-level information from earlier hierarchical levels. In our experiments (Section 5 and
I), we have found stronger neural architectures by incorporating the hierarchical information in the
kernel design, which provides experimental support for above arguments.
However, modeling solely based on the (standard) WL graph kernel neglects the useful hierarchical
information from our assembly process. Moreover, the large size of neural architectures make it still
challenging to capture the more global topological patterns. We therefore propose to use hierarchical
information through a hierarchy of WL graph kernels that take into account the different granularities
of the architectures and combine them in a weighted sum. To obtain the different granularities, we
use the fold operators Fl that removes algebraic terms beyond the l-th hierarchical level. Thereby,


                                                 22
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                        id        id
                                    conv conv conv conv                 fc

      (a) F3 (ω) = ω = Linear(Residual(conv, id, conv), Residual(conv, id, conv), fc).
                                 Residual    Residual     fc

                           (b) F2 (ω) = Linear(Residual, Residual, fc).

                Figure 7: Labeled graphs Φ(F2 ) and Φ(F3 ) of the folds F2 and F3 .


we obtain the folds
F3 (ω) = ω = Linear(Residual(conv, id, conv), Residual(conv, id, conv), fc),
                                                                         (18)
F2 (ω) = Linear(Residual, Residual, fc) ,                          F1 (ω) = Linear      ,
for the algebraic architecture term ω. Note that we ignore the first fold since it does not represent
a labeled DAG. Figure 7 visualizes the labeled graphs Φ(F2 ) and Φ(F3 ) of the folds F2 or F3 ,
respectively. These graphs can be fed into (standard) WL graph kernels. Therefore, we can construct
a hierarchy of WL graph kernels kW L as follows:
                                           L
                                           X
                      khW L (ωi , ωj ) =         λl · kW L (Φ(Fl (ωi )), Φ(Fl (ωj )))   ,        (19)
                                           l=2
where ωi and ωj are two algebraic architecture terms. Note that λl govern the importance of the
learned graph information across the hierarchical levels and can be optimized through the marginal
likelihood.

F.3    E XAMPLES FOR THE EVOLUTIONARY OPERATIONS

For the evolutionary operations, we adopted ideas from grammar-based genetic programming
(McKay et al., 2010; Moss et al., 2020). In the following, we will show how these evolutionary
operations manipulate algebraic terms, e.g.,
      Linear(Residual(conv, id, conv), Residual(conv, id, conv), fc) ,                           (20)
from the search space
            S ::= Linear(S, S, S) | Residual(S, S, S) | conv | id | fc                      ,    (21)
to generate evolved algebraic terms. Figure 1 shows how we can derive the algebraic term in Equa-
tion 20 from the search space in Equation 21. For mutation operations, we first randomly pick a
subterm of the algebraic term, e.g., Residual(conv, id, conv). Then, we randomly sample a
new subterm with the same nonterminal symbol S as start symbol, e.g., Linear(conv, id, fc),
and replace the previous subterm, yielding
           Linear(Linear(conv, id, fc), Residual(conv, id, conv), fc) .                          (22)
For (self-)crossover operations, we swap two subterms, e.g., Residual(conv, id, conv) and
Residual(conv, id, conv) with the same nonterminal S as start symbol, yielding
      Linear(Residual(conv, id, conv), Residual(conv, id, conv), fc) .                           (23)
Note that unlike the commonly used crossover operation, which uses two parents, self-crossover has
only one parent. In future work, we could also add a self-copy operation that copies a subterm to
another part of the algebraic term, explicitly regularizing diversity and thus potentially speeding up
the search.

G      R ELATED WORK BEYOND NEURAL ARCHITECTURE SEARCH
While our work focuses exclusively on NAS, we will discuss below how it relates to the areas of
optimizer search (as well as from scratch automated machine learning) and neural-symbolic pro-
gramming.


                                                         23
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Optimizer search is a closely related field to NAS, where we automatically search for an optimizer
(i.e., an update function for the weights) instead of an architecture. Initial works used learnable
parametric or non-parametric optimizers. While the former approaches (Andrychowicz et al., 2016;
Li & Malik, 2017; Chen et al., 2017; 2022a) have poor scalability and generality, the latter works
overcome those limitations. Bello et al. (2017) searched for an instantiation of hand-crafted patterns
via reinforcement learning, while Wang et al. (2022) proposed a tree-structured search space2 and
searched for optimizers via a modified Monte Carlo sampling approach. AutoML-Zero (Real et al.,
2020) took an even more general approach by searching over entire machine learning algorithms,
including optimizers, from a generic search space built from basic mathematical operations with an
evolutionary algorithm. Chen et al. (2022b) used RE to discover optimizers from a generic search
space (inspired by AutoML-Zero) for training vision transformers (Dosovitskiy et al., 2021).
Complementary to the above, there is recent interest in automatically synthesizing programs from
domain-specific languages. Gaunt et al. (2017) proposed a hand-crafted program template and si-
multaneously optimized the parameters of the differentiable program with gradient descent. The
HOUDINI framework (Valkov et al., 2018) proposed type-directed (top-down) enumeration and
evolution approaches over differentiable functional programs. Shah et al. (2020) hierarchically as-
sembled differentiable programs and used neural networks for the approximation of missing expres-
sion in partial programs. Cui & Zhu (2021) treated CFGs stochastically with trainable production
rule sampling weights, which were optimized with a gradient-based approach (Liu et al., 2019b).
However, naı̈vely applying gradient-based approaches does not work in our search spaces due to the
exponential explosion of supernet weights, but still renders an interesting direction for future work.
Compared to these lines of work, we extended CFGs to handle changes in spatial resolution, promote
regularity, and (compared to most of them) incorporate constraints, the latter two of which could
also be applied in those domains. We also proposed a BO search strategy to search efficiently with
a tailored kernel design to handle the hierarchical nature of the search space (i.e., the architectures).


H     I MPLEMENTATION DETAILS OF THE SEARCH STRATEGIES

BANAT & BANAT (WL) The only difference between BANAT and BANAT (WL) is that the
former uses our proposed hierarchy of WL kernels (hWL), whereas the latter only uses a single WL
kernel (WL) for the entire architecture (c.f., (Ru et al., 2021)). We ran BANAT asynchronously
in parallel throughout our experiments with a batch size of B = 1, i.e., at each BO iteration a
single architecture is proposed for evaluation. For the acquisition function optimization, we used
a pool size of P = 200, where the initial population consisted of the current ten best-performing
architectures and the remainder were randomly sampled architectures to encourage exploration in
the huge search spaces. During evolution, the mutation probability was set to pmut = 0.5 and
crossover probability was set to pcross = 0.5. From the crossovers, half of them were self-crossovers
of one parent and the other half were common crossovers between two parents. The tournament
selection probability was set to ptour = 0.2. We evolved the population at least for ten iterations and
a maximum of 50 iterations using a early stopping criterion based on the fitness value improvements
over the last five iterations.

Regularized Evolution (RE) RE (Real et al., 2019; Liu et al., 2018) iteratively mutates the best
architectures out of a sample of the population. We reduced the population size from 50 to 30 to
account for fewer evaluations, and used a sample size of 10. We also ran RE asynchronously for
better comparability.


I   S EARCHING THE HIERARCHICAL NAS-B ENCH -201 SEARCH SPACE

In this section, we provide training details (Section I.1) and provide complementary results as well
as conduct extensive analyses (Section I.2).

    2
      Note that the tree-structured search space can equivalently be described with a CFG (with a constraint on
the number of maximum depth of the syntax trees).


                                                      24
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                      Table 4: Licenses for the datasets we used in our experiments.

 Dataset                                     License                        URL
 CIFAR-10 (Krizhevsky et al., 2009)           MIT       https://www.cs.toronto.edu/˜kriz/cifar.html
 CIFAR-100 (Krizhevsky et al., 2009)          MIT       https://www.cs.toronto.edu/˜kriz/cifar.html
 ImageNet-16-120 (Chrabaszcz et al., 2017)    MIT      https://patrykchrabaszcz.github.io/Imagenet32/
 CIFARTile (Geada et al., 2021)               GNU      https://github.com/RobGeada/cvpr-nas-datasets
 AddNIST (Geada et al., 2021)                 GNU      https://github.com/RobGeada/cvpr-nas-datasets


I.1   T RAINING DETAILS

Training protocol We evaluated all search strategies on CIFAR-10/100 (Krizhevsky et al., 2009),
ImageNet-16-120 (Chrabaszcz et al., 2017), CIFARTile, and AddNIST (Geada et al., 2021). Note
that CIFARTile and AddNIST are novel datasets and therefore have not yet been optimized by the
research community. We provide further dataset details below. For training of architectures on
CIFAR-10/100 and ImageNet-16-120, we followed Dong & Yang (2020). We trained architectures
with SGD with learning rate of 0.1, Nesterov momentum of 0.9, weight decay of 0.0005 with cosine
annealing (Loshchilov & Hutter, 2019), and batch size of 256 for 200 epochs. The initial channels
were set to 16. For both CIFAR-10 and CIFAR-100, we used random flip with probability 0.5
followed by a random crop (32x32 with 4 pixel padding) and normalization. For ImageNet-16-
120, we used a 16x16 random crop with 2 pixel padding instead. For training of architectures on
AddNIST and CIFARTile, we followed the training protocol from the CVPR-NAS 2021 competition
(Geada et al., 2021): We trained architectures with SGD with learning rate of 0.01, momentum of
0.9, and weight decay of 0.0003 with cosine annealing, and batch size of 64 for 64 epochs. We set
the initial channels to 16 and did not apply any further data augmentation.


Dataset details In Table 4, we provide the licenses for the datasets used in our experiments. For
training of architectures on CIFAR-10, CIFAR-100 (Krizhevsky et al., 2009), and ImageNet-16-120
(Chrabaszcz et al., 2017), we followed the dataset splits and training protocol of NAS-Bench-201
(Dong & Yang, 2020). For CIFAR-10, we split the original training set into a new training set
with 25k images and validation set with 25k images following Dong & Yang (2020). The test set
remained unchanged. For evaluation, we trained architectures on both the training and validation set.
For CIFAR-100, the training set remained unchanged, but the test set was partitioned in a validation
set and new test set with each 5K images. For ImageNet-16-120, all splits remained unchanged.
For AddNIST and CIFARTile, we used the training, validation, and test splits as defined in the
CVPR-NAS 2021 competition (Geada et al., 2021).


I.2   E XTENDED SEARCH RESULTS AND ANALYSES

Supplementary to Figure 2, Figure 8 compares the cell-based vs. hierarchical NAS-Bench-201
search space from Section 6.1 using RS, RE, and BANAT (WL). The cell-based search space de-
sign shows on par or stronger performance on all datasets except for CIFARTile for the three search
strategies. In contrast, for our proposed search strategy BANAT we find on par (CIFAR-10/100) or
superior (ImageNet-16-120, CIFARTile, and AddNIST) performance using the hierarchical search
space design. This clearly shows that the increase of the search space does not necessarily yields the
discovery of stronger neural architectures. Further, it exemplifies the importance of a strong search
strategy to search effectively and efficiently in huge hierarchical search spaces (Q2), and provides
further evidence that the incorporation of hierarchical information is a key contributor for search
efficiency (Q3). Based on this, we believe that future work using, e.g., graph neural networks as a
surrogate, may benefit from the incorporation of hierarchical information.
We report the test errors of our best found architectures in Table 5. We observe that our search
strategy BANAT finds the strongest performing architectures across all dataset (Q2, Q3). Also note
that we achieve better (validation and) test performance on ImageNet-16-120 on the hierarchical than
the state-of-the-art search strategy on the cell-based NAS-Bench-201 search space (i.e., +0.37%p
compared to Shapley-NAS (Xiao et al., 2022)) (Q1).


                                                         25
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                       CIFAR-10              CIFAR-100         ImageNet-16-120            CIFARTile             AddNIST
  Val error [%]


                  11                    32                     58                    60
                                                                                     50                    10
                  10                    30                     56
                                                                                                            9
                                                               54                    40
                   9                    28                                                                  8
                                                               52                    30                     7
                   8                    26
                       0 25 50 75 100        0 25 50 75 100         0 25 50 75 100        0 25 50 75 100        0 25 50 75 100

                       Evaluations           Evaluations     Evaluations      Evaluations                       Evaluations
                                                   hierarchical          cell-based
                                                        (a) Random Search (RS).
                       CIFAR-10              CIFAR-100         ImageNet-16-120            CIFARTile             AddNIST
  Val error [%]


                  11                    32                     58                    60
                                                                                     50                    10
                  10                    30                     56
                                                                                                            9
                                                               54                    40
                   9                    28                                                                  8
                                                               52                    30                     7
                   8                    26
                       0 25 50 75 100        0 25 50 75 100         0 25 50 75 100        0 25 50 75 100        0 25 50 75 100

                       Evaluations           Evaluations     Evaluations      Evaluations                       Evaluations
                                                   hierarchical          cell-based
                                                    (b) Regularized Evolution (RE).
                       CIFAR-10              CIFAR-100         ImageNet-16-120            CIFARTile             AddNIST
  Val error [%]


                  11                    32                     58                    60
                                                                                     50                    10
                  10                    30                     56
                                                                                                            9
                                                               54                    40
                   9                    28                                                                  8
                                                               52                    30                     7
                   8                    26
                       0 25 50 75 100        0 25 50 75 100         0 25 50 75 100        0 25 50 75 100        0 25 50 75 100

                       Evaluations           Evaluations     Evaluations      Evaluations                       Evaluations
                                                   hierarchical          cell-based
                                                              (c) BANAT (WL).

Figure 8: Cell-based vs. hierarchical search spaces. We plot mean and ±1 standard error of the
validation error on the cell-based (dashed orange) and hierarchical (solid blue) NAS-Bench-201
search space using Random Search (RS) (top), Regularized Evolution (RE) (middle), and BANAT
(WL) (bottom).


                                                                     26
     Table 5: Test errors (and ±1 standard error) of popular baseline architectures (e.g., ResNet (He et al., 2016) and EfficientNet (Tan & Le, 2019) variants), and our
     best found architectures on the cell-based and hierarchical NAS-Bench-201 search space. Note that we picked the ResNet and EfficientNet variant based on the test
     error, consequently giving an overestimate of their test performance.
     †
       optimal numbers as reported in Dong & Yang (2020).
     (best) test error (and ±1 standard error) across three seeds {777, 888, 999} of the best architecture of the three search runs with lowest validation error.

       Method                                             CIFAR-10                      CIFAR-100                   ImageNet-16-120                    CIFARTile                      AddNIST
                                                  cell-based    hierarchical    cell-based     hierarchical    cell-based     hierarchical    cell-based     hierarchical    cell-based     hierarchical
       Best ResNet (He et al., 2016)                  06.49 ± 0.24 (32)             27.10± 0.67 (110)              53.67 ± 0.18 (56)              57.80± 0.57 (18)                7.78 ± 0.05 (34)
       Best EfficientNet (Tan & Le, 2019)             11.73 ± 0.10(B0)              35.17 ± 0.42 (B6)              77.73 ± 0.29 (B0)              61.01 ± 0.62 (B0)              13.24 ± 0.58 (B1)
                                                                                                                                                                                                           Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


27
       NAS-Bench-201 oracle†                                5.63                          26.49                          52.69                            -                              -
       RS                                         6.39 ± 0.18   6.77 ± 0.10    28.75 ± 0.57    29.49 ± 0.57   54.83 ± 0.78    54.70± 0.82    52.72 ± 0.45    40.93 ± 0.81   7.82 ± 0.36      8.05 ± 0.29
       NASWOT (N=10) (Mellor et al., 2021)        6.55 ± 0.10   8.18 ± 0.46    29.35 ± 0.53    31.73 ± 0.96   56.80± 1.35     58.66 ± 0.29   41.83 ± 2.29    49.46 ± 2.95   10.11 ± 0.69    11.81 ± 1.55
       NASWOT (N=100) (Mellor et al., 2021)       6.59 ± 0.17   8.56 ± 0.87    28.91 ± 0.25    31.65 ± 1.95   55.99 ± 1.30    58.47 ± 2.74   41.63 ± 1.02    43.31 ± 2.00   10.75 ± 0.23    14.47 ± 1.44
       NASWOT (N=1000) (Mellor et al., 2021)      6.68 ± 0.12   8.26 ± 0.38    29.37 ± 0.17    31.66 ± 0.72   58.93 ± 2.92    58.33 ± 0.91   39.61 ± 1.12    45.66 ± 1.29   10.68 ± 0.27    13.57 ± 1.89
       NASWOT (N=10000) (Mellor et al., 2021)     6.98 ± 0.43   8.40± 0.52     29.95 ± 0.42    32.09 ± 1.61   54.20± 0.49     57.58 ± 1.53   39.90± 1.20     42.45 ± 0.67   10.72 ± 0.53    14.82 ± 0.66
       RE (Real et al., 2019; Liu et al., 2018)   5.76 ± 0.17   6.88 ± 0.24    27.68 ± 0.55    30.00± 0.32    53.92 ± 0.60    55.39 ± 0.54   52.79 ± 0.59    40.99 ± 2.89    7.69 ± 0.35     7.56 ± 0.69
       BANAT (WL) (Ru et al., 2021)               5.68 ± 0.11   6.98 ± 0.50    27.66 ± 0.18    28.70± 0.64    53.67 ± 0.39    53.47 ± 0.86   52.81 ± 0.27    35.75 ± 1.58    7.86 ± 0.41     8.20± 0.37
       BANAT                                      5.68 ± 0.11   6.00± 0.16     27.66 ± 0.18    27.57 ± 0.46   53.67 ± 0.39    53.43 ± 0.61   52.81 ± 0.27    32.28 ± 2.39    7.86 ± 0.41     6.09 ± 0.34
       BANAT (best)                               5.64 ± 0.14   5.65 ± 0.09    27.03 ± 0.23    27.63 ± 0.20   53.54 ± 0.43    52.78 ± 0.23   53.18 ± 0.91    30.33 ± 0.77   8.04 ± 0.45     6.33 ± 0.59
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                       CIFAR-10                         CIFAR-100                    ImageNet-16-120                       CIFARTile                        AddNIST
                  20                               50                               100



  Val error [%]
                                                                                                                                                       30
                                                                                                                      55
                  15                               40
                                                                                     75                                                                20
                                                                                                                      40
                  10                               30                                                                                                  10
                                                                                     50                               25

                                 RS

                                      RE


                                                                  RS

                                                                       RE


                                                                                                    RS

                                                                                                         RE


                                                                                                                                     RS

                                                                                                                                          RE


                                                                                                                                                                      RS

                                                                                                                                                                           RE
                       BANAT


                                           BANAT


                                                        BANAT


                                                                            BANAT


                                                                                          BANAT


                                                                                                              BANAT


                                                                                                                           BANAT


                                                                                                                                               BANAT


                                                                                                                                                            BANAT


                                                                                                                                                                                BANAT
                        (ours)


                                                         (ours)


                                                                                           (ours)


                                                                                                                            (ours)


                                                                                                                                                             (ours)
                                            (WL)


                                                                             (WL)


                                                                                                               (WL)


                                                                                                                                                (WL)


                                                                                                                                                                                 (WL)
Figure 9: Density estimates for the validation error of all architecture candidates proposed by the
search strategies (i.e., BANAT, RS, RE, and BANAT (WL)) and across datasets (i.e., CIFAR-10/100,
ImageNet-16-120, CIFARTile, AddNIST) from our experiments in Section 5.


Search costs Search time varied across datasets from ca. 0.5 days (CIFAR-10) to ca. 1.8 days
(ImageNet-16-120) using eight asynchronous workers, each with an NVIDIA RTX 2080 Ti GPU,
for ca. 4 to ca. 14.4 GPU days in total.

Is our search strategy BANAT exploring well-performing architectures during search? To
investigate the question, we studied density estimates of the validation error of proposed candidates
for all search strategies across our experiments from Section 5. This provides a better view for
whether search strategies are exploring well-performing architectures or wasting computational re-
sources on low-performing architectures. Figure 9 shows that our proposed search strategy BANAT
explored better architecture candidates across all the datasets, i.e., it has smaller median validation
errors and the distributions are further shifted towards smaller validation errors than for the other
search strategies.

What distinguishes top-performing neural architectures from the other ones? To understand
what distinguishes top-performing neural architecture from other ones, we analyze the impact of
maximum depth on performance and the frequency of production rules in the worst-10%, top-10%,
or other neural architectures, respectively. In another analysis, we marginalize out the validation
error of every production rule; thereby relating the contribution of a production rule with the per-
formance of the architecture. Note, however, that both analyses ignore the topological information,
i.e., a topological operator or primitive computation may have a different effect at different stages of
the architecture.
Figure 10 shows no particular trend (e.g., more depth yields better performance) across the datasets,
indicating that depth may not be the most important factor for performance in our hierarchical search
space. In contrast, Figure 11 and Figure 12 show that particularly macro-level production rules (i.e.,
for the nonterminals D2, D1, D0, and D) have a large effect on the performance of an architecture.
Interestingly, we find that that top-performing architectures (almost exclusively) use the topological
operator Residual3 for derivations from the nonterminal D1 across search spaces. This hints
that a residual connection at the macro-level could be a strong topological structure, but remains
to be evaluated for a variety of architectures. Cell-level production choices have less effect on
performance. However, we hypothesize that this may also be due to the neglect of topological
information. We leave further analysis for future work.

What is the impact of flexible parameterization of convolutional blocks? To investigate the im-
pact of the flexible parameterization of the convolutional blocks (i.e., activation functions, normal-
izations, and type of convolution), we removed the flexible parameterization and allowed only the
same primitive computations as in the cell-based NAS-Bench-201 search space, while still search-
ing over the macro architecture. More explicitly, we only allow ReLU non-linearity as the activation
function, batch normalization as the normalization, and 1 × 1 or 3 × 3 convolutions. Figure 13
shows that for all datasets except CIFAR-100, flexible parameterization of the convolutional blocks
improves performance of the found architectures. Interestingly, we find an architecture on CIFAR-
100, which achieves 26.24 % test error with 1.307 MB and 167.172 M number of parameters or
FLOPs, respectively. This architecture is superior to the optimal architecture in the cell-based NAS-
Bench-201 search space. Note that this architecture is also pareto-optimal for test error vs. number
of parameters and test error vs. number of FLOPs.


                                                                                             28
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                       CIFAR-10              CIFAR-100       ImageNet-16-120           CIFARTile            AddNIST
                  20                    40                                        60                   20



  Val error [%]
                                                             70

                                                                                  50
                  15                    35                                                             15
                                                             60                   40
                                        30                                                             10
                  10                                                              30
                                                             50                                         5
                           100   200            100   200            100   200            100   200            100   200

                          Depth                Depth                Depth                Depth                Depth
                                  Worst-10%                 Other                Top-10%                Best

Figure 10: Validation error over maximal depth of all architecture candidates proposed by the
search strategies (i.e., BANAT, RS, RE, and BANAT (WL)) and across datasets (i.e., CIFAR-10/100,
ImageNet-16-120, CIFARTile, AddNIST) from our experiments in Section 5.


Test error vs. number of parameters and FLOPs Figure 14 shows the test error vs. the number
of parameters or FLOPs. Our best found architectures fall well within the parameter and FLOPs
ranges of the cell-based NAS-Bench-201 search space across all datasets, except for the parameters
on CIFAR-10. Note that our best found architecture on ImageNet-16-120 is pareto-optimal for test
error vs. number of parameters and test error vs. number of FLOPs.

Best architectures Below we report the best found architecture per dataset on the hierarchical
NAS-Bench-201 search space (Section 5.1) for each dataset. Figure 15 visualizes the novel and
diverse design of the architectures (including stem and classifier head).
CIFAR-10 (mean test error 5.65 %, #params 2.204 MB, FLOPs 127.673 M):
                       Linear4(Residual3(Residual2(Cell(id, zero, Linear1(Linear3(hardswish, conv1x1,
                       layer)), Linear1(Linear3(hardswish, conv3x3, layer)), zero, Linear1(Linear3(mish,
                       conv3x3, instance))), Cell(Linear1(Linear3(relu, dconv3x3, layer)), id, avg pool, Lin-
                       ear1(Linear3(relu, dconv3x3, layer)), id, zero), Cell(zero, Linear1(Linear3(relu, conv1x1,
                       layer)), id, Linear1(Linear3(hardswish, conv1x1, instance)), Linear1(Linear3(hardswish,
                       conv3x3, layer)), Linear1(Linear3(hardswish, dconv3x3, layer)))), Residual2(Cell(id,
                       zero, Linear1(Linear3(relu, conv1x1, layer)), Linear1(Linear3(mish, conv1x1,
                       layer)), Linear1(Linear3(hardswish, conv3x3, layer)), zero), Cell(id, zero, id,
                       Linear1(Linear3(relu, conv3x3, batch)), id, id), Cell(Linear1(Linear3(hardswish,
                       conv3x3, layer)), Linear1(Linear3(hardswish, conv1x1, layer)), Linear1(Linear3(relu,
                       conv1x1, layer)), Linear1(Linear3(relu, conv3x3, layer)), zero, id)), Resid-
                       ual2(Cell(Linear1(Linear3(hardswish, conv1x1, instance)), Linear1(Linear3(hardswish,
                       dconv3x3, batch)), Linear1(Linear3(mish, dconv3x3, instance)), Linear1(Linear3(relu,
                       conv1x1, batch)), id, id), down, down), Residual2(Cell(Linear1(Linear3(hardswish,
                       conv1x1, layer)), Linear1(Linear3(hardswish, dconv3x3, batch)), Linear1(Linear3(relu,
                       conv1x1, batch)), Linear1(Linear3(hardswish, conv3x3, layer)), id, avg pool), down,
                       down)), Residual3(Residual2(Cell(id, zero, Linear1(Linear3(hardswish, conv1x1,
                       layer)), Linear1(Linear3(hardswish, conv3x3, layer)), id, Linear1(Linear3(mish,
                       conv3x3, instance))), Cell(Linear1(Linear3(relu, dconv3x3, layer)), id, avg pool, Lin-
                       ear1(Linear3(relu, dconv3x3, layer)), id, zero), Cell(zero, Linear1(Linear3(relu, conv1x1,
                       layer)), id, Linear1(Linear3(hardswish, conv1x1, instance)), Linear1(Linear3(hardswish,
                       conv1x1, layer)), Linear1(Linear3(hardswish, dconv3x3, layer)))), Residual2(Cell(id, zero,
                       Linear1(Linear3(mish, conv1x1, layer)), Linear1(Linear3(mish, conv3x3, layer)), Lin-
                       ear1(Linear3(hardswish, dconv3x3, batch)), zero), Cell(id, zero, id, Linear1(Linear3(relu,
                       conv3x3, batch)), id, id), Cell(Linear1(Linear3(hardswish, conv3x3, layer)), Lin-
                       ear1(Linear3(hardswish, conv1x1, layer)), Linear1(Linear3(mish, conv1x1, batch)), Lin-
                       ear1(Linear3(relu, conv3x3, instance)), zero, id)), Residual2(Cell(Linear1(Linear3(relu,
                       conv1x1, batch)), Linear1(Linear3(hardswish, dconv3x3, batch)), id, Linear1(Linear3(relu,
                       conv1x1, batch)), id, id), down, down), Residual2(Cell(Linear1(Linear3(hardswish,
                       conv1x1, layer)), Linear1(Linear3(hardswish, dconv3x3, batch)), Linear1(Linear3(relu,
                       conv1x1, batch)), Linear1(Linear3(hardswish, conv3x3, layer)), id, avg pool), down,
                       down)), Linear3(Residual2(Cell(Linear1(Linear3(hardswish, conv3x3, batch)), Lin-
                       ear1(Linear3(relu, conv1x1, instance)), Linear1(Linear3(relu, conv1x1, layer)),
                       Linear1(Linear3(relu, conv1x1, layer)), Linear1(Linear3(relu, conv1x1, layer)),
                       id), Cell(Linear1(Linear3(relu, conv1x1, batch)), id, id, Linear1(Linear3(relu,


                                                                  29
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                                                    Worst-10%                                                       Other                                        Top-10%
 Proportion         CIFAR-10                                         CIFAR-100                                   ImageNet-16-120                                      CIFARTile                                        AddNIST
              1.0                                             1.0                                               1.0                                             1.0                                              1.0


              0.5                                             0.5                                               0.5                                             0.5                                              0.5


              0.0                                             0.0                                               0.0                                             0.0                                              0.0


                                                  Linear4


                                                                                                    Linear4


                                                                                                                                                    Linear4


                                                                                                                                                                                                     Linear4


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Linear4
                     Linear3(D1

                                   Linear3(D0


                                                                       Linear3(D1

                                                                                     Linear3(D0


                                                                                                                       Linear3(D1

                                                                                                                                     Linear3(D0


                                                                                                                                                                        Linear3(D1

                                                                                                                                                                                      Linear3(D0


                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Linear3(D1

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Linear3(D0
                                                                    Worst-10%                                                       Other                                        Top-10%
   (a) D2 CIFAR-10
          ::= Linear3(D1,CIFAR-100    ImageNet-16-120
                          D1, D0) | Linear3(D0, D1, D1) CIFARTile
                                                        | Linear4(D1, D1,AddNIST
                                                                          D0, D0).
              1.0                                             1.0                                               1.0                                             1.0                                              1.0
 Proportion


              0.5                                             0.5                                               0.5                                             0.5                                              0.5


              0.0                                             0.0                                               0.0                                             0.0                                              0.0
                     Linear3

                                   Linear4


                                                                       Linear3

                                                                                     Linear4


                                                                                                                       Linear3

                                                                                                                                     Linear4


                                                                                                                                                                        Linear3

                                                                                                                                                                                      Linear4


                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Linear3

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Linear4
                                                  Residual3


                                                                                                    Residual3


                                                                                                                                                    Residual3


                                                                                                                                                                                                     Residual3


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Residual3
                                                                    Worst-10%                                                       Other                                        Top-10%
                   CIFAR-10
              (b) D1             CIFAR-100
                     ::= Linear3(C,           ImageNet-16-120
                                    C, D) | Linear4(C, C, C, D) | CIFARTile
                                                                   Residual3(C, C,AddNIST
                                                                                   D, D).
              1.0                                             1.0                                               1.0                                             1.0                                              1.0
 Proportion


              0.5                                             0.5                                               0.5                                             0.5                                              0.5


              0.0                                             0.0                                               0.0                                             0.0                                              0.0
                     Linear3

                                   Linear4


                                                                       Linear3

                                                                                     Linear4


                                                                                                                       Linear3

                                                                                                                                     Linear4


                                                                                                                                                                        Linear3

                                                                                                                                                                                      Linear4


                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Linear3

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Linear4
                                                  Residual3


                                                                                                    Residual3


                                                                                                                                                    Residual3


                                                                                                                                                                                                     Residual3


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Residual3
                                                                    Worst-10%                                                       Other                                        Top-10%
    (c) D0 CIFAR-10
           ::= Linear3(C, CIFAR-100    ImageNet-16-120
                           C, CL) | Linear4(C, C, C, CL) | CIFARTile
                                                           Residual3(C, C,AddNIST
                                                                           CL, CL).
              1.0                                             1.0                                               1.0                                             1.0                                              1.0
 Proportion


              0.5                                             0.5                                               0.5                                             0.5                                              0.5


              0.0                                             0.0                                               0.0                                             0.0                                              0.0
                     Linear2

                                   Linear3


                                                                       Linear2

                                                                                     Linear3


                                                                                                                       Linear2

                                                                                                                                     Linear3


                                                                                                                                                                        Linear2

                                                                                                                                                                                      Linear3


                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Linear2

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Linear3
                                                  Residual2


                                                                                                    Residual2


                                                                                                                                                    Residual2


                                                                                                                                                                                                     Residual2


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Residual2


                                                                    Worst-10%                                                       Other                                        Top-10%
         CIFAR-10
 (d) D ::= Linear2(CL, CIFAR-100    ImageNet-16-120
                       down) | Linear3(CL, CL, down) | CIFARTile      AddNIST
                                                       Residual2(C, down, down).
              1.0                                             1.0                                               1.0                                             1.0                                              1.0
 Proportion


              0.5                                             0.5                                               0.5                                             0.5                                              0.5


              0.0                                             0.0                                               0.0                                             0.0                                              0.0
                     Linear2

                                   Linear3


                                                                       Linear2

                                                                                     Linear3


                                                                                                                       Linear2

                                                                                                                                     Linear3


                                                                                                                                                                        Linear2

                                                                                                                                                                                      Linear3


                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Linear2

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Linear3
                                                  Residual2


                                                                                                    Residual2


                                                                                                                                                    Residual2


                                                                                                                                                                                                     Residual2


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Residual2


                                                                    Worst-10%                                                       Other                                        Top-10%
                (e)CIFAR-10      CIFAR-100
                    C ::= Linear2(CL,         ImageNet-16-120
                                      CL) | Linear3(CL,         CIFARTile CL,AddNIST
                                                        CL) | Residual2(CL,   CL).
              1.0                                             1.0                                               1.0                                             1.0                                              1.0
 Proportion


              0.5                                             0.5                                               0.5                                             0.5                                              0.5


              0.0                                             0.0                                               0.0                                             0.0                                              0.0
                                  id


                                                                                    id


                                                                                                                                    id


                                                                                                                                                                                     id


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     id
                    zero


                                                                      zero


                                                                                                                      zero


                                                                                                                                                                       zero


                                                                                                                                                                                                                       zero
                                          BLOCK


                                                                                            BLOCK


                                                                                                                                            BLOCK


                                                                                                                                                                                             BLOCK


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             BLOCK
                                                   avg_pool


                                                                                                     avg_pool


                                                                                                                                                     avg_pool


                                                                                                                                                                                                      avg_pool


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      avg_pool


                                                              (f) OP ::= zero | id | BLOCK | avg pool.



                                                                                                                      30
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                                               Worst-10%                                             Other                                  Top-10%
                      CIFAR-10                                  CIFAR-100                            ImageNet-16-120                                 CIFARTile                                  AddNIST
               1.0                                       1.0                                        1.0                                       1.0                                        1.0
  Proportion


               0.5                                       0.5                                        0.5                                       0.5                                        0.5


               0.0                                       0.0                                        0.0                                       0.0                                        0.0
                       relu


                                              mish


                                                                  relu


                                                                                         mish


                                                                                                           relu


                                                                                                                                   mish


                                                                                                                                                      relu


                                                                                                                                                                              mish


                                                                                                                                                                                                relu


                                                                                                                                                                                                                       mish
                                 hardswish


                                                                            hardswish


                                                                                                                      hardswish


                                                                                                                                                                 hardswish


                                                                                                                                                                                                          hardswish
                                                               Worst-10%                                             Other                                  Top-10%
                      CIFAR-10                                   CIFAR-100
                                                                (g)          ImageNet-16-120
                                                                    ACT ::= relu               CIFARTile
                                                                                 | hardswish | mish.                                                                                            AddNIST
               1.0                                       1.0                                        1.0                                       1.0                                        1.0
  Proportion


               0.5                                       0.5                                        0.5                                       0.5                                        0.5


               0.0                                       0.0                                        0.0                                       0.0                                        0.0
                       conv1x1

                                 conv3x3


                                                                  conv1x1

                                                                            conv3x3


                                                                                                           conv1x1

                                                                                                                      conv3x3


                                                                                                                                                      conv1x1

                                                                                                                                                                 conv3x3


                                                                                                                                                                                                conv1x1

                                                                                                                                                                                                          conv3x3
                                              dconv3x3


                                                                                         dconv3x3


                                                                                                                                   dconv3x3


                                                                                                                                                                              dconv3x3


                                                                                                                                                                                                                       dconv3x3
                                                                Worst-10%                                            Other                                      Top-10%
                      CIFAR-10 (h) CONV
                                    CIFAR-100  ImageNet-16-120
                                        ::= conv1x1              CIFARTile
                                                    | conv3x3 | dconv3x3.                                                                                                                       AddNIST
               1.00                                      1.00                                       1.00                                      1.00                                       1.00
 Proportion


               0.75                                      0.75                                       0.75                                      0.75                                       0.75

               0.50                                      0.50                                       0.50                                      0.50                                       0.50

               0.25                                      0.25                                       0.25                                      0.25                                       0.25

               0.00                                      0.00                                       0.00                                      0.00                                       0.00
                                                layer


                                                                                           layer


                                                                                                                                     layer


                                                                                                                                                                                layer


                                                                                                                                                                                                                         layer
                         batch


                                                                    batch


                                                                                                             batch


                                                                                                                                                        batch


                                                                                                                                                                                                  batch
                                   instance


                                                                              instance


                                                                                                                        instance


                                                                                                                                                                   instance


                                                                                                                                                                                                            instance


                                                           (i) NORM ::= batch | instance | layer.

Figure 11: Comparison of the proportion of production rules in the worst-10% (blue), top-10%
(green) and other (orange) neural architectures from our experiments in Section 5.


                                                                                                           31
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                       CIFAR-10                                           CIFAR-100                                    ImageNet-16-120                                       CIFARTile                                        AddNIST
  Val error [%]                                                     100                                               100
                  75                                                                                                                                                    60                                               30
                                                                                                                       80
                  50                                                                                                                                                                                                     20
                                                                     50                                                                                                 40
                  25                                                                                                   60                                                                                                10



                                                       Linear4


                                                                                                         Linear4


                                                                                                                                                           Linear4


                                                                                                                                                                                                            Linear4


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Linear4
                         Linear3(D1

                                       Linear3(D0


                                                                           Linear3(D1

                                                                                         Linear3(D0


                                                                                                                             Linear3(D1

                                                                                                                                           Linear3(D0


                                                                                                                                                                              Linear3(D1

                                                                                                                                                                                            Linear3(D0


                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Linear3(D1

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Linear3(D0
      (a) D2CIFAR-10      CIFAR-100
             ::= Linear3(D1,            ImageNet-16-120
                             D1, D0) | Linear3(D0, D1, D1) CIFARTile
                                                           | Linear4(D1, D1,AddNIST
                                                                             D0, D0).
                                                                    100                                               100
  Val error [%]


                  75                                                                                                                                                    60                                               30
                                                                                                                       80
                  50                                                                                                                                                                                                     20
                                                                     50                                                                                                 40
                  25                                                                                                   60                                                                                                10
                         Linear3

                                       Linear4


                                                                           Linear3

                                                                                         Linear4


                                                                                                                             Linear3

                                                                                                                                           Linear4


                                                                                                                                                                              Linear3

                                                                                                                                                                                            Linear4


                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Linear3

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Linear4
                                                       Residual3


                                                                                                         Residual3


                                                                                                                                                           Residual3


                                                                                                                                                                                                            Residual3


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Residual3
                   (b) CIFAR-10      CIFAR-100
                       D1 ::= Linear3(C,           ImageNet-16-120
                                         C, D) | Linear4(C, C, C, D) |CIFARTile
                                                                       Residual3(C, C,AddNIST
                                                                                       D, D).
                                                                    100                                               100
  Val error [%]


                  75                                                                                                                                                    60                                               30
                                                                                                                       80
                  50                                                                                                                                                                                                     20
                                                                     50                                                                                                 40
                  25                                                                                                   60                                                                                                10
                         Linear3

                                       Linear4


                                                                           Linear3

                                                                                         Linear4


                                                                                                                             Linear3

                                                                                                                                           Linear4


                                                                                                                                                                              Linear3

                                                                                                                                                                                            Linear4


                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Linear3

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Linear4
                                                       Residual3


                                                                                                         Residual3


                                                                                                                                                           Residual3


                                                                                                                                                                                                            Residual3


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Residual3
        (c) D0CIFAR-10
               ::= Linear3(C,CIFAR-100    ImageNet-16-120
                              C, CL) | Linear4(C, C, C, CL) |CIFARTile
                                                              Residual3(C, C,AddNIST
                                                                              CL, CL).
                                                                    100                                               100
  Val error [%]


                  75                                                                                                                                                    60                                               30
                                                                                                                       80
                  50                                                                                                                                                                                                     20
                                                                     50                                                                                                 40
                  25                                                                                                   60                                                                                                10
                         Linear2

                                       Linear3


                                                                           Linear2

                                                                                         Linear3


                                                                                                                             Linear2

                                                                                                                                           Linear3


                                                                                                                                                                              Linear2

                                                                                                                                                                                            Linear3


                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Linear2

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Linear3
                                                       Residual2


                                                                                                         Residual2


                                                                                                                                                           Residual2


                                                                                                                                                                                                            Residual2


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Residual2


       CIFAR-10
 (d) D ::= Linear2(CL,CIFAR-100    ImageNet-16-120
                       down) | Linear3(CL, CL, down) |CIFARTile       AddNIST
                                                       Residual2(C, down, down).
                                                                    100                                               100
  Val error [%]


                  75                                                                                                                                                    60                                               30
                                                                                                                       80
                  50                                                                                                                                                                                                     20
                                                                     50                                                                                                 40
                  25                                                                                                   60                                                                                                10
                         Linear2

                                       Linear3


                                                                           Linear2

                                                                                         Linear3


                                                                                                                             Linear2

                                                                                                                                           Linear3


                                                                                                                                                                              Linear2

                                                                                                                                                                                            Linear3


                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Linear2

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Linear3
                                                       Residual2


                                                                                                         Residual2


                                                                                                                                                           Residual2


                                                                                                                                                                                                            Residual2


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Residual2


                        CIFAR-10
                       (e)             CIFAR-100
                           C ::= Linear2(CL,        ImageNet-16-120
                                             CL) | Linear3(CL,        CIFARTile
                                                               CL) | Residual2(CL, CL,AddNIST
                                                                                       CL).
                                                                    100                                               100
  Val error [%]


                  75                                                                                                                                                    60                                               30
                                                                                                                       80
                  50                                                                                                                                                                                                     20
                                                                     50                                                                                                 40
                  25                                                                                                   60                                                                                                10
                                      id


                                                                                        id


                                                                                                                                          id


                                                                                                                                                                                           id


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            id
                        zero


                                                                          zero


                                                                                                                            zero


                                                                                                                                                                             zero


                                                                                                                                                                                                                              zero
                                               BLOCK


                                                                                                 BLOCK


                                                                                                                                                   BLOCK


                                                                                                                                                                                                    BLOCK


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     BLOCK
                                                         avg_pool


                                                                                                           avg_pool


                                                                                                                                                             avg_pool


                                                                                                                                                                                                              avg_pool


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               avg_pool


                                                                      (f) OP ::= zero | id | BLOCK | avg pool.


                                                                                                                             32
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                            CIFAR-10                               CIFAR-100                           ImageNet-16-120                             CIFARTile                                AddNIST
                                                             100                                      100
   Val error [%]


                   75                                                                                                                         60                                      30
                                                                                                       80
                   50                                                                                                                                                                 20
                                                              50                                                                              40
                   25                                                                                  60                                                                             10
                            relu


                                                  mish


                                                                     relu


                                                                                           mish


                                                                                                             relu


                                                                                                                                   mish


                                                                                                                                                     relu


                                                                                                                                                                           mish


                                                                                                                                                                                             relu


                                                                                                                                                                                                                   mish
                                      hardswish


                                                                               hardswish


                                                                                                                       hardswish


                                                                                                                                                               hardswish


                                                                                                                                                                                                       hardswish
                            CIFAR-10                               CIFAR-100    ImageNet-16-120
                                                                   (g) ACT ::= relu               CIFARTile
                                                                                    | hardswish | mish.                                                                                     AddNIST
                                                             100                                      100
   Val error [%]


                   75                                                                                                                         60                                      30
                                                                                                       80
                   50                                                                                                                                                                 20
                                                              50                                                                              40
                   25                                                                                  60                                                                             10
                            conv1x1

                                      conv3x3


                                                                     conv1x1

                                                                               conv3x3


                                                                                                             conv1x1

                                                                                                                       conv3x3


                                                                                                                                                     conv1x1

                                                                                                                                                               conv3x3


                                                                                                                                                                                             conv1x1

                                                                                                                                                                                                       conv3x3
                                                  dconv3x3


                                                                                           dconv3x3


                                                                                                                                   dconv3x3


                                                                                                                                                                           dconv3x3


                                                                                                                                                                                                                   dconv3x3
                            CIFAR-10                             CIFAR-100
                                                             (h) CONV        ImageNet-16-120
                                                                      ::= conv1x1              CIFARTile
                                                                                  | conv3x3 | dconv3x3.                                                                                     AddNIST
                                                             100                                      100
   Val error [%]


                   75                                                                                                                         60                                      30
                                                              80
                                                                                                       80
                   50                                         60                                                                                                                      20
                                                                                                                                              40
                   25                                         40                                       60                                                                             10
                                                                                                                                   layer


                                                                                                                                                                           layer
                            batch


                                                  layer


                                                                     batch


                                                                                           layer


                                                                                                             batch


                                                                                                                                                     batch


                                                                                                                                                                                             batch


                                                                                                                                                                                                                   layer
                                      instance


                                                                               instance


                                                                                                                       instance


                                                                                                                                                               instance


                                                                                                                                                                                                       instance
                                                                   (i) NORM ::= batch | instance | layer.

Figure 12: Marginalized performance of every production rule in our hierarchical NAS-Bench-201
search space from Section 5.


                            CIFAR-10                                CIFAR-100                          ImageNet-16-120                             CIFARTile                               AddNIST
  Val error [%]


                    11                                        32                                       58                                     60
                                                                                                                                              50                                      10
                    10                                        30                                       56
                                                                                                                                                                                       9
                                                              28                                       54                                     40
                        9                                                                                                                                                              8
                                                              26                                       52                                     30                                       7
                        8
                            0 25 50 75 100                          0 25 50 75 100                          0 25 50 75 100                         0 25 50 75 100                          0 25 50 75 100

                            Evaluations     Evaluations     Evaluations       Evaluations      Evaluations
                                 hierarchical          hierarchical without flexible parameterization


Figure 13: Impact of flexible parameterization of convolutional blocks in the hierarchical NAS-
Bench-201 search space.


                                                                                                             33
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                          CIFAR-10                CIFAR-100              ImageNet-16-120


                   Test error [%]
                                    100                     100                         100
                                     75                                                  90
                                                             75
                                                                                         80
                                     50
                                                             50                          70
                                     25                                                  60
                                      0                      25                          50
                                          0.2   1.2   2.2          0.2     0.9    1.6             0.2        0.9   1.6

                                      #params [MB]            #params [MB]                #params [MB]
                                         all cells                best cell                    ours

                                      (a) Test error vs. number of parameters (#params (MB)).

                                           CIFAR-10               CIFAR-100              ImageNet-16-120
                   Test error [%]



                                    100                     100                         100
                                     75                                                  90
                                                             75
                                                                                         80
                                     50
                                                             50                          70
                                     25                                                  60
                                      0                      25                          50
                                          0     100   200         0      100     200          0         20    40   60

                                          #FLOPs [M]              #FLOPs [M]                  #FLOPs [M]
                                            all cells               best cell                     ours

                                          (b) Test error vs. number of FLOPs (#FLOPs (M)).

Figure 14: Test error vs. number of parameters (a) and FLOPs (b) for each architecture candidate in
the cell-based search space (blue dots), the best cell (orange cross), and our best found architecture
(green star).



         conv1x1, layer)), id, id), Cell(id, Linear1(Linear3(relu, conv1x1, instance)), Lin-
         ear1(Linear3(relu, conv1x1, instance)), Linear1(Linear3(relu, conv1x1, layer)), zero, Lin-
         ear1(Linear3(hardswish, conv3x3, batch)))), Residual2(Cell(Linear1(Linear3(hardswish,
         conv3x3, layer)), Linear1(Linear3(relu, conv3x3, instance)), Linear1(Linear3(mish,
         conv1x1, layer)), Linear1(Linear3(relu, conv1x1, layer)), Linear1(Linear3(relu, conv3x3,
         layer)), id), Cell(Linear1(Linear3(relu, conv1x1, batch)), id, id, Linear1(Linear3(relu,
         conv3x3, batch)), id, id), Cell(id, Linear1(Linear3(relu, conv1x1, instance)), Lin-
         ear1(Linear3(relu, conv1x1, instance)), Linear1(Linear3(relu, dconv3x3, layer)), zero,
         Linear1(Linear3(hardswish, dconv3x3, layer)))), Cell(Linear1(Linear3(relu, dconv3x3,
         instance)), zero, zero, id, zero, id)), Linear4(Residual2(Cell(Linear1(Linear3(hardswish,
         conv3x3, layer)), Linear1(Linear3(relu, conv3x3, layer)), Linear1(Linear3(relu,
         conv1x1, layer)), Linear1(Linear3(relu, conv1x1, layer)), Linear1(Linear3(relu, conv3x3,
         layer)), id), Cell(Linear1(Linear3(relu, conv1x1, batch)), id, id, Linear1(Linear3(relu,
         conv3x3, batch)), id, id), Cell(id, Linear1(Linear3(relu, conv1x1, instance)), Lin-
         ear1(Linear3(relu, conv1x1, instance)), Linear1(Linear3(relu, conv1x1, layer)), zero, Lin-
         ear1(Linear3(hardswish, conv3x3, batch)))), Residual2(Cell(Linear1(Linear3(hardswish,
         conv3x3, layer)), Linear1(Linear3(relu, conv3x3, layer)), Linear1(Linear3(relu,
         conv1x1, layer)), Linear1(Linear3(relu, conv1x1, layer)), Linear1(Linear3(relu, conv3x3,
         layer)), id), Cell(Linear1(Linear3(relu, conv1x1, batch)), id, id, Linear1(Linear3(relu,
         conv3x3, batch)), id, id), Cell(id, Linear1(Linear3(relu, conv1x1, instance)), Lin-
         ear1(Linear3(relu, conv1x1, instance)), Linear1(Linear3(relu, conv1x1, layer)), zero, Lin-
         ear1(Linear3(hardswish, conv3x3, layer)))), Residual2(Cell(Linear1(Linear3(hardswish,
         conv3x3, layer)), Linear1(Linear3(relu, conv3x3, layer)), Linear1(Linear3(relu,
         conv1x1, layer)), Linear1(Linear3(relu, conv1x1, layer)), Linear1(Linear3(relu, conv3x3,
         layer)), id), Cell(Linear1(Linear3(relu, conv1x1, batch)), id, id, Linear1(Linear3(relu,
         conv3x3, batch)), id, id), Cell(id, Linear1(Linear3(relu, conv1x1, instance)), Lin-
         ear1(Linear3(relu, conv1x1, instance)), Linear1(Linear3(relu, conv1x1, layer)), zero,
         Linear1(Linear3(hardswish, conv3x3, layer)))), Cell(id, Linear1(Linear3(hardswish,
         conv1x1, layer)), Linear1(Linear3(mish, conv1x1, batch)), id, zero, id))) .


CIFAR-100 (mean test error 27.63 %, #params 0.962 MB, FLOPs 115.243 M):


                                                                      34
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


        Linear3(Residual3(Linear3(Cell(Linear3(mish, conv3x3, layer), avg pool, Lin-
        ear3(hardswish, conv1x1, instance), zero, Linear3(mish, conv3x3, batch), zero),
        Cell(Linear3(hardswish, dconv3x3, batch), zero, Linear3(hardswish, dconv3x3, batch),
        Linear3(relu, dconv3x3, batch), id, id), Cell(Linear3(mish, conv3x3, batch), zero,
        id, zero, Linear3(hardswish, dconv3x3, batch), id)), Linear2(Cell(id, zero, Lin-
        ear3(mish, conv3x3, batch), zero, zero, Linear3(mish, conv1x1, batch)), Cell(zero,
        zero, zero, id, zero, avg pool)), Cell(Linear3(relu, conv3x3, batch), zero, Lin-
        ear3(hardswish, conv3x3, instance), id, id, avg pool), Cell(id, id, zero, zero, id,
        id)), Residual3(Linear3(Cell(Linear3(mish, conv3x3, layer), id, Linear3(hardswish,
        dconv3x3, layer), Linear3(hardswish, dconv3x3, batch), Linear3(mish, conv3x3, in-
        stance), Linear3(mish, conv3x3, batch)), Cell(Linear3(hardswish, conv1x1, layer),
        id, Linear3(hardswish, dconv3x3, batch), Linear3(relu, conv3x3, layer), id, id),
        Cell(Linear3(relu, conv3x3, instance), zero, id, zero, Linear3(mish, conv3x3, batch),
        avg pool)), Linear3(Cell(zero, id, Linear3(hardswish, conv1x1, layer), Linear3(mish,
        conv3x3, instance), Linear3(mish, conv3x3, instance), zero), Cell(Linear3(hardswish,
        conv1x1, layer), id, Linear3(hardswish, dconv3x3, batch), Linear3(relu, conv3x3,
        batch), id, id), Cell(Linear3(relu, conv3x3, instance), zero, id, zero, Linear3(mish,
        conv3x3, layer), avg pool)), Residual2(Cell(zero, id, zero, Linear3(mish, conv3x3,
        layer), avg pool, Linear3(mish, conv3x3, layer)), down, down), Residual2(Cell(zero, id,
        zero, Linear3(mish, conv3x3, batch), avg pool, Linear3(mish, conv3x3, layer)), down,
        down)), Residual3(Linear3(Cell(Linear3(mish, conv3x3, layer), id, Linear3(hardswish,
        dconv3x3, layer), Linear3(hardswish, dconv3x3, batch), Linear3(mish, conv3x3, in-
        stance), Linear3(mish, conv3x3, batch)), Cell(Linear3(hardswish, conv1x1, layer),
        id, Linear3(hardswish, dconv3x3, batch), Linear3(relu, conv3x3, layer), id, id),
        Cell(Linear3(relu, conv3x3, instance), zero, id, zero, Linear3(mish, conv3x3, batch),
        avg pool)), Linear3(Cell(Linear3(mish, conv3x3, batch), id, Linear3(hardswish, conv1x1,
        batch), Linear3(mish, conv3x3, instance), Linear3(mish, conv3x3, instance), zero),
        Cell(Linear3(hardswish, conv1x1, layer), id, Linear3(hardswish, dconv3x3, batch),
        Linear3(hardswish, dconv3x3, batch), id, id), Cell(Linear3(relu, conv3x3, instance),
        zero, id, zero, Linear3(mish, conv3x3, layer), avg pool)), Residual2(Cell(zero, id, zero,
        Linear3(mish, conv3x3, layer), avg pool, Linear3(mish, conv3x3, layer)), down, down),
        Residual2(Cell(zero, id, zero, Linear3(mish, conv3x3, batch), avg pool, Linear3(mish,
        conv3x3, layer)), down, down)))

ImageNet-16-120 (mean test error 52.78 %, #params 0.626 MB, FLOPs 23.771 M):
        Linear3(Linear4(Residual2(Cell(id, avg pool, id, id, Linear3(relu, dconv3x3, layer),
        zero), Cell(Linear3(hardswish, conv1x1, batch), zero, zero, Linear3(mish, dconv3x3,
        layer), zero, zero), Cell(Linear3(relu, dconv3x3, layer), Linear3(mish, dconv3x3, layer),
        zero, Linear3(hardswish, conv3x3, layer), Linear3(relu, dconv3x3, instance), Lin-
        ear3(hardswish, conv3x3, instance))), Linear2(Cell(zero, Linear3(relu, conv3x3, layer),
        Linear3(mish, conv1x1, batch), Linear3(mish, conv1x1, batch), avg pool, Linear3(relu,
        conv3x3, layer)), Cell(id, id, Linear3(mish, conv3x3, layer), Linear3(relu, conv3x3, in-
        stance), id, id)), Residual2(Cell(zero, avg pool, Linear3(mish, conv1x1, batch), Lin-
        ear3(mish, conv1x1, layer), zero, zero), Cell(id, Linear3(relu, dconv3x3, layer), zero,
        zero, Linear3(relu, dconv3x3, instance), zero), Cell(id, Linear3(relu, conv3x3, layer),
        id, zero, zero, id)), Cell(zero, Linear3(hardswish, conv3x3, layer), avg pool, zero, Lin-
        ear3(hardswish, conv1x1, layer), id)), Residual3(Residual2(Cell(Linear3(relu, conv1x1,
        instance), Linear3(mish, conv1x1, layer), Linear3(mish, conv1x1, instance), zero, Lin-
        ear3(hardswish, dconv3x3, layer), id), Cell(id, avg pool, avg pool, Linear3(relu, conv1x1,
        instance), id, zero), Cell(avg pool, Linear3(mish, conv3x3, instance), Linear3(mish,
        conv1x1, instance), Linear3(relu, dconv3x3, batch), id, Linear3(hardswish, conv3x3,
        instance))), Linear2(Cell(zero, Linear3(relu, conv3x3, layer), Linear3(mish, conv1x1,
        batch), Linear3(mish, conv1x1, batch), avg pool, Linear3(relu, conv3x3, instance)),
        Cell(id, zero, Linear3(mish, conv3x3, layer), Linear3(relu, conv3x3, instance), id,
        id)), Residual2(Cell(Linear3(mish, conv3x3, layer), Linear3(mish, conv1x1, batch), id,
        Linear3(mish, conv1x1, layer), zero, id), down, down), Residual2(Cell(Linear3(relu,
        conv3x3, layer), zero, Linear3(relu, dconv3x3, layer), Linear3(mish, conv1x1, layer),
        zero, id), down, down)), Residual3(Residual2(Cell(Linear3(mish, conv1x1, instance),
        Linear3(mish, conv1x1, layer), Linear3(mish, conv1x1, instance), avg pool, Lin-
        ear3(hardswish, dconv3x3, layer), id), Cell(id, avg pool, avg pool, Linear3(relu, conv1x1,
        instance), id, zero), Cell(avg pool, Linear3(mish, conv3x3, instance), Linear3(mish,
        conv1x1, instance), Linear3(relu, dconv3x3, batch), id, Linear3(hardswish, conv3x3,
        instance))), Linear2(Cell(zero, Linear3(relu, conv3x3, layer), Linear3(mish, conv1x1,
        batch), Linear3(mish, conv1x1, batch), avg pool, Linear3(relu, conv3x3, layer)), Cell(id,


                                                   35
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


        zero, Linear3(mish, conv3x3, layer), Linear3(relu, conv3x3, instance), id, id)), Resid-
        ual2(Cell(Linear3(relu, conv3x3, layer), avg pool, id, Linear3(mish, conv3x3, instance),
        zero, id), down, down), Residual2(Cell(Linear3(relu, conv3x3, layer), zero, Linear3(relu,
        dconv3x3, instance), Linear3(mish, conv1x1, layer), zero, id), down, down)))

CIFARTile (mean test error 30.33 %, #params 2.356 MB, FLOPs 372.114 M):
        Linear4(Residual3(Residual2(Cell(Linear3(hardswish, conv3x3, instance), id, zero,
        Linear3(relu, dconv3x3, instance), Linear3(mish, conv1x1, instance), avg pool),
        Cell(avg pool, avg pool, id, zero, Linear3(hardswish, conv3x3, batch), avg pool),
        Cell(Linear3(relu, dconv3x3, instance), zero, id, Linear3(relu, dconv3x3, layer), id, id)),
        Residual2(Cell(zero, zero, Linear3(mish, conv1x1, instance), Linear3(mish, conv3x3,
        batch), zero, id), Cell(Linear3(mish, conv3x3, instance), zero, Linear3(relu, dconv3x3,
        batch), id, Linear3(mish, conv3x3, batch), id), Cell(Linear3(hardswish, dconv3x3, batch),
        Linear3(relu, conv3x3, batch), Linear3(relu, conv1x1, batch), zero, Linear3(relu, conv3x3,
        batch), id)), Linear2(Cell(Linear3(relu, dconv3x3, layer), Linear3(mish, conv1x1, layer),
        id, zero, Linear3(mish, conv3x3, batch), Linear3(relu, dconv3x3, layer)), down), Lin-
        ear2(Cell(id, Linear3(hardswish, conv1x1, layer), id, Linear3(relu, conv1x1, instance),
        avg pool, Linear3(relu, conv1x1, layer)), down)), Residual3(Residual2(Cell(id, avg pool,
        avg pool, Linear3(hardswish, dconv3x3, instance), Linear3(mish, conv1x1, layer), Lin-
        ear3(hardswish, dconv3x3, instance)), Cell(id, id, Linear3(relu, dconv3x3, layer), id,
        id, zero), Cell(Linear3(relu, conv3x3, layer), id, avg pool, Linear3(mish, dconv3x3, in-
        stance), Linear3(relu, conv1x1, layer), zero)), Residual2(Cell(Linear3(mish, conv3x3,
        batch), Linear3(mish, conv3x3, instance), zero, avg pool, avg pool, Linear3(mish,
        conv1x1, batch)), Cell(Linear3(mish, conv1x1, batch), Linear3(relu, dconv3x3, layer),
        zero, id, avg pool, avg pool), Cell(avg pool, Linear3(hardswish, conv1x1, instance), id,
        avg pool, avg pool, Linear3(hardswish, conv1x1, instance))), Residual2(Cell(Linear3(relu,
        dconv3x3, batch), avg pool, id, avg pool, id, zero), down, down), Residual2(Cell(zero,
        zero, Linear3(relu, dconv3x3, batch), avg pool, Linear3(hardswish, conv1x1, instance),
        avg pool), down, down)), Linear4(Linear3(Cell(Linear3(hardswish, conv3x3, batch), Lin-
        ear3(hardswish, conv3x3, batch), Linear3(relu, conv1x1, instance), id, Linear3(relu,
        conv1x1, layer), Linear3(relu, conv3x3, layer)), Cell(id, Linear3(relu, conv3x3, in-
        stance), Linear3(hardswish, conv1x1, instance), Linear3(relu, conv3x3, layer), avg pool,
        Linear3(mish, conv1x1, layer)), Cell(zero, zero, id, Linear3(relu, conv3x3, batch),
        id, Linear3(relu, conv1x1, layer))), Linear3(Cell(Linear3(hardswish, conv3x3, batch),
        Linear3(hardswish, conv3x3, batch), Linear3(relu, conv1x1, instance), Linear3(relu,
        dconv3x3, layer), Linear3(mish, conv1x1, layer), Linear3(relu, conv3x3, batch)), Cell(id,
        Linear3(relu, conv3x3, instance), Linear3(hardswish, conv1x1, instance), Linear3(relu,
        dconv3x3, instance), avg pool, Linear3(mish, conv1x1, layer)), Cell(zero, zero, id, Lin-
        ear3(relu, conv3x3, batch), id, avg pool)), Linear3(Cell(id, id, avg pool, Linear3(mish,
        conv1x1, layer), Linear3(mish, conv3x3, batch), zero), Cell(id, Linear3(relu, conv1x1,
        batch), avg pool, Linear3(relu, conv1x1, layer), avg pool, zero), Cell(zero, Linear3(relu,
        conv1x1, batch), Linear3(mish, dconv3x3, batch), Linear3(mish, conv1x1, batch), id, id)),
        Cell(id, Linear3(hardswish, conv1x1, layer), zero, id, zero, id)), Linear3(Linear2(Cell(id,
        zero, Linear3(mish, dconv3x3, instance), Linear3(mish, conv3x3, batch), Linear3(mish,
        dconv3x3, instance), Linear3(relu, conv1x1, instance)), Cell(Linear3(relu, dconv3x3, in-
        stance), avg pool, Linear3(mish, conv1x1, instance), Linear3(hardswish, dconv3x3, in-
        stance), id, Linear3(hardswish, conv1x1, layer))), Linear2(Cell(zero, zero, Linear3(mish,
        dconv3x3, instance), Linear3(relu, conv3x3, instance), Linear3(hardswish, conv3x3,
        batch), avg pool), Cell(id, id, Linear3(hardswish, conv1x1, instance), avg pool, zero, Lin-
        ear3(hardswish, conv3x3, batch))), Cell(avg pool, Linear3(mish, dconv3x3, layer), zero,
        avg pool, avg pool, zero))) .

AddNIST (mean test error 6.33 %, #params 2.853 MB, FLOPs 593.856 M):
        Linear4(Residual3(Linear3(Cell(id, Linear3(hardswish, dconv3x3, batch), Linear3(relu,
        conv1x1, layer), Linear3(mish, conv3x3, batch), avg pool, zero), Cell(zero, zero, avg pool,
        id, avg pool, Linear3(hardswish, conv1x1, instance)), Cell(Linear3(relu, conv3x3, layer),
        id, zero, Linear3(mish, conv3x3, instance), id, avg pool)), Linear2(Cell(id, Linear3(relu,
        conv3x3, layer), Linear3(relu, conv3x3, layer), Linear3(hardswish, conv3x3, batch),
        id, Linear3(relu, conv3x3, layer)), Cell(Linear3(mish, conv3x3, instance), id, Lin-
        ear3(mish, conv3x3, batch), id, avg pool, id)), Linear3(Cell(zero, id, Linear3(relu,
        dconv3x3, instance), Linear3(relu, dconv3x3, layer), Linear3(relu, dconv3x3, instance),
        Linear3(mish, conv3x3, batch)), Cell(Linear3(mish, conv1x1, instance), zero, Lin-
        ear3(relu, conv3x3, instance), id, zero, Linear3(relu, conv3x3, batch)), down), Lin-


                                                    36
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


         ear3(Cell(zero, avg pool, Linear3(hardswish, dconv3x3, layer), Linear3(relu, conv3x3,
         layer), Linear3(hardswish, conv1x1, instance), Linear3(hardswish, conv3x3, batch)),
         Cell(Linear3(hardswish, conv3x3, batch), Linear3(hardswish, conv1x1, layer), Lin-
         ear3(mish, conv1x1, batch), id, Linear3(hardswish, conv3x3, batch), zero), down)),
         Residual3(Linear2(Cell(Linear3(mish, conv1x1, layer), avg pool, Linear3(hardswish,
         dconv3x3, batch), Linear3(mish, dconv3x3, batch), id, Linear3(mish, conv3x3, layer)),
         Cell(zero, Linear3(relu, dconv3x3, layer), Linear3(hardswish, conv3x3, instance),
         avg pool, avg pool, zero)), Linear3(Cell(Linear3(relu, conv3x3, batch), id, Linear3(relu,
         conv3x3, layer), Linear3(mish, conv1x1, instance), id, Linear3(relu, dconv3x3, batch)),
         Cell(Linear3(mish, conv3x3, batch), Linear3(mish, conv1x1, instance), Linear3(mish,
         conv3x3, instance), zero, Linear3(mish, dconv3x3, layer), Linear3(relu, conv3x3,
         batch)), Cell(avg pool, Linear3(mish, conv1x1, instance), Linear3(relu, conv3x3, batch),
         avg pool, id, Linear3(mish, dconv3x3, batch))), Linear3(Cell(zero, avg pool, Lin-
         ear3(hardswish, dconv3x3, layer), Linear3(relu, conv3x3, batch), Linear3(hardswish,
         conv1x1, batch), Linear3(hardswish, conv3x3, batch)), Cell(avg pool, Linear3(hardswish,
         dconv3x3, layer), Linear3(mish, conv1x1, batch), id, Linear3(hardswish, conv3x3,
         batch), zero), down), Residual2(Cell(zero, Linear3(mish, conv1x1, instance), Lin-
         ear3(hardswish, conv1x1, instance), avg pool, Linear3(relu, conv1x1, layer), Lin-
         ear3(hardswish, dconv3x3, batch)), down, down)), Linear4(Linear2(Cell(Linear3(relu,
         conv3x3, instance), id, Linear3(relu, conv3x3, batch), avg pool, zero, id), Cell(avg pool,
         Linear3(hardswish, conv3x3, layer), avg pool, Linear3(mish, conv3x3, batch), Lin-
         ear3(relu, conv3x3, batch), id)), Linear2(Cell(Linear3(mish, conv1x1, layer), avg pool,
         Linear3(hardswish, dconv3x3, batch), Linear3(mish, dconv3x3, batch), id, Linear3(mish,
         conv3x3, layer)), Cell(zero, Linear3(relu, dconv3x3, layer), Linear3(hardswish, conv3x3,
         instance), avg pool, avg pool, zero)), Linear2(Cell(id, Linear3(relu, conv3x3, instance),
         Linear3(relu, conv3x3, layer), Linear3(hardswish, dconv3x3, batch), id, Linear3(relu,
         conv3x3, layer)), Cell(Linear3(mish, conv1x1, batch), id, avg pool, id, avg pool,
         id)), Cell(id, Linear3(relu, conv3x3, layer), Linear3(mish, conv1x1, instance), Lin-
         ear3(hardswish, conv3x3, batch), Linear3(mish, dconv3x3, instance), Linear3(hardswish,
         conv1x1, instance))), Linear4(Linear2(Cell(Linear3(relu, conv3x3, instance), id, Lin-
         ear3(relu, conv3x3, batch), avg pool, zero, id), Cell(zero, Linear3(relu, conv3x3, batch),
         avg pool, Linear3(mish, conv3x3, batch), Linear3(relu, dconv3x3, instance), id)), Lin-
         ear3(Cell(Linear3(relu, conv3x3, batch), id, Linear3(relu, conv3x3, layer), Linear3(mish,
         conv1x1, layer), id, Linear3(relu, dconv3x3, instance)), Cell(Linear3(mish, conv3x3,
         batch), Linear3(mish, conv1x1, instance), Linear3(hardswish, dconv3x3, instance), zero,
         Linear3(mish, dconv3x3, layer), Linear3(relu, conv3x3, batch)), Cell(avg pool, Lin-
         ear3(mish, conv1x1, instance), Linear3(relu, conv3x3, batch), avg pool, id, Linear3(mish,
         dconv3x3, batch))), Linear2(Cell(id, Linear3(relu, conv3x3, layer), Linear3(hardswish,
         conv3x3, layer), Linear3(hardswish, dconv3x3, batch), id, Linear3(relu, conv3x3, layer)),
         Cell(Linear3(mish, conv3x3, batch), id, avg pool, id, avg pool, id)), Cell(id, Linear3(relu,
         conv3x3, layer), Linear3(mish, conv1x1, instance), Linear3(hardswish, conv3x3, batch),
         Linear3(mish, dconv3x3, instance), Linear3(mish, conv3x3, instance)))) .


The above reported architectures already yield strong performance. In particular, on ImageNet-
16-120, CIFARTile, and AddNIST we find superior architectures with comparable number of pa-
rameters and FLOPs to architectures from common cell-based search spaces. When running the
search for 50 additional evaluations, we further improved performance to a test error of 51.98 % on
ImageNet-16-120, which is superior to the optimal architecture in the cell-based NAS-Bench-201
search space by 0.71 %p. We also found an architecture on CIFAR-100, when only allowing for the
same primitive computations as in the cell-based NAS-Bench-201 search space, that achieves a test
error of 26.24 % and, thus, is also superior to the optimal architecture in the cell-based NAS-Bench-
201 search space by 0.25 %p. The found architectures from our huge hierarchical search spaces
show that the search over a larger variety of architectures can indeed improve performance with a
small search budget, even though the search problem is significantly more difficult.


                                                     37
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                                                                                                                                 stm
                                                                                                                                mi                       id                  mi                      id
                                                                                                                                                                             mi                                            dc


                                                                                                                                                                 mi
                                                                                                      c3 ba mi c3 in


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             id
                                                                                                                                                                                             c3 ba mi dc la re
                                                                                                                                  id                                                                                  in                             mi            ap


                                                                                                                                                                 c1


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    mi
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     c3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   in                                               c1
                                                                                                                                                                              la                                                 la
                                                                                                                                                                    mi                                            ha
                                                                                                                                                                                   ap


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     c3 in
                                                                                                                                     c1
                                                                                                                                          la              id
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     ha               id


                                                                                                                                               ha c1


                                                                                                                                                                                             c3



                                                                                                                                                                                                                              c1
                                                                                                                                  do


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   re
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      la


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             c3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      ba


                                                                                                                                                                        ap
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                re                  re


                                                                                                             do
                                                                                                                                                            la


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           c1 la
                                                                                                                                                                              la



                                                                                                                                                                                                                   c3
                                                                                                                                                                                         la                       ap


                                                                                                                                                                        mi c3 la
                                                                                                                                                do


                                                                                                                                                              id
                                                                                                                                                                   ap
                                                                                                                                       do
                                                                                                       mi                     id                       mi                id
                                                                                                                                                       mi                                dc                                                id
                                                                                                                                       mi
                                                                                        c3 la mi c3



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               mi


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                ha c1 ba
                                                                                                                                                                                        in


                                                                                                                                                                   c3
                                                                                                                                                                        ba
                                                                                    id


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                ap


                                                                                                                                                                             mi dc
                                                                                                                                       c1
                                                                                 in                                                                                                                                             ap


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         c3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  mi
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 ap
                                                                                                                                                              la


                                                                                                                                                                                                                 c1
                                                                                                                                                                                         la                                     in
                                                                                                                                                                             la re
                                                                                                                                                    mi                                    ha
                                                                                                                                                                   ap


                                                                                                                                                                                                                      c3 in
                                                                                                               c1


                                                                                                                        la                id
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  ha                 id
                                                                                                                             ha c1


                                                                                                                                                                              c3
                                                                                           do


                                                                                                                                                                                                                 c1


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   re
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      la


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                c3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      ba
                                                                                                                                                       ap
                                                                          do


                                                                                                                                                                                                                 mi              re
                                                                                                                                          la
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          c1 la
                                                                                                                                                                 la



                                                                                                                                                                                                c3



                                                                                                                                                                           la           ap
                                                                                                                                                       mi c3 la


                                                                                                                             do                id
                                                                                                                                               ap
                                                                                                            do
                                                                id                                          id
                                                                                 mi dc


                                                                                                                                                 mi
                                                                                                                                  mi c3
                                   id


                    mi                                                                             in
                               ha


                                                     ap                                                                       ba
                                   c1 ba


                                                                                                                        mi dc


                                                                                                                                                       c1


                                                     ap
             c3


                                                     ap
                                                                      mi c1 la


                                                                                             la                        la
                                   in
                                                                            ha
                                                                           c3 in ididid ap
                                                                               id


                                                                     mi                                     ap
                                                                                  mi                        id
                                                                                                                             ha
                                         dc


                                                                                           c1 la


                                                                                                                       c3


                                                                la                             ba
                                                                     id               mi
                               mi
                                                       mi c3 ba


                                                                                                   dc
                  c1


                                                                            in
                                                dc mi


                         la
                                       la
                                      mi
                                    c3 in ididid ap
                                        id


                              mi                                     ap
                                            mi                       id
                                                                                 mi
               dc


                                                    c1 la cls


                                                                          c3


                         la                                 ba



                                                                                                                              (a) CIFAR-10.


                                                                                                                                                38
                                                                                                                                                                  c3
                                                                                                                                                                         la


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      c1
                                                                                                                                                                             c3 la              c1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      c3


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       la
                                                                                                                                                                    re


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            c3 ba re c3
                                                                                                                                                                                                       ba
                                                                                                                                                                                   id
                                                                                                                                                                                  ha


                                                         c3                                                                                                                                                                                                                c3 ba re          c3


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                la
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                re
                                                                                                                                                                c3 in


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      mi
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      ba


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       mi
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ba
                                                                                                                                                                       ha


                                                                                                                                                                             c3           id miapc3 ba id                                                                                                                          a mic3 ba          id        re c3 bacls
                                                                 la


                                                                                                                                                                                  ba                                                                                                                                      id
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               c1 l
                                                                                                                                                           re


                                                                     c3 la         c1


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      mi


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        la
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       id
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               do                                                 c3


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                ha
                                                                                                                                                                                  la


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           id

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      in
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       id
                                                                                         ba


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      ha c3
                                                                                                                                                           mi


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          re
                                                              re


                                                                                                                                                                        c3


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ba
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     c3 ba re             c3                                                                                                         c3 ba


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         mi
                                                                         ha
                                                                         id


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  id


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        re
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ba


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ha
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           la
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               re
                                                        c3 in                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 c3 bami c1 la ap                                   c3


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      do
                                                                                         id
                                                              ha


                                                                     c3 ba id miapc3 ba
                                                                                                                                                           re


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            do
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     ba
                                                                                                                               do


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    id
                                                   re


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    id
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           re c1 la hadc
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           re c1 la


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              (b) CIFAR-100.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               a


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         re
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        c3b
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     la


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ba
                                                                                                           ba re c3


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       mi
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                c1
                                                                        la


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 c3


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  la
                                                                                                    c3


                                                                                                                                                                                                             mi
                                                   mi


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                c3


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      re
                                                                c3                                                                                        mi
                                                                                                                                                          do


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      ba
                                                                                                                                                  do


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               in
                                                                                                                                     ba


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               39
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     id



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       re
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                                                                                                                                   c1 la        c3 ba re c3
                                                                                                                                                                                     id
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               c3
                                                                                                                               c1 la hadc ba re


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  ba
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     dc


                                                                                                                                                                                                             mi
                                                   re


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            re dc

                                                                                                                                                           id
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          c1 la ha


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      la
                                                                                                                                                                                                  ba


                                                                                                                                                                                                                 ba
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 c3
                                                  stm

                                                                                                                                                     in
                                                                                                                          re



                                                                                                                                                                                                             la ha
                                                                                                                                           id
                                                                                                                                                                                                 c3
                                                                                                   mi


                                                                                                                                      la


                                                                                                                                                           re
                                                                                                        re dc baapre c1 laid                                                                                                                                                 c3
                                                   id


                                                                                                                                                                                                                         re
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          a
                                                                                                                                                  re dc         mi c3 ba mi c1


                                                                                                                                                                                                                      c3b
                                                                                                                          re


                                                                                                                                                                                                                      id
                                                                             id                                                 c3
                                                        re c3


                                                                                                                                                                                                          id
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                c3


                                                                                                                                                                                                         ba
                                                                                                                                                                                     re
                                                                                    c3


                                                                                                                                                                                                        mi
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     re
                                                                                                   id


                                                                                                                                                                                  la
                                                                                                                      ba
                                                                                                                                                                         id
                                                   re


                                                                                              la
                                                                                                                                                                                          re c1 la


                                                                                                                                                                                                                            la
                                                                                                                                                                                                     c3 ha
                                                                       ba


                                                                                                                                                                                                     id
                                                                                                                                                                                                                re
                                                                      re


                                                                                                                                                                                                                         c3
                                                        mi


                                                                                                                                                                                                              re
                                                                                                   re


                                                                                                              c3
                                                                        c1 la
                                                                                           ba
                                                   mi


                                                                                                                                                                                                                            ba
                                                             c3 ba re


                                                                                                                                                                                  ba
                                                                                                                                                                                           ap
                                                                             re


                                                                                  c1 la ha dc                                                                           c3
                                                                        ba

                                                                                    ba


                                                                c3                                                                                                                                                     c3
                                                        c3   ba re c3
                                                                                                                                                            c1
                                                                                                                                                                            id


                                                                                                                                                               dc          dc
                                                                                                                                                                                in
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             c1
                                                                                                                                                      hida


                                                                                                                                                    c1 in                        ba
                                                                                                                                                                    la
                                                                                                                                                                    re

                                                                                                                                                                                         re c3 la


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             id
                                                                                                                                                                                                    re
                                                                                                                                               re


                                                                                                                                                                                 id
                                                                                                                                                         mi



                                                                                                                                                                                                         c3
                                                                      c3                                                                                     c1 in id ap


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 in
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             dc



                                                                                                                                                                                       in
                                                                                                                                                                                      mi
                                                                                                         c3                                                 la


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        (c) ImageNet16-120.
                                                                                                                                                                      mi


                                                                                                                                                                                                          in
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    c1
                                                                                                                                               re



                                                                                                                     re dc


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   c1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              la                       ba
                                                                                                                                                    c1                      c1 in hac3


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        id
                                                                                                               in
                                                                ha


                                                                                                                                                                                             c1          ba id mic3                                            c1 in                        re c3 la

                                                                                                                                                                    mi
                                                                                                                id


                                                                                                                                                                                                                        la


                                                                                                                                                                                                                               mi
                                                                                                                              in


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           e
                                                                                                                                               mi

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       c3 r
                                                                            la


                                                                                                                                                                                                                          id


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          la
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          id


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   re
                                                                                                                                       hac3 la id


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       re
                                                                midc la hac3       c3 la
                                                                                                   re


                                                                                                                                                                           in
                                                                                           c3 re


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              40
                                                                                                            mi


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         mi
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     id
                                                                                                                                                                                                              re


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        mi
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        in
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               re


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  id
                                                                                                                                  id


                                                                                                                                               mi
                                                                                                                     c1 la re la
                                                                                                          id
                                                                                                         id


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                c3 la redc la id
                                                                               in


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          la
                                                                              re


                                                                                                                             c3
                                                                                              la


                                                                                                                                                                      c3


                                                                                                                                                                                                                        in
                                                                                                                                                    c3 la


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   mi
                                                         la
                                                         id


                                                                                                   id c3 la                                                                                                                                                                                                                        c1
                                                       re


                                                                                                        idmi
                                                                                                                                                                                              do                   c3                               c1 in    ha    dc la ap c1 in hac3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          mi
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                c1      ba id
                                                  stmid re dc


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         do
                                                                                                                                                mi
                                                                              mi
                                                                              in


                                                                                           ba


                                                                                                                        id
                                                                                                                        id


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 do


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                mi
                                                                     dc la re dc    c1                                                                                                                                                                       ap


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              mi
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    c3


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               mi
                                                                                                                                                          id


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    id


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         la
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         la


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       mi
                                                                     la


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             in


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         id
                                                                                                                                                mi
                                                   mi


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               re
                                                                                                                                                     c1 ba                                                do


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              re
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               c3 la redc in id


                                                                                                                                                            id
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            c3
                                                         dc


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         in
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    c3


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        do
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 do


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ap
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   re


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              do
                                                                                                                                                          la
                                                                                                                                                     c1                                                                                                                                                                                           cls


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   mi
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    c3 la id                                              do


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             id
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             in
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        c3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                                                                                                                                          stmre dc in
                                                                                                       re                   mi               ha                              id      ap ap                       id         ha


                                         dclami c3


                                                                                                                            c3inmi
                                                                                   c1 laredcla
                                                                id                                                           c1
                                                                                                                                              in                             ap


                                                                                                                                                                                                                             c3
                                                                ba                                                                                     re                    re


                                                                                                                                                                                               ap
                                                                                                                                                   dcinid



                                                                                                                                                                                     dc
                                                                                                                                                                        id
                                                                                                                                                                        id                               ba
                                                                                                                                                                                                 mi


                                                                                                                                                                                   mila
                                                                                                                                                                                    c3 in



                                                                                                                                                                                                         c3ba
                                                                                                                                                                                                            re         ha


                                                                                                                                                                                                              c3 b



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  dcba
                                                                                                                                                                                     mi


                                                                                                                                                                   id
                                                                                                                                                                        re                                                       re      re


                                                                                                 do


                                                                                                                                                   dcba


                                                                                                                                                                                                                            c1



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              c3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ba


                                                                                                                                                                                                                   a
                                                                                                                                                                                      c3
                                                                                                                                                     id                                   id              ba
                                                                                                                                             ha                         reba
                                                                                                                            cl1a


                                                                                                                                                    id
                                                                                                                                              id


                                                                                                                                                                                   c1
                                                                                                                               rec1
                                                                                                                                                               in


                                                                                                                                              ap
                                                                                                                                        la
                                                                                                                            do
                                                                                                                            ha                id
                                                                                    re                                                                ap
                                                                          ap                                                                                                  mi            ap
                                                                dcba


                                                                                                                                                                                                    ha
                                                                                                                                              dc


                                                                                                                                                                        c1 la
                                                     id                                                                                                                                             dc

                                                                                                                 id
                                                                                                                                                       in                    re      in
                                                                                                                                                       mi

                                                                                                                           id


                                                                                                                                                                                  c3la
                                                                                                                                              dc
                                                                                                                                   id


                                                                                                                                                                              re
                                                                                                                                                                              c1


                                                                                                                                          in
                                                                                                       mi                   mi                     mla
                                                                                                                                                    i                    re
                                                                c3 ba


                                                                                                        c3inmic1bahac1


                                                                                                                                                                 c1 b


                                                                                                                                                                                                 dc la
                                                                             do


                                                                                                                            ap
                                              do


                                                                                     ap



                                                                                                                                                                        a
                                                                                                                              ap
                                                                                                                                    id

                                                                                                                in                   id             ap              ap
                                                                                                                         aha
                                                                                                                           p c1

                                                                                                                                     ap


                                                                                                                             in
                                                                                   do                                              ap
                                                                               ha do
                                                          ha c3 bida


                                                                                                      c3ba


                                                                                                 re                re
                                                                                                                     c1
                                                                                    c1


                                                                             in
                                                                rec3larec3


                                                                                      la
                                         id                                          re
                           c1                                                                          c3
                         ha


                                  in                 in
                            ap


                                                                     la
                            mic1larec3baha


                      re                                    ha
                                                                                   c3ba
                                  c3
             dc


                                                                              re                  mi
                                         ba


                                                                                                       c1
                                                                      c1


                           la                              in
                                             rec3barec3


                                                                      la
                           id                                        re
               c1                                                                       dc
              ha


                      in            in
                   ap


                                                     in
                   mic1larec3ba


                   mi             id
                                           mic3
              c1


                   la
                    id            reba
                   ap
                                       c1 c1ba c1la


                                    la
                                   re
                   mi
              c1


                   ba
                                haid
                           id


                                  idid
                   mi
                                       mi                       mi
              c3


                                                                              dcinre
                                  dc in


                      ba                                                      c1
                      ha                         rein
                                                                   dcinmic1
              dc



                                         ap


                           in                               in
                                                      id
                                                 hac1larec3in


                                                                     id
                                                                                   hac1
                                                      id


                                                                          in
                                           ap
                                                                hac3


                                                     abpa
                                                      ap
                                            apcls


                                                                                                                           (d) CIFARTile.


                                                                                                                                              41
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                                                                                       stmapmi c1
                                                      ha                              re                                           ha                   id
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      mi


                         c3bare


                                                           dcinhac3lahadcbaap ap


                                                                                                                                                                                        mi
                                                                                                                                                               c3
                                                                                     ap                                                                            la


                                                                                                                                                                                            c1
                    ha                                                                                                                                                             la


                                                                                                                                                                                                                       c3
                                                                                     la


                                                                                                                                                                    rec1la
             c3
              la


                                                                              ap
                                                                                    ap                                                                                                      ba


                              dc
                   hac
                                       la        la                                 ap


                    3
                                            ha                                        re


                                                                             mi c1 la hadc
                            c3inhac3


                                                                                                            dcinha
                                                                                  ap
                                  la


                                                                                                      c3
                                       re         ap                                         la


                                                                                                                                          do
                                                                                              ap


                                        c3
                                                       la                     ba                      ap


                                                                                             midcla
                                                                                                       do
                                                                                                       do


                                                                                                                    rec1inidhac1la rec1
                                                                                                                              ap
                                                                                                                           ba


                                                                                                                                   ap
                                                           dcinhac3                                   re             ha                            ha



                                                                                                       c3lamic1la


                                                                                                                                                               c3in
                                                                                                                                                                        ha


                                                                                                                ap


                                                                                                                                                                              c3la rec3
                                                                                                                                           ap
                                                                                      la
                                                                                                ha              ap


                                                                                                                                                            ap
                                                                              dc


                                                                                                                  ba                      ap                        la
                                                                                                                   re                                               ha
                                                                                                                                          ap


                                                                                                                                                                              c3in
                                                                               dc


                                                                                                                                                                                        ha
                                                                                   in ha


                                                                                                                                  ap
                                                                                                                         id


                                                                                                                                                                                                   c3la rec3
                                                                                                                                                               ap
                                                                                        c3


                                                                                                           la
                                                                                                                    ha             ap

                                                                                                                                                                         ap
                                                                                                                                                             ap
                                                                                                      dc


                                                                                                                                     ba
                                                                                                                                                                              mi in

                                                                                                                                                                                    dcla
                                                                                                                                                                        do
                                                                                                                                                                              dho
                                                                                                                                                                   mi           a
                                                                                                                                                            c1la



                                                                                                                                                                                        c3
                                                                                                                                                               ap
                                                                                                                                                                              idla
                                                                                                                                                                                    hac3
                                                                                                                                                                        ap


                                                                                                                                                                              bah                             ha
                                                                                                                                          re                 ha                         a
                                                                                                       dcinhac3



                                                                                                                                               c3lamic1la


                                                                                                                                                                                                   c3in


                                                                                                                                                                                                                ha
                                                                                                                                                        ap


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        c3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           c3la rec3



                                                                                                                         la
                                                                                                                                          ha            ap
                                                                                                                                                                                          ap


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                in
                                                                                                                                                                             ap
                                                                                                                     dc


                                                                                                                                                          ba
                                                                                                                                                                               mi                  mila
                                                                                                                                                                         c1ba mi



                                                                                                                                                                                                                dc


                                                                                                                                                                                                     la
                                                                                                                                                                                c1


                                                                                                                                                                                 ba
                                                                                                                                                                                                    re
                                                                                                                                                                                 id
                                                                                                                                                                                                               c1


                                                                                                                                                                                ap
                                                                                                                                                                                re                  mlai
                                                                                                                                                                          c1ba



                                                                                                                                                                                                                      c1


                                                                                                                                                                                ap                     a
                                                                                                                                                                                                   mbi
                                                                                                                                                                                                            c3la
                                                                                                                                                                                            id


                                                                                                                                                                   re                              hida                    ha                ha
                                                                                                                                                                         ap
                                                                                                                                dcin


                                                                                                                                                                                                            c3in



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        c3


                                                                                                                      ha                   id                            ap                                             ha
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   la
                                                                                                                                                      mic1la


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       c3la rec3
                                                                                                              c3


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             c3


                                                                                                                                  la
                                                                                                                                                                                                    ap


                                                                                                                                                  ha           ap
                                                                                                                                                                                     ap                                la
                                                                                                                                  dc


                                                                                                                                                                        la                                                                 la
                                                                                                                                                                                                    rec3in ap ha dc


                                                                                                                                                                                                                id
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       hac3


                                                                                                                                                                                                                ba
                                                                                                                                                                                   id
                                                                                                                                                   ha
                                                                                                                                                                   ha


                                                                                                                                          c3
                                                                                                                                                               c3


                                                                                                                                                                              la                  la
                                                                                                                                                                                            ap
                                                                                                                                                                                            rec1lacls


                                                                                                                                                                        in



                                                                                                        (e) AddNIST.

Figure 15: Visualization of the best found architectures in our hierarchical NAS-Bench-201 search
space. Abbreviations are defined as follows: ap=avg pool, ba=batch, c1=conv1x1, c3=conv3x3,
cls=classifier, dc=dconv3x3, ha=hardswish, in=instance, la=layer, mi=mish, re=relu, and stm=stem.
Best viewed with zoom.


                                                                                                                             42
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Table 6: Definition of the binary and unary operations in the activation function search space Gact .
The symbol β indicates a per-channel trainable parameter and σ(·) is the sigmoid function.

    add           x1 + x2        bgaussian sq   exp(−β(x1 − x2 )2 )      cubic           x3
                                                                                         √           cos       cos x       umax       max(x, 0)
  multi           x1 · x2       bgaussian abs    exp(−β|x1 − x2 |)    square root          x        sinh      sinh x       umin       min(x, 0)
    sub           x1 − x2            wavg         βx1 + (1 − β)x2       mconst            β         cosh    cosh(x)      sigmoid         σ(x)
                     x1
    div             x2 +ϵ             id                 x              aconst         x+β          tanh    tanh(x)       logexp   log(1 + exp(x))
   bmax         max(x1 , x2 )        neg                −x                log       log(|x| + ϵ)   asinh   sinh−1 (x)   gaussian      exp(−x2 )
   bmin         min(x1 , x2 )        abs                |x|               exp         exp(x)       atanh   tanh−1 (x)       erf         erf(x)
 bsigmoid        σ(x1 ) · x2        square              x2                sin          sin(x)       sinc     sinc(x)      const           β


J         S EARCHING FOR ACTIVATION FUNCTIONS
J.1        S EARCH SPACE

To search for activation functions, we adopted the search space from Ramachandran et al. (2017).
More specifically, we define the following CFG Gact :
       L2 ::= BinTopo(L1, L1, BINOP) | UnTopo(L1)
       L1 ::= BinTopo(UNOP, UNOP, BINOP) | UnTopo(UNOP)
    BINOP ::= add | multi | sub | div | bmax | bmin | bsigmoid | bgaussian sq
              | bgaussian abs | wavg
    UNOP ::= id | neg | abs | square | cubic | square root | mconst | aconst
              | log | exp | sin | cos | sinh | cosh | tanh | asinh | atanh | sinc
              | umax | umin | sigmoid | logexp | gaussian | erf | const ,
                                                                                 (24)
where the binary operations (BINOP) and unary operations (UNOP) are specified in Table 6 and
BinTopo and UnTopo define the topology of binary or unary operations, respectively. The
search space L(Gact ) comprises ca. 108.6 potential activation functions. Note that the search
space size can be varied by adding more levels or by using a recursive formulation, i.e., L ::=
BinOp(L, L) | UnOp(L) | id.

J.2        T RAINING DETAILS

Similar to Ramachandran et al. (2017), we trained a ResNet-20 (He et al., 2016) on CIFAR-103
(Krizhevsky et al., 2009). Specifically, we trained the network with SGD with learning rate of 0.1,
momentum of 0.9, and weight decay of 0.0001, with a batch size of 128 for 64K steps. The learning
rate is divided by 10 after 32K and 48K steps. We used random flip with probability 0.5 followed
by a random crop (32x32 with 4 pixel padding) and normalization. We split the training data into
45K training or 5K validation samples, respectively, and report final test error on the unseen test set
(10K samples).

J.3        E XTENDED SEARCH RESULTS

Search costs The search cost was ca. 5 GPU days using eight asynchronous workers, each with
an NVIDIA RTX 2080 Ti GPU, for ca. 40 GPU days in total.

Best found activation function Our best found activation function for ResNet-20 is as follows:
                                β(σ(−x) · min(x, 0)) + (1 − β)(min(max(x, 0), erf x)) .                                                      (25)
Figure 16 visualizes and compares the found activation function with common activation functions
from the literature.

K          B EST PRACTICES CHECKLIST FOR NAS RESEARCH
NAS research has faced challenges with reproducibility and fair empirical comparisons for a long
time (Li & Talwalkar, 2020; Yang et al., 2020a). In order to promote fair and reproducible NAS
      3
          Table 4 provides the license of CIFAR-10.


                                                                         43
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


            Best found activation function                      Common activation functions
      1                                                  2.0
                                                                     ReLU
                                                         1.5
      0                                                              Sigmoid
                                                         1.0
                                      β=0                            GELU
 y


     −1
                                      β = 0.5            0.5
                                                                     Swish
                                      β=1                0.0



           −2      −1        0        1         2              −2    −1        0     1        2
                             x                                                 x

Figure 16: Visualization of our best found activation function (see Equation 25) for different values
of the trainable parameter β (left) and common activation function from the literature (right).


research, Lindauer & Hutter (2020) created a best practices checklist for NAS research. Below, we
address all points on the checklist.

     1. Best Practices for Releasing Code
         (a) Did you release code for the training pipeline used to evaluate the final architec-
             tures?, Did you release code for the search space?, Did you release code for your
             NAS method? [Yes] All code can be found at https://anonymous.4open.
             science/r/iclr23_tdnafs.
         (b) Did you release the hyperparameters used for the final evaluation pipeline, as well as
             random seeds? [Yes] We provide experimental details (including hyperparameters as
             well as random seeds) in Section 5, Appendix I.1 and J.2.
         (c) Did you release hyperparameters for your NAS method, as well as random seeds?
             [Yes] We discuss implementation details (including hyperparameters as well as ran-
             dom seeds) of our NAS method in Section 5 and Appendix H.
     2. Best practices for comparing NAS methods
         (a) For all NAS methods you compare, did you use exactly the same NAS benchmark,
              including the same dataset (with the same training-test split), search space and code
              for training the architectures and hyperparameters for that code? [Yes] We always
              used the same training pipelines during search and final evaluation.
         (b) Did you control for confounding factors (different hardware, versions of deep learn-
              ing libraries, different runtimes for the different methods)? [Yes] We kept hardware,
              software versions, and runtimes fixed across our experiments to reduce effects of con-
              founding factors.
         (c) Did you run ablation studies? [Yes] We compared different kernels (hWL, WL, NAS-
              BOT, and GCN) and investigated the surrogate performance in Section 5. We also an-
              alyzed the distribution of architectures during search, frequency of production rules,
              impact of the flexible parameterization of the convolutional blocks, test error vs. num-
              ber of parameters and FLOPs in Appendix I.2.
         (d) Did you use the same evaluation protocol for the methods being compared? [Yes]
         (e) Did you compare performance over time? [Yes] We plotted results over the number of
              iterations, as typically done for black-box optimizers, and report the total search cost
              in Appendix I.2. For the activation function search, we do not compare performance
              over time.
          (f) Did you compare to random search? [Yes]
         (g) Did you perform multiple runs of your experiments and report seeds? [Yes] We ran
              all search runs on the hierarchical or cell-based NAS-Bench-201 over three seeds, the
              search run for an activation function for one seed, and surrogate regression experi-
              ments over 20 seeds.
         (h) Did you use tabular or surrogate benchmarks for in-depth evaluations? [N/A] At the
              time of this work, there existed no surrogate benchmark for hierarchical NAS.


                                                    44
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


     3. Best practices for reporting important details
         (a) Did you report how you tuned hyperparameters, and what time and resources this
             required? [N/A] We have not tuned any hyperparameter.
         (b) Did you report the time for the entire end-to-end NAS method (rather than, e.g., only
             for the search phase? [Yes] We report search times in Appendix I.2 and J.3. For the
             hierarchical NAS-Bench-201 experiments, the training protocols are exactly the same
             for the search and final evaluation (except for CIFAR-10), there are no additional costs
             for final evaluation. For the activation function search experiment, we used the same
             training protocol for training and evaluation.
         (c) Did you report all the details of your experimental setup? [Yes] We report all experi-
             mental details in Section 5, Appendix I.1, and J.2.


                                                45
