Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


FACTOR L EARNING P ORTFOLIO O PTIMIZATION
I NFORMED BY C ONTINUOUS -T IME F INANCE M ODELS
 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                             A BSTRACT
         We study financial portfolio optimization in the presence of unknown and un-
         controlled system variables referred to as stochastic factors. Existing work falls
         into two distinct categories: (i) reinforcement learning employs end-to-end policy
         learning with flexible factor representation, but does not precisely model the dy-
         namics of asset prices or factors; (ii) continuous-time finance methods, in contrast,
         take advantage of explicitly modeled dynamics but pre-specify, rather than learn,
         factor representation. We propose FaLPO (factor learning portfolio optimization),
         a framework that interpolates between these two approaches. Specifically, FaLPO
         hinges on deep policy gradient to learn a performant investment policy that takes
         advantage of flexible representation for stochastic factors. Meanwhile, FaLPO
         also incorporates continuous-time finance models when modeling the dynamics. It
         uses the optimal policy functional form derived from such models and optimizes
         an objective that combines policy learning and model calibration. We prove the
         convergence of FaLPO and provide performance guarantees via a finite-sample
         bound. On both synthetic and real-world portfolio optimization tasks, we observe
         that FaLPO outperforms five leading methods. Finally, we show that FaLPO can
         be extended to other decision-making problems with stochastic factors.


1    I NTRODUCTION
Portfolio optimization studies how to allocate investments across multiple risky financial assets
such as stocks and safe assets such as US government bonds. The investment target is often
formulated as maximizing the expected utility of the investment portfolioвҖҷs value at a fixed time
horizon, which conceptually maximizes profit while constraining risk (von Neumann & Morgenstern,
1947). With continuous-time stochastic models of stock prices, great advances in the expected
utility maximization framework were made in Merton (1969) using stochastic optimal control
(dynamic programming) methods. More realistic models incorporate factors like economic indices
and proprietary trading signals (Merton et al., 1973; Fama & French, 2015; 1992), which (i) affect
the dynamics of stock prices; (ii) stochastically evolve over time; (iii) are not affected by individual
investment decisions. With greater data availability, it is natural to design and apply data-driven
machine learning methods (Bengio, 1997; Dixon et al., 2020; De Prado, 2018) to handle factors for
portfolio optimization. This work proposes a novel methodвҖ”Factor Learning Portfolio Optimization
(FaLPO)вҖ”which combines tools from both machine learning and continuous-time finance.
Portfolio optimization with stochastic factors is challenging for three reasons. First, financial data is
notoriously noisy and idiosyncratic (Goyal & Santa-Clara, 2003), causing complex purely data-driven
methods to be unstable and prone to overfitting. Second, the relationship between the factors and
their impact on stock prices can be extremely complicated and difficult to model ex ante. Third,
many successful finance models are in continuous time and require interacting with the environment
infinitely frequently. As a result, such models cannot be easily combined with machine learning
methods, many of which are in discrete time.
Current approaches to portfolio optimization broadly fall into two categories: reinforcement learning
(RL) and continuous-time finance methods. Many RL solutions to portfolio optimization are built on
deep deterministic policy gradient (Silver et al. 2014; Hambly et al. 2021, Section 4.3). Such methods
parameterize the policy function as a neural network with strong representation power and learn the
neural network by optimizing the corresponding portfolio performance. However, these approaches


                                                   1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


(as well as other model-free methods like Haarnoja et al. 2018) have high sample complexity and tend
to overfit due to the high noise in the data. Other RL methods explicitly learn representation (Watter
et al., 2015; Lee et al., 2020; Laskin et al., 2021) and leverage discrete-time models (Deisenroth &
Rasmussen, 2011; Gu et al., 2016; Mhammedi et al., 2020; Janner et al., 2019; Nagabandi et al.,
2018). Nonetheless, these methods are not informed by continuous-time finance models and, as our
experiments suggest in Section 5, cannot benefit from structures inherent in the financial market.
Stochastic factor models can be used to mathematically derive optimal (or approximately optimal)
investment policies (Kim & Omberg, 1996; Chacko & Viceira, 2005; Fouque et al., 2017; Avanesyan,
2021). To this end, one needs domain knowledge to pick and model the factors. Then, model
calibration (a.k.a. model fitting, parameter estimation) is conducted by maximizing a calibration
objective. With the calibrated model, the optimal investment policy can be derived analytically or
numerically (Merton, 1992; Fleming & Soner, 2006). This procedure of calibration and optimization
effectively constrains the вҖҳlearningвҖҷ in the optimization step, and thus helps reduce overfitting to
noisy data. However, this approach cannot capture the complicated factor effects in the data, because
the factors may be complex and unlikely to be identified manually. Therefore, these methods may
end up with oversimplified models and suffer from model bias with suboptimal performance.
To tackle these limitations, we propose factor learn-
ing portfolio optimization (FaLPO), a new method             Challenges                 Our Solution    Existing Works
that interpolates between the two aforementioned
                                                             Huge Noise
solutions (Figure 1). FaLPO includes (i) a neural                          Neural Stochastic
                                                                                                          Reinforcement
stochastic factor model to handle huge noise and com-        Complicated
                                                                             Factor Models
                                                                                                            Learning

plicated factor effects and (ii) a model-regularized        Factor Effects

                                                                                                  FaLPO  Continuous-Time
policy learning method to combine continuous-time           Discrete Time
                                                                 v.s.
                                                                           Model-Regularized                  Finance
                                                                            Policy Learning
models with discrete-time policy learning methods.         Continuous Time


First, to reduce the sample complexity and avoid over-
fitting, FaLPO assumes factors and asset prices follow        Figure 1: Demonstration of FaLPO
a parametric continuous-time finance model. To cap-
ture the complicated factor effects, FaLPO models
the factors by a representation function П• parameterized by a neural network with minimal paramet-
ric constraints. Second, for policy learning, FaLPO incorporates two regularizations derived from
continuous-time stochastic factor models: a policy functional form and model calibration. Specif-
ically, we derive policy functional forms from the neural stochastic factor model using stochastic
optimal control tools, and apply it to parameterize the candidate policy in FaLPO. The use of this
form in the learning algorithm effectively acts as a regularizer. Then, model calibration and policy
learning are conducted jointly, such that the learned policy is informed by continuous-time models.
Theoretically, we prove that the added continuous-time regularization leads to the optimal portfolio
performance as the trading frequency increases. Empirically, we demonstrate the improved perfor-
mance of the proposed method by both synthetic and real-world experiments. We review the related
literature in Appendix A. We also discuss how FaLPO is extendable beyond portfolio optimization,
and can be applied to other decision-making problems with stochastic factors in Appendix H.


2     BACKGROUND

In this section, we first formulate the portfolio optimization problem. We then review two major
solutions to this problem: deep deterministic policy gradient in reinforcement learning (RL) and
stochastic factor models in continuous-time finance.

2.1    P ORTFOLIO O PTIMIZATION

Problem Formulation Portfolio optimization seeks to derive a policy of asset allocation that yields
high return while maintaining low risk for the investment. Formally, consider dS risky assets with
prices St := [St1 , St2 , В· В· В· StdS ]вҠӨ and a risk-free money market account with, for simplicity, zero
interest rate of return (like cash). We observe dY features (e.g. economic indices, market benchmarks)
denoted as Yt . From Yt , we can derive dX factors denoted as Xt which (i) affect the dynamics of
asset prices; (ii) evolve over time stochastically; (iii) are not affected by investment decisions. Given
an initial investment capital (or wealth) z0 and the initial values for Yt and St as y0 and s0 , we use a


                                                          2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


dS Г— 1 vector ПҖt to denote the fractions of wealth invested in the dS assets at time point t. Note that
negative values are allowed in ПҖt indicating short positions. At the terminal time T > 0, the target is
to maximize the expectation of a given utility function E[U (ZTПҖ )], where U : Z вҶ’ with Z вҠҶ is                        R        R
the utility function and ZTПҖ denotes the terminal wealth under ПҖ.
Intuitively, a utility function reflects the risk preference of
an investor. It is an increasing function of wealth that is


                                                                                                         Exponential Utility
                                                                  10                         0.0
                                                                                   Оі's                         Оі's
also concave: it changes significantly when the wealth is


                                                                        Power Utility
                                                                                       0.2                         0.5
                                                                                            вҲ’0.5
                                                                                       0.4                         1
                                                                   0
low but less so when the wealth is high (Figure 2). This                               0.6
                                                                                       0.8
                                                                                            вҲ’1.0
                                                                                                                   1.5
                                                                                                                   2
                                                       1
work focuses on the power utility U (z; Оі) := 1вҲ’Оі         z 1вҲ’Оі                        1.2
                                                                                       1.4
                                                                                                                   2.5
                                                                                                                   3


             R
                                                                 вҲ’10
                                                                                       1.6                         3.5
                                                                                            вҲ’1.5
               +                                                                       1.8                         4
with Z =         , Оі > 0, and Оі Мё= 1; and the exponential                                                          4.5


                                                  R
                                                                                                                   5
                                                                 вҲ’20                        вҲ’2.0
                         exp(вҲ’Оіz)
utility U (z; Оі) := вҲ’        Оі     with Z =        and Оі > 0.        0.0 2.5 5.0
                                                                           Wealth
                                                                                 7.5   10.0      0.0 2.5 5.0
                                                                                                       Wealth
                                                                                                             7.5 10.0


Here, Оі is the investorвҖҷs risk aversion coefficient and is
hand-picked (instead of tuned) by the user. A larger Оі Figure 2: Power & exponential utilities.
corresponds to more risk aversion, while a smaller Оі cor-
responds to more risk tolerance. Beyond these two utilities, our method is also applicable to other
utility functions and other objective functions for portfolio optimization (see Appendix B).

Discrete- and Continuous-Time Policies Discrete- and continuous-time policies are two major
types of investment policies, differing on how frequently the portfolio is rebalanced. A discrete-time
policy rebalances the portfolio fintely frequently, leading to a discrete-time dynamics for the wealth.
Such policies are often considered in RL methods (Section 2.2). Continuous-time policies rebalance
the investment infinitely frequently, leading to a continuous-time dynamics for the wealth. These
policies are often found explicitly in continuous-time finance models (Section 2.3) 1 .

2.2    D EEP D ETERMINISTIC P OLICY G RADIENT

We review deep deterministic policy gradient (DDPG, Silver et al. 2014)вҖ”a quintessential example
of RL methods. DDPG does not explicitly model the dynamics, but instead directly learns a discrete-
time policy for portfolio optimization. DDPG parameterizes the policy function as a deep neural
network and conducts gradient-based policy learning. Denote by ПҖ(t, St , Zt , Yt ; ОёD ) the deep policy
function with parameter ОёD . Without explicitly modeling the dynamics of St or Xt , DDPG directly
maximizes the following performance objective to learn a policy:
                                                                                        ПҖ(В·;ОёD )
                                max V (ОёD ) with V (ОёD ) := E[U (ZT                                )],                         (1)
                                 ОёD

                                                              ПҖ(В·;Оё )
where the expectation is over the terminal wealth ZT D following the policy ПҖ(В·; ОёD ). A key step
of DDPG is to compute the gradient of V (ОёD ) to update ОёD . Following the procedure in Appendix C,
this can be achieved by sampling the trajectories of St and Yt to approximate the expectation and
thus the gradient of V (ОёD ).
Typically, DDPG learns a discrete-time policy that rebalances the portfolio finitely frequently. To
                                                                                                ПҖ(В·;Оё )
see how the policy rebalances the portfolio, we study its corresponding wealth process Zt D
that characterizes the changes in wealth over time. Let вҲҶt > 0 be the time interval (e.g. daily,
weekly) to rebalance the portfolio and, for integer M > 0, let T := M вҲҶt be the fixed in-
vestment horizon (e.g. one or two months). At time mвҲҶt with m вҲҲ {0, 1, 2, В· В· В· , M вҲ’ 1},
         i
define ПҖmвҲҶt    := ПҖ i (mвҲҶt, SmвҲҶt , ZmвҲҶt , YmвҲҶt ; ОёD ) as the fraction of current wealth invested
                                                                            ПҖ(В·;ОёD )       ПҖ(В·;Оё )
in the ith risky asset. Then, the wealth change at time mвҲҶt is: Z(m+1)вҲҶt               вҲ’ ZmвҲҶt D =
                        i         i
                                                                i         i
  ПҖ(В·;Оё ) PdS     i    S(m+1)вҲҶt вҲ’SmвҲҶt            ПҖ(В·;ОёD ) i    S(m+1)вҲҶt вҲ’SmвҲҶt
ZmвҲҶt D       i=1 ПҖmвҲҶt      S i         , where Z mвҲҶt     ПҖ mвҲҶt     S i          is the wealth change
                                  mвҲҶt                                                         mвҲҶt

due to the investment in the ith risky asset. Note that the number of shares invested in an asset
  ПҖ(В·;Оё ) ПҖ i
(ZmвҲҶt D SmвҲҶti ) does not change during (mвҲҶt, (m + 1)вҲҶt): the portfolio rebalances every вҲҶt time.
            mвҲҶt

RL methods like DDPG provide flexible representation for factors: the hidden layers of the neural
network are considered as the representation learned for Yt , providing strong representation power.
   1
     Note that it is impossible to rebalance a portfolio infinitely frequently in practice. Thus, continuous-time
policies are more useful as analytical tools.


                                                          3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Nonetheless, there is not an explicit parametric model for the learned representation and asset prices.
Consequently, such methods require lots of data and tend to overfit (Aboussalah, 2020).

2.3   S TOCHASTIC FACTOR M ODELS

We review stochastic factor models in continuous-time finance. These models can explicitly formulate
the dynamics and can also be used to mathematically derive the functional form of the optimal
continuous-time investment policy. Stochastic factor models are described by stochastic differential
equations (SDEs) (see Oksendal 2013 and Appendix D) to formulate the dynamics of asset prices
St . Specifically, with a dX Г— 1 factor variable Xt , let Wt := [Wt1 , Wt2 , В· В· В· WtdW ]вҠӨ be a dW Г— 1
Brownian motion that characterizes random fluctuations. Then, St and Xt are assumed to follow
                                           dW
                dSti                       X
                     = fS
                         i
                           (Xt ; Оё вҲ—
                                   S )dt +     gSij (Xt ; ОёSвҲ— )dWtj ,   i вҲҲ {1, 2, В· В· В· , dS } ,
                 Sti                       j=1                                                          (2)
                dXt = fX (Xt ; ОёSвҲ— )dt + gX (Xt ; ОёSвҲ— )вҠӨ dWt .

            R         R            R                 R       R      R
In (2), fS : dX вҶ’ dS , fX : dX вҶ’ dX , gS : dX вҶ’ dS Г—dW , and gX : dX вҶ’ dX Г—dW                R      R
are parametric functions pre-specified by domain knowledge. Further, fS and fX are often referred
to as the drift, and gS and gX as the volatility of St and Xt respectively. Intuitively, SDEs formulate
the change of a variable in an infinitesimal time step as the sum of a deterministic part (dt) and a
stochastic part (dWt ), and we use ОёSвҲ— to parameterize the SDE. The factor Xt appears in both the drift
and volatility of the asset prices, thus affecting the price transition. With the parametric functional
forms in (2), we can use tools in stochastic optimal control to derive the functional form of the optimal
continuous-time investment policy.
Continuous-time policies change the investment in each asset at every time point. For a continuous-
                                                                        dZМғ ПҖМғ   PdS ПҖМғti dSti
time investment policy ПҖМғt , the dynamics of wealth ZМғtПҖМғ is defined as ZМғ ПҖМғt := i=1   Sti
                                                                                               , with ZМғ0 =
                                                                          t
z0 , S0 = s0 and X0 = x0 . Crucially, this is different from the discrete-time wealth process ZtПҖ in
                                        ZМғ ПҖМғ ПҖМғ i
Section 2.2, as the number of shares St i t in asset i now changes continuously over time, as opposed
                                          t
to being rebalanced at finite intervals. This discrepancy creates obstacles to directly apply the results
derived from stochastic factor models to discrete-time policy learning.
Stochastic factor models can reduce sample complexity for portfolio optimization, since the assumed
functional forms in (2) significantly constrain the solution space. However, a crucial step to apply
stochastic factor models is to pick or even construct Xt from the observed Yt that perfectly follows
a pre-specified model. This step often relies on domain knowledge and thus may end up with
oversimplified models suffering from model bias and eventually leading to suboptimal performance.


3     FACTOR L EARNING P ORTFOLIO O PTIMIZATION

We propose factor learning portfolio optimization (FaLPO), a new decision-making framework that
interpolates between DDPG and stochastic factor models. FaLPO has two components: (i) a neural
stochastic factor model to handle huge noise and complicated factor effects and (ii) model-regularized
policy learning to combine continuous-time models with discrete-time policy learning methods.

3.1   N EURAL S TOCHASTIC FACTOR M ODELS

We describe neural stochastic factor models (NSFM) and discuss their benefits. On the one hand,
a neural stochastic factor model assumes the existence of a representation function П• such that
the factors of the problem can be directly learned from its features: Xt = П•(Yt ; ОёП•вҲ— ). Here, П• is
formulated as a neural network with parameter ОёП•вҲ— (Figure 3). As a result, FaLPO avoids hand-picking
factors from features as is the case in stochastic factor models (Section 2.3). The neural network
representation has only a few parametric constraints and thus is able to capture complicated factor
effects in the data. Furthermore, factors Xt and asset prices St are assumed to follow a stochastic
factor model (e.g. (2) and (6)), which reduces the sample complexity and avoids overfitting.


                                                         4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


3.2   M ODEL -R EGULARIZED P OLICY L EARNING

Under the proposed neural stochastic factor model, we aim to learn the discrete-time optimal policy
function ПҖtвҲ— and the representation function П•(В·; ОёП•вҲ— ). However, while the policy learning is for
discrete-time policies, our proposed model is in continuous time. To bridge this gap, we incorporate
two types of continuous-time model regularization into discrete-time policy learning: (i) the policy
functional form (3) and (ii) the model calibration objective (4).

Policy Functional Form From our model, we apply the
functional form of a continuous-time optimal policy into
                                                                                          Stochastic Factor
our discrete-time policy learning. Using tools in stochastic                                   Models
optimal control, we can derive the functional form of an op-
                                  вҲ—                      вҲ—
timal continuous-time policy: ПҖМғt = О (t, St , Zt , Xt ; ОёПҖМғ ),
where the functional form of О  can be obtained in                                              Factor
many existing stochastic factor models (Kim & Omberg,                                      Representation
                                                                            Not Specified

1996; Chacko & Viceira, 2005; Avanesyan, 2021; Za-
riphopoulou, 2001; Wachter, 2002; Kraft, 2005), and ОёПҖМғвҲ—                                  Time

is an optimal parameter for О . FaLPO uses the functional
form of О  in policy learning and parameterize the candi- Figure 3: Demonstration for neural
date policy as                                                 stochastic factor models.
   ПҖ(t, St , Zt , Yt ; ОёП• , ОёПҖ ) := О (t, St , Zt , П•(Yt ; ОёП• ); ОёПҖ ),
                                                                    (3) Algorithm 1 FaLPO
where П• is the representation function for the factors in 1: Input: number of iterations N .
Section 3.1. As a result, О  constrains the policy space and              2: Initialize ОёП• and ОёПҖ .
acts as regularization. Importantly, although О  is derived 3: for n вҲҲ [N ] do
for continuous-time policies, it can still provide guidance              4:    Parameterize the policy function
for discrete-time policy learning when вҲҶt is small. We                         according to (3).
rigorously prove the soundness of using (3) in Section 4.                5:    Estimate the policy gradient for
                                                                               H in (5) (Appendix C).
Model Calibration FaLPO also hinges on model cali-                       6:    Update ОёП• , ОёПҖ , and ОёS .
bration to regularize policy learning. Given the specific                7: end for
functional forms in (2), FaLPO conducts model calibra- 8: Return ПҖ(В·; ОёП• , ОёПҖ )
tion to estimate the parameters of the SDE. The calibration
procedure can be summarized as maximizing a model cal-
ibration objective:
                                                    max L(ОёП• , ОёS ).                                        (4)
                                                  ОёS

In practice, with discrete data, one may use likelihood (Phillips, 1972; Beskos & Roberts, 2005) or
other likelihood-based objective functions (Bishwal, 2007; Ait-Sahalia & Kimmel, 2010) for L (see
Appendix E for concrete examples).
To harness the information provided by model calibration in policy learning, FaLPO combines the
model calibration objective L in (4) with the performance objective V in (1) and facilitates a joint
optimization over the two. Note that naively combining L(ОёП• , ОёS ) and V (ОёD ) is not effective since
the two in general do not share common parameters: the parameter of the policy network ОёD has no
overlap with the SDE parameter ОёS or factor representation parameter ОёП• . However, by constraining
the policy space to (3) in FaLPO, we can show that ОёП• is also part of the policy parameterization.
                                                ПҖ(В·;Оё ,Оё )
Thus, V can be derived as V (ОёП• , ОёПҖ ) := E[U (ZT П• ПҖ )]. In other words, ОёП• is shared in both V
and L, and hence FaLPO can carry out a joint optimization over the two:

             max          H(ОёП• , ОёПҖ , ОёS ), with H(ОёП• , ОёПҖ , ОёS ) := (1 вҲ’ О»)V (ОёП• , ОёПҖ ) + О»L(ОёП• , ОёS ),   (5)
        (ОёП• ,ОёПҖ ,ОёS )вҲҲA

where the candidate policy follows the functional form of the optimal continuous-time policy (3) (see
Algorithm 1), and A denotes the considered parameter set. The model calibration objective also acts
as a model regularization, where О» вҲҲ (0, 1) is a hyperparameter determining its effect. In practice,
we can optimize (5) by gradient-based methods, facilitating a easy and end-to-end learning procedure
(see Appendix C for gradient estimation details).


                                                         5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


3.3   E XAMPLE OF FA LPO

In portfolio optimization, one can use different types of stochastic factor models. FaLPO can be
applied to many such types (Appendix F). In this section, we use the KimвҖ“Omberg model (Kim &
Omberg, 1996) as an example to illustrate FaLPOвҖҷs modeling and policy learning. KimвҖ“Omberg
is a standard model for portfolio optimization with stocahstic factors, which has been extensively
studied empirically (Welch & Goyal, 2008; Muhle-Karbe et al., 2017). For modeling, FaLPO with
KimвҖ“Omberg model formulates the dynamics of asset prices and factors as
                         dW
         dSti            X
              = Xt
                  i
                    dt +     Пғ ij dWtj , dXt = Вө(Пү вҲ’ Xt ) dt + v dWt , and Xt = П•(Yt ; ОёП•вҲ— ),             (6)
         Sti             j=1

where SDE parameters Пү, Пғ, v, and Вө are constant matrices or vectors.
For policy learning, we detail the policy functional form and model calibration. Under the Kim-
Omberg model, we can derive the optimal policy functional form О  in (3). Specifically, for
power utility О (t, St , Zt , П•(Yt ; ОёП• ); ОёПҖ ) = k1 (t; ОёПҖ )П•(Yt ; ОёП• ) + k2 (t; ОёПҖ ), for exponential utility
О (t, St , Zt , П•(Yt ; ОёП• ); ОёПҖ ) = k1 (t; ОёПҖ )П•(Yt ; ОёП• )/Zt + k2 (t; ОёПҖ )/Zt , where k1 (В·; ОёПҖ ) : [0, T ] вҶ’
RdS Г—dX and k2 (В·; ОёПҖ ) : [0, T ] вҶ’ RdS Г—dX are two time dependent functions (Appendix F.2).
We can derive the functional forms of k1 and k2 since the two are solutions to systems of
ODEs related to algebraic Riccati equations (Appendix G). We can also directly use function
approximators like neural networks or kernel methods for the two. For model calibration, we
use  a negative mean square loss with the derivation deferred               to Appendix E: L(ОёП• , ОёS ) :=
      PdS              i               i       i                i
                                                                   2
вҲ’E       i=1 log(St+вҲҶt ) вҲ’ log(St ) вҲ’ П• (Yt ; ОёП• )вҲҶt вҲ’ ОёS             , where in this case ОёS is a dS Г— 1
vector. Therefore, to implement FaLPO, we can parameterize the candidate policy function using О 
and optimize (5).
Note that the methodology of FaLPO is also generally applicable to other decision-making problems
besides portfolio optimization. In Appendix H, we use linear quadratic control with stochastic factors
as an example to demonstrate the generality of FaLPO.

4     T HEORY
We theoretically analyze both the asymptotic and non-asymptotic characteristics of FaLPO.

4.1   A SYMPTOTIC A NALYSIS

FaLPO applies the policy functional form and model calibration derived from continuous-time
models to discrete-time policy learning. We show that FaLPO can achieve the optimal performance
asymptotically (i.e. with infinite data and perfect optimization). In the following, we describe the
assumptions and results and provide the formal theorem in the end.
We provide an intuitive description on the assumptions, with the formal statements provided in
Appendix I.1. First, we assume that the portfolio optimization problem satisfies some standard
regularity conditions (Higham et al., 2002): the drift and volatility are locally Lipschitz continuous;
meanwhile, the asset prices, the stochastic factors, and the wealth process under the optimal policy
have bounded moments. Second, we assume that the utility function U (z) has linear growth on
z вҲҲ Z. Note that some widely used cases like power utility with Оі < 1 and exponential utility with
lower-bounded wealth satisfy this assumption. Third, we consider only admissible policies with
parameters in A and we assume that A covers the optimal continuous-time policy parameter. A policy
is admissible if it is predictable and if the wealth process ZtПҖ вҲҲ Z for any t вҲҲ [0, T ] almost surely.
It is a common practice to only consider such admissible policies in portfolio optimization. The
last two assumptions are artifacts of the current theoretical analysis; in practice FaLPO can achieve
reasonable performance without enforcing them (see Section 5).
With the foregoing assumptions, we show that the performance of FaLPO can asymptotically converge
                                                                   вҲ—
to that of the best policy in discrete time. In detail, we define VвҲҶt := V (ПҖ вҲ— ) where ПҖ вҲ— is an optimal
                                                                 вҲ—
discrete-time admissible policy with time interval вҲҶt, i.e., VвҲҶt   is the optimal performance obtained
without constraining to the functional form (3) or leveraging model calibration like (5). Next, define


                                                      6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


 вҲ—        вҲ—       вҲ—       вҲ—
ОёвҲҶt  := (ОёП•,вҲҶt , ОёПҖ,вҲҶt , ОёS,вҲҶt ) вҲҲ arg max(ОёП• ,ОёПҖ ,ОёS )вҲҲA H(ОёП• , ОёПҖ , ОёS ) with the policy functional form
                    вҲ—
(3), such that V (ОёвҲҶt ) is the performance that FaLPO can achieve with infinite data and perfect
                                                                       вҲ—           вҲ—
optimization. Then, Theorem 4.1 shows that the gap between VвҲҶt            and V (ОёвҲҶt  ) converges to zero as
вҲҶt goes to zero.
                                                                      вҲ—          вҲ—

T HEOREM 4.1 With assumptions in Appendix I.1, limвҲҶtвҶ’0 VвҲҶt               вҲ’ V (ОёвҲҶt  ) = 0.

Theorem 4.1 justifies the methodology of FaLPO under a small time interval. The proof is provided
in Appendix I.2 and Appendix I.3.

4.2   N ON -A SYMPTOTIC A NALYSIS

We study the finite-sample performance of FaLPO. We describe the problem setup, major assumptions,
and then provide the theorem. In each iteration, we collect B independent trajectories to estimate
the gradient of H. Let Оёn be the estimatePafter the nth iteration, and N the total number of iterations.
                                           N
                                                 Оёn
we analyze the average estimate ОёМ„ := n=1    N      instead of ОёN , which is a common technique for
                                                                                                         вҲ—
stochastic optimization analysis. Specifically, we aim to bound the expected difference between VвҲҶt
and V (ОёМ„). Note that it is extremely challenging to theoretically analyze a non-convex stochastic
optimization (5) without further specifications in problem setup and assumptions (Polyak, 1963;
Bhandari & Russo, 2019; Jin et al., 2021; Ma, 2020; Wang et al., 2019). Therefore, we consider a
projection-based variant of FaLPO, under which the optimization process is conducted in a bounded
parameter set B вҠҶ A. Furthermore, we assume that the objective function H is strongly concave in
                                 вҖ        вҖ        вҖ        вҖ 
B with a local maximal point ОёвҲҶt   := (ОёП•,вҲҶt  , ОёP,вҲҶt , ОёS,вҲҶt ). Similar local curvature assumptions are
commonly used to analyze non-convex problems (Bach et al., 2017; Loh, 2017). With the above
                                                       вҲ—
setup and assumptions, the expected gap between VвҲҶt        and V (ОёМ„) satisfies the following finite-sample
bound in Theorem 4.2.
T HEOREM 4.2 With the aforementioned projection-based FaLPO algorithm and assumptions, both
detailed in Appendix J.2, there exist positive constants C1 , C2 , C3 , and C4 such that
                                              вҲ—
                 вҲ—                 eвҲҶt    H(ОёвҲҶt  ) вҲ’ H(ОёвҖ  ) C1 log(N )
              E[VвҲҶt вҲ’ V (ОёМ„)] вүӨ        +                    +
                                  1вҲ’О»           1вҲ’О»            N (1 вҲ’ О»)
                                                                                                        (7)
                                     C1 log(N )
                                                 (1 вҲ’ О»)2 C2 + О»2 C3 + 2О»(1 вҲ’ О»)C4 ,

                                  +
                                     BN (1 вҲ’ О»)
where О» вҲҲ [0, 1]. Also, eвҲҶt is an error term not related to N or B but dependent on вҲҶt with
limвҲҶtвҶ’0 eвҲҶt = 0.
                                                                                                 вҲ—
Theorem 4.2 provides a non-asymptotic upperbound on the gap between the optimal performance VвҲҶt
                                                                                               eвҲҶt
and the one achieved by FaLPO V (ОёМ„). We briefly comment on each term in the upperbound. 1вҲ’О»
bounds the asymptotic performance gap caused by leveraging the continuous-time policy functional
form constraint and model calibration, and we explain its connection to Theorem 4.1 in Appendix J.4.
    вҲ—      вҖ 
H(ОёвҲҶt )вҲ’H(ОёвҲҶt )                                                                вҖ 
      1вҲ’О»        controls the performance gap between the local optimal point ОёвҲҶt  and the global
                вҲ—                                                                        вҖ 
optimal point ОёвҲҶt . The remaining terms characterize the performance gap between ОёМ„ and ОёвҲҶt .
Theorem 4.2 has two implications. First, the bound in (7) is a rational function of О». Accordingly,
there exist situations where a О» вҲҲ (0, 1) provides a smaller upper bound than О» = 0, indicating the
possibility that tuning О» can provide better performance (see experiments in Appendix J). Second,
when О» = 1, the bound diverges to infinity. This makes sense since when О» = 1, H(ОёП• , ОёПҖ , ОёS ) =
L(ОёП• , ОёS ) does not contain ОёПҖ : the algorithm does not learn the policy. We prove the theorem in
Appendices J.1, J.3 and J.4.


5     E XPERIMENTS

By incorporating continuous-time finance models into policy learning, FaLPO can deal with high
data noise and complex factor effects. In this section, we demonstrate the improved performance of
FaLPO against existing portfolio optimization methods, over synthetic and real-world experiments.


                                                     7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


             Explicit Factor   Continuous-Time   Discrete-Time   Annual Volatility        0.1              0.2              0.3
   Methods
             Representation         Model           Model           FaLPO            вҲ’0.465 Вұ 0.446   вҲ’1.35 Вұ 0.155    вҲ’2.737 Вұ 0.219
   MMMC            вң–                  вң”                вң–
                                                                     DDPG            вҲ’1.650 Вұ 0.456   вҲ’3.30 Вұ 1.294    вҲ’5.495 Вұ 1.269
    DDPG           вң–                  вң–                вң–
    SLAC           вң”                  вң–                вң”             SLAC            вҲ’0.750 Вұ 0.210   вҲ’5.50 Вұ 0.011    вҲ’6.160 Вұ 0.012
   RichID          вң”                  вң”                вң–             RichID          вҲ’3.350 Вұ 0.111   вҲ’5.65 Вұ 0.102    вҲ’6.325 Вұ 0.048
  CT-MB-RL         вң–                  вң”                вң–           CT-MB-RL          вҲ’2.850 Вұ 0.014   вҲ’5.35 Вұ 0.020    вҲ’6.160 Вұ 0.026
   FaLPO           вң”                  вң”                вң–            MMMC             вҲ’4.723 Вұ 7.619   вҲ’5.602 Вұ 4.299   вҲ’6.124 Вұ 3.217

 Table 1: Competing methods and their Table 2: Average terminal utility after tuning with
 characteristics.                     standard deviation for synthetic data

5.1   S YNTHETIC E XPERIMENTS

Metrics We compare different methods using the average terminal utility since it is the ultimate goal
in our portfolio optimization problem formulation and is commonly used in continuous-time finance
models. There exist other statistics measuring the performance of portfolios (see Section B). These
statistics are not equivalent or consistent with the utility, and thus we do not emphasize them.
Methods We compare FaLPO with five competing methods representing various approaches in
prior work (Table 1). (i) Merton Model with Model Calibration (MMMC): model calibration of a
classic continuous-time finance baseline, which does not consider stochastic factors (Merton, 1969),
combined with closed-from policy function. (ii) Deep Deterministic Policy Gradient (DDPG): a
state-of-the-art model-free RL method with deterministic policy (Silver et al., 2014), which many
empirical portfolio optimization methods build on. (iii) Stochastic latent actor critic (SLAC): a
state-of-the-art representation learning RL method that explicitly learns representation of latent
variables (Lee et al., 2020). (iv) Model-based RL with rich observations (RichID): a state-of-the-art
model-based RL method with representation learning (Mhammedi et al., 2020). (v) Continuous-time
model-based RL (CT-MB-RL): policy gradient optimizing the performance objective using the policy
functional form derived from continuous-time models, but directly treating the features as the factors.
For policy gradient methods, we pick a deterministic policy approach like DDPG as, when compared
to non-deterministic policy gradient alternatives, they are more suitable to portfolio optimization due
to the continuous action space, high exploration cost, and high noise in financial data (Appendix A.2).
For portfolio optimization, different variance reduction methods for policy gradient (Schulman
et al., 2015; 2017; Xu et al., 2020) only provide minor performance improvements (Aboussalah,
2020). We hence do not report such results. For areas of RL with representation learning and
model-based RL, we focus on those (SLAC and RichID) explicitly learning a representation of latent
variables, since such methods are more closely related to FaLPO. There are other techniques like
data augmentation, feature construction, adversarial training, and regularization that can improve the
empirical performance of portfolio optimization (see survey in Hambly et al., 2021, Section 4.3). In
this work, we focus on the central methodological task of policy learning, and most such techniques
can be directly combined with our proposed method.
Protocol We simulate environments with the KimвҖ“Omberg model and implement the considered
methods to compare their performance. Note that a key data generating parameter in portfolio
optimization is the signal-to-noise ratio, which can be roughly characterized by the ratio between the
scale of the drift and the scale of the volatility (see Appendix K.1 for detailed explanation). We test
our method under different signal-to-noise ratios. To this end, we randomly generate stock drifts to
around 10% (to mimic the real-world average return of stocks in SP500), vary the scale of volatility
in {10%, 20%, 30%}, and simulate data following the procedure in Appendix K.2. Then, we apply
the considered methods to maximize the terminal power and exponential utility with different ОівҖҷs.
For each method, we tune the learning rate and other method-specific hyperparameters with early
stopping (Appendix K.3). With each method-hyperparameter-environment combination, we repeat
training, validation, and testing five times.
Results For exponential utility maximization, Table 2 summarizes the average test utility after
hyperparameter selection with 10 stocks, 10 features, and Оі = 5. FaLPO outperforms all the
competing methods in terms of average terminal utility. This performance gain may be explained
by the factor representation learning informed by the continuous-time finance model, as other
methods are incapable of doing so. Meanwhile, MMMC and CT-MB-RL underperform, which
suggests the disadvantage of using oversimplified models. Compared with the more sophisticated
RL methods like SLAC and RichID, the simple DDPG is fairly competitive. This is consistent


                                                                       8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


     Methods    Energy       Material       Industrials              Mix                               0.8
                                                                                                             в—Ҹ       Оі=5


                                                                                      Average Return
     FaLPO     вҲ’2.4 Вұ 1.9   вҲ’3.2 Вұ 1.0     вҲ’6.3 Вұ 2.3             вҲ’3.5 Вұ 1.5                                 в—Ҹ       Оі=7
                                                                                                       0.6
      DDPG     вҲ’6.6 Вұ 1.2   вҲ’7.3 Вұ 1.5      вҲ’7.3 Вұ 2.1      вҲ’2.5 Г— 104 Вұ 3.3 Г— 108                           в—Ҹ       Оі=9
                                                                                                                                                       в—Ҹ


      SLAC     вҲ’6.8 Вұ 0.2   вҲ’7.0 Вұ 1.5    вҲ’342.4 Вұ 886.8    вҲ’3.0 Г— 108 Вұ 4.3 Г— 1012                    0.4
     RichID    вҲ’6.5 Вұ 0.1   вҲ’6.9 Вұ 1.4      вҲ’6.9 Вұ 0.4            вҲ’8.1 Вұ 3.9                                     в—Ҹ
                                                                                                                      в—Ҹ
                                                                                                                                       в—Ҹ
                                                                                                                                           в—Ҹ
                                                                                                                                                               в—Ҹ
                                                                                                                                                                   в—Ҹ   в—Ҹ   в—Ҹ
                                                                                                                                                                               в—Ҹ

                                                                                                       0.2                 в—Ҹ
                                                                                                                                                           в—Ҹ

    CT-MB-RL   вҲ’4.2 Вұ 6.2   вҲ’5.4 Вұ 4.3   вҲ’11655 Вұ 32947.5         вҲ’5.7 Вұ 3.1                                     в—Ҹ
                                                                                                                           в—Ҹ
                                                                                                                                   в—Ҹ
                                                                                                                                           в—Ҹ
                                                                                                                                               в—Ҹ


                                                                                                                                               в—Ҹ           в—Ҹ
                                                                                                                                                                   в—Ҹ
                                                                                                                                                                       в—Ҹ
                                                                                                                                                                           в—Ҹ   в—Ҹ
                                                                                                                                                                                   в—Ҹ


                                                                                                                      в—Ҹ                в—Ҹ   в—Ҹ
                                                                                                                                   в—Ҹ                   в—Ҹ       в—Ҹ   в—Ҹ       в—Ҹ

               вҲ’8.5 Вұ 7.6   вҲ’6.5 Вұ 1.7     вҲ’11.0 Вұ 5.4            вҲ’7.5 Вұ 4.4
                                                                                                                           в—Ҹ                       в—Ҹ           в—Ҹ

     MMMC                                                                                              0.0
                                                                                                                 в—Ҹ
                                                                                                                      в—Ҹ        в—Ҹ
                                                                                                                               в—Ҹ
                                                                                                                                   в—Ҹ
                                                                                                                                       в—Ҹ       в—Ҹ
                                                                                                                                                   в—Ҹ   в—Ҹ
                                                                                                                                                           в—Ҹ           в—Ҹ       в—Ҹ
                                                                                                                                                                                   в—Ҹ
                                                                                                                                                                                   в—Ҹ


                                                                                                                                                   в—Ҹ


                                                                                                         Q1 2018 Q4 2018                       Q1 2020                         Q1 2022
Table 3: Average terminal utility for real-world data.                     Date
Mix denotes a mix of stocks in the previous three sec-
tors.                                                  Figure 4: FaLPO average return over portfo-
                                                       lio terminal dates.

with the existing observation that more complicated RL solutions may not always be suitable for
portfolio optimization due to the large noise and idiosyncrasy in the data. In the appendix, we
provide additional experimental results with different problem dimensions (Appendix K.4.1), other Оі
values (Appendix K.4.2), and different utility functions (Appendix K.4.3). The results are consistent.
Appendix K.4.4 studies a simplified case, where the optimal performance can be mathematically
derived. FaLPO achieves a similar performance as the theoretically optimal one.

5.2      R EAL -W ORLD S TOCK T RADING

In this section, we present an application of FaLPO for real-world stock trading problems. Following
the synthetic portfolio optimization setup, we study the six considered methods for 21-day (one
month) stock trading in four different stock sectors using the daily stock price data from Yahoo finance
between January 4, 2006 and April 1, 2022. For factors, we follow existing works (Aboussalah, 2020;
De Prado, 2018; Dixon et al., 2020) and consider economic indexes, technical analysis indexes, and
sector-specific features such as oil prices, gold prices, and related ETF prices, leading to around 30
factors for each sector. In each sector we select 10 stocks according to the availability and trading
volume in the considered time range (Appendix L.1). The training, validation, and testing data are
constructed using rolling windows (Appendix L.3). Table 3 reports the achieved average utility of
each method under the selected hyperparamters. FaLPO achieves the highest average utility in all
four sectors.
Next, we conduct the training-tuning-testing procedure above with Оі вҲҲ {5, 7, 9}, and report the
returns of FaLPO in each quarter in Figure 4. Recall that a smaller Оі corresponds to taking more risk.
This is consistent with the observation in Figure 4 that the smaller the Оі the bigger the return but the
larger the fluctuations. Also, the return fluctuates and drops around late 2018 and early 2020. The
former corresponds to the abrupt bear market at the end of 2018, and the latter is consistent with the
time period that COVID-19 bursts. Under these two time periods, the financial market was especially
noisy and unpredictable. We also implement sensitivity analysis on О» in Appendix L.4 and observe
that a non-zero small О» works well in practice.

6      E PILOGUE
Conclusion This work proposes FaLPO, a new decision-making framework for portfolio optimiza-
tion with stochastic factors. By using continuous-time finance models to regularize policy learning,
FaLPO is able to handle high noise and complex effects in financial data. We demonstrate FaLPOвҖҷs
benefits both theoretically and empirically. We focus on policy learning and defer more advanced
feature engineering methods to future work.

Limitations FaLPO has two potential limitations. First, while we show the extension of FaLPO to
problems beyond portfolio optimization, FaLPO is not applicable when there is no suitable parametric
model to derive the optimal policy functional form. In such cases, the model-regularized policy
learning of FaLPO cannot be implemented. Second, the performance of FaLPO still relies on good
features (Yt ) to generate factors (Xt ). In the presence of unpredictable market events (like COVID-
19), or when the features do not contain any useful signals (like the Merton case in Appendix K.4.4),
additional caution needs to be taken when applying FaLPO.

Reproducibility The assumptions and proof details are provided in Appendices I and J. The
experiment implementation details are reported in Appendices K and L.


                                                                            9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


R EFERENCES
Amine Mohamed Aboussalah. What is the value of the cross-sectional approach to deep reinforcement
 learning? Available at SSRN, 2020.
Alekh Agarwal, Sham M Kakade, Jason D Lee, and Gaurav Mahajan. On the theory of policy
  gradient methods: Optimality, approximation, and distribution shift. Journal of Machine Learning
  Research, 22(98):1вҖ“76, 2021.
Yacine AДұМҲt-Sahalia. Closed-form likelihood expansions for multivariate diffusions. The Annals of
  Statistics, 36(2):906вҖ“937, 2008.
Yacine Ait-Sahalia and Robert L Kimmel. Estimating affine multifactor term structure models using
  closed-form likelihood expansions. Journal of Financial Economics, 98(1):113вҖ“144, 2010.
Levon Avanesyan. Optimal investment in incomplete markets with multiple Brownian externalities.
  PhD thesis, Princeton University, 2021.
Levon Avanesyan, Mykhaylo Shkolnikov, and Ronnie Sircar. Construction of forward performance
  processes in stochastic factor models and an extension of widderвҖҷs theorem. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:1805.04535, 2018.
Stephen H Bach, Bryan He, Alexander Ratner, and Christopher ReМҒ. Learning the structure of
  generative models without labeled data. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp.
  273вҖ“282. PMLR, 2017.
Krzysztof Bartoszek, Sylvain GleМҒmin, Ingemar Kaj, and Martin Lascoux. Using the OrnsteinвҖ“
  Uhlenbeck process to model the evolution of interacting populations. Journal of theoretical
  biology, 429:35вҖ“45, 2017.
Maximilian Behr, Peter Benner, and Jan Heiland. Invariant Galerkin Ansatz spaces and Davison-
 Maki methods for the numerical solution of differential Riccati equations. arXiv preprint
 arXiv:1910.13362, 2019.
Yoshua Bengio. Using a financial training criterion rather than a prediction criterion. International
  Journal of Neural Systems, 8(04):433вҖ“443, 1997.
Alexandros Beskos and Gareth O Roberts. Exact simulation of diffusions. The Annals of Applied
  Probability, 15(4):2422вҖ“2444, 2005.
Jalaj Bhandari and Daniel Russo. Global optimality guarantees for policy gradient methods. arXiv
   preprint arXiv:1906.01786, 2019.
Homanga Bharadhwaj, Mohammad Babaeizadeh, Dumitru Erhan, and Sergey Levine. Information
  prioritization through empowerment in visual model-based rl. arXiv preprint arXiv:2204.08585,
  2022.
Lukas Biewald. Experiment tracking with weights and biases, 2020. URL https://www.wandb.
  com/. Software available from wandb.com.
Jaya PN Bishwal. Parameter estimation in stochastic differential equations. Springer, 2007.
Tomas BjoМҲrk. Arbitrage theory in continuous time. Oxford university press, 2009.
Simone P Blomberg, Suren I Rathnayake, and Cheyenne M Moreau. Beyond brownian motion
  and the ornstein-uhlenbeck process: Stochastic diffusion models for the evolution of quantitative
  characters. The American Naturalist, 195(2):145вҖ“165, 2020.
George Chacko and Luis M Viceira. Dynamic consumption and portfolio choice with stochastic
  volatility in incomplete markets. The Review of Financial Studies, 18(4):1369вҖ“1402, 2005.
Yevgen Chebotar, Karol Hausman, Marvin Zhang, Gaurav Sukhatme, Stefan Schaal, and Sergey
  Levine. Combining model-based and model-free updates for trajectory-centric reinforcement
  learning. In International conference on machine learning, pp. 703вҖ“711. PMLR, 2017a.


                                                 10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Yevgen Chebotar, Mrinal Kalakrishnan, Ali Yahya, Adrian Li, Stefan Schaal, and Sergey Levine. Path
  integral guided policy search. In 2017 IEEE international conference on robotics and automation
  (ICRA), pp. 3381вҖ“3388. IEEE, 2017b.
Marco Corazza and Francesco Bertoluzzo. Q-learning-based financial trading systems with ap-
 plications. University CaвҖҷFoscari of Venice, Dept. of Economics Working Paper Series No, 15,
 2014.
Marcos Lopez De Prado. Advances in financial machine learning. John Wiley & Sons, 2018.
Marc Deisenroth and Carl E Rasmussen. Pilco: A model-based and data-efficient approach to policy
 search. In Proceedings of the 28th International Conference on machine learning (ICML-11), pp.
 465вҖ“472. Citeseer, 2011.
Matthew F Dixon, Igor Halperin, and Paul Bilokon. Machine Learning in Finance. Springer, 2020.
Kenji Doya. Reinforcement learning in continuous time and space. Neural computation, 12(1):
  219вҖ“245, 2000.
Benjamin Eysenbach, Alexander Khazatsky, Sergey Levine, and Ruslan Salakhutdinov. Mismatched
  no more: Joint model-policy optimization for model-based rl. arXiv preprint arXiv:2110.02758,
  2021.
Eugene F Fama and Kenneth R French. The cross-section of expected stock. The Journal of Finance,
  47(2):427вҖ“465, 1992.
Eugene F Fama and Kenneth R French. A five-factor asset pricing model. Journal of financial
  economics, 116(1):1вҖ“22, 2015.
Vicky Fasen. Statistical estimation of multivariate ornsteinвҖ“uhlenbeck processes and applications to
  co-integration. Journal of Econometrics, 172(2):325вҖ“337, 2013.
Damir FilipovicМҒ and Eberhard Mayerhofer. Affine diffusion processes: theory and applications. In
 Advanced financial modelling, pp. 125вҖ“164. De Gruyter, 2009.
Wendell Fleming and Raymond Rishel. Deterministic and stochastic optimal control. Springer, 1975.
Wendell H Fleming and Sanjoy K Mitter. Optimal control and nonlinear filtering for nondegenerate
 diffusion processes. Stochastics: An International Journal of Probability and Stochastic Processes,
 8(1):63вҖ“77, 1982.
Wendell H Fleming and Halil Mete Soner. Controlled Markov processes and viscosity solutions,
 volume 25. Springer Science & Business Media, 2006.
Jean-Pierre Fouque, Ronnie Sircar, and Thaleia Zariphopoulou. Portfolio optimization and stochastic
  volatility asymptotics. Mathematical Finance, 27(3):704вҖ“745, 2017.
Mohammad Ghavamzadeh, Shie Mannor, Joelle Pineau, Aviv Tamar, et al. Bayesian reinforcement
 learning: A survey. Foundations and TrendsВ® in Machine Learning, 8(5-6):359вҖ“483, 2015.
Amit Goyal and Pedro Santa-Clara. Idiosyncratic risk matters! The journal of finance, 58(3):
 975вҖ“1007, 2003.
Shixiang Gu, Timothy Lillicrap, Ilya Sutskever, and Sergey Levine. Continuous deep q-learning
  with model-based acceleration. In International conference on machine learning, pp. 2829вҖ“2838.
  PMLR, 2016.
Mao Guan and Xiao-Yang Liu. Explainable deep reinforcement learning for portfolio management:
 an empirical approach. In Proceedings of the Second ACM International Conference on AI in
 Finance, pp. 1вҖ“9, 2021.
Tuomas Haarnoja, Aurick Zhou, Pieter Abbeel, and Sergey Levine. Soft actor-critic: Off-policy
  maximum entropy deep reinforcement learning with a stochastic actor. In International conference
  on machine learning, pp. 1861вҖ“1870. PMLR, 2018.


                                                11
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Danijar Hafner, Timothy Lillicrap, Ian Fischer, Ruben Villegas, David Ha, Honglak Lee, and James
  Davidson. Learning latent dynamics for planning from pixels. In International Conference on
  Machine Learning, pp. 2555вҖ“2565. PMLR, 2019.
Ben Hambly, Renyuan Xu, and Huining Yang. Recent advances in reinforcement learning in finance.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2112.04553, 2021.
Elad Hazan and Satyen Kale. Beyond the regret minimization barrier: an optimal algorithm for
  stochastic strongly-convex optimization. In Proceedings of the 24th Annual Conference on
  Learning Theory, pp. 421вҖ“436. JMLR Workshop and Conference Proceedings, 2011.
Florian Herzog, Gabriel Dondi, Hans P Geering, and Lorenz Schumann. Continuous-time multivariate
  strategic asset allocation. In Proceedings of the 11th Annual Meeting of the German Finance
  Association, Session 2B, pp. 1вҖ“34. Citeseer, 2004.
Desmond J Higham, Xuerong Mao, and Andrew M Stuart. Strong convergence of euler-type methods
  for nonlinear stochastic differential equations. SIAM Journal on Numerical Analysis, 40(3):
 1041вҖ“1063, 2002.
VladimДұМҒr HolyМҖ and Petra TomanovaМҒ. Estimation of ornstein-uhlenbeck process using ultra-high-
  frequency data with application to intraday pairs trading strategy. arXiv preprint arXiv:1811.09312,
  2018.
Guosheng Hu, Yuxin Hu, Kai Yang, Zehao Yu, Flood Sung, Zhihong Zhang, Fei Xie, Jianguo Liu,
  Neil Robertson, Timpathy Hospedales, et al. Deep stock representation learning: From candlestick
  charts to investment decisions. In 2018 IEEE international conference on acoustics, speech and
  signal processing (ICASSP), pp. 2706вҖ“2710. IEEE, 2018.
Michael Janner, Justin Fu, Marvin Zhang, and Sergey Levine. When to trust your model: Model-based
 policy optimization. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 32, 2019.
Zhengyao Jiang, Dixing Xu, and Jinjun Liang. A deep reinforcement learning framework for the
  financial portfolio management problem. arXiv preprint arXiv:1706.10059, 2017.
Chi Jin, Praneeth Netrapalli, Rong Ge, Sham M Kakade, and Michael I Jordan. On nonconvex
  optimization for machine learning: Gradients, stochasticity, and saddle points. Journal of the ACM
 (JACM), 68(2):1вҖ“29, 2021.
Hilbert J Kappen. Path integrals and symmetry breaking for optimal control theory. Journal of
  statistical mechanics: theory and experiment, 2005(11):P11011, 2005.
Hilbert Johan Kappen and Hans Christian Ruiz. Adaptive importance sampling for control and
  inference. Journal of Statistical Physics, 162(5):1244вҖ“1266, 2016.
Ioannis Karatzas and Steven Shreve. Brownian motion and stochastic calculus, volume 113. springer,
  1987.
Belhal Karimi, Blazej Miasojedow, Eric Moulines, and Hoi-To Wai. Non-asymptotic analysis of
  biased stochastic approximation scheme. In Conference on Learning Theory, pp. 1944вҖ“1974.
  PMLR, 2019.
Taesup Kim, Sungjin Ahn, and Yoshua Bengio. Variational temporal abstraction. Advances in Neural
  Information Processing Systems, 32, 2019.
Tong Suk Kim and Edward Omberg. Dynamic nonmyopic portfolio behavior. The Review of Financial
  Studies, 9(1):141вҖ“161, 1996.
Holger Kraft. Optimal portfolios and hestonвҖҷs stochastic volatility model: an explicit solution for
  power utility. Quantitative Finance, 5(3):303вҖ“313, 2005.
Michael Laskin, Denis Yarats, Hao Liu, Kimin Lee, Albert Zhan, Kevin Lu, Catherine Cang, Lerrel
 Pinto, and Pieter Abbeel. Urlb: Unsupervised reinforcement learning benchmark. arXiv preprint
 arXiv:2110.15191, 2021.


                                                 12
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Alex X Lee, Anusha Nagabandi, Pieter Abbeel, and Sergey Levine. Stochastic latent actor-critic:
  Deep reinforcement learning with a latent variable model. Advances in Neural Information
  Processing Systems, 33:741вҖ“752, 2020.
Xiao-Yang Liu, Hongyang Yang, Jiechao Gao, and Christina Dan Wang. Finrl: Deep reinforcement
  learning framework to automate trading in quantitative finance. In Proceedings of the Second ACM
  International Conference on AI in Finance, pp. 1вҖ“9, 2021.
Po-Ling Loh. Statistical consistency and asymptotic normality for high-dimensional robust m-
  estimators. The Annals of Statistics, 45(2):866вҖ“896, 2017.
Tengyu Ma. Why do local methods solve nonconvex problems? Beyond the Worst-Case Analysis of
  Algorithms, pp. 465, 2020.
Sidra Mehtab and Jaydip Sen. A robust predictive model for stock price prediction using deep
  learning and natural language processing. Available at SSRN 3502624, 2019.
Robert C Merton. Lifetime portfolio selection under uncertainty: The continuous-time case. The
  review of Economics and Statistics, pp. 247вҖ“257, 1969.
Robert C Merton. Continuous-time finance. Blackwell Cambridge, MA, 1992.
Robert C Merton et al. An intertemporal capital asset pricing model. Econometrica, 41(5):867вҖ“887,
  1973.
Zakaria Mhammedi, Dylan J Foster, Max Simchowitz, Dipendra Misra, Wen Sun, Akshay Krish-
  namurthy, Alexander Rakhlin, and John Langford. Learning the linear quadratic regulator from
  nonlinear observations. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 33:14532вҖ“14543,
  2020.
Johannes Muhle-Karbe, Max Reppen, and H Mete Soner. A primer on portfolio choice with small
  transaction costs. Annual Review of Financial Economics, 9:301вҖ“331, 2017.
ReМҒmi Munos. Policy gradient in continuous time. Journal of Machine Learning Research, 7:771вҖ“791,
   2006.
Anusha Nagabandi, Gregory Kahn, Ronald S Fearing, and Sergey Levine. Neural network dynam-
  ics for model-based deep reinforcement learning with model-free fine-tuning. In 2018 IEEE
 International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA), pp. 7559вҖ“7566. IEEE, 2018.
Abhishek Nan, Anandh Perumal, and Osmar R Zaiane. Sentiment and knowledge based algorithmic
  trading with deep reinforcement learning. In International Conference on Database and Expert
  Systems Applications, pp. 167вҖ“180. Springer, 2022.
Arkadi Nemirovski, Anatoli Juditsky, Guanghui Lan, and Alexander Shapiro. Robust stochastic
  approximation approach to stochastic programming. SIAM Journal on optimization, 19(4):1574вҖ“
  1609, 2009.
Bernt Oksendal. Stochastic differential equations: an introduction with applications. Springer
  Science & Business Media, 2013.
Matteo Papini, Damiano Binaghi, Giuseppe Canonaco, Matteo Pirotta, and Marcello Restelli. Stochas-
 tic variance-reduced policy gradient. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp.
 4026вҖ“4035. PMLR, 2018.
PCB Phillips. The structural estimation of a stochastic differential equation system. Econometrica:
  Journal of the Econometric Society, pp. 1021вҖ“1041, 1972.
Peter CB Phillips and Jun Yu. Maximum likelihood and gaussian estimation of continuous time
  models in finance. In Handbook of financial time series, pp. 497вҖ“530. Springer, 2009.
Boris T Polyak. Gradient methods for the minimisation of functionals. USSR Computational
  Mathematics and Mathematical Physics, 3(4):864вҖ“878, 1963.


                                               13
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Konrad Rawlik, Marc Toussaint, and Sethu Vijayakumar. On stochastic optimal control and rein-
  forcement learning by approximate inference. Proceedings of Robotics: Science and Systems VIII,
  2012.
A Max Reppen and H Mete Soner. Bias-variance trade-off and overlearning in dynamic decision
  problems. arXiv preprint arXiv:2011.09349, 2020.
Rori V Rohlfs, Patrick Harrigan, and Rasmus Nielsen. Modeling gene expression evolution with an
  extended OrnsteinвҖ“Uhlenbeck process accounting for within-species variation. Molecular biology
  and evolution, 31(1):201вҖ“211, 2014.
John Schulman, Sergey Levine, Pieter Abbeel, Michael Jordan, and Philipp Moritz. Trust region
  policy optimization. In International conference on machine learning, pp. 1889вҖ“1897. PMLR,
  2015.
John Schulman, Filip Wolski, Prafulla Dhariwal, Alec Radford, and Oleg Klimov. Proximal policy
  optimization algorithms. arXiv preprint arXiv:1707.06347, 2017.
Shai Shalev-Shwartz, Yoram Singer, Nathan Srebro, and Andrew Cotter. Pegasos: Primal estimated
  sub-gradient solver for svm. Mathematical programming, 127(1):3вҖ“30, 2011.
David Silver, Guy Lever, Nicolas Heess, Thomas Degris, Daan Wierstra, and Martin Riedmiller.
  Deterministic policy gradient algorithms. In International conference on machine learning, pp.
  387вҖ“395. PMLR, 2014.
Freek Stulp and Olivier Sigaud. Path integral policy improvement with covariance matrix adaptation.
  In Proceedings of the 29th International Coference on International Conference on Machine
  Learning, pp. 1547вҖ“1554, 2012.
Jingrui Sun and Jiongmin Yong. Stochastic Linear-Quadratic Optimal Control Theory: Open-Loop
   and Closed-Loop Solutions. Springer Nature, 2020.
Richard S Sutton and Andrew G Barto. Reinforcement learning: An introduction. MIT press, 2018.
Peter Tankov. Financial modelling with jump processes. CRC press, 2003.
Evangelos Theodorou, Jonas Buchli, and Stefan Schaal. A generalized path integral control approach
  to reinforcement learning. The Journal of Machine Learning Research, 11:3137вҖ“3181, 2010.
Brandon Trabucco, Xinyang Geng, Aviral Kumar, and Sergey Levine. Design-bench: Benchmarks
  for data-driven offline model-based optimization. arXiv preprint arXiv:2202.08450, 2022.
Vladimir Vapnik. Principles of risk minimization for learning theory. In Advances in neural
  information processing systems, pp. 831вҖ“838, 1992.
Oldrich Vasicek. An equilibrium characterization of the term structure. Journal of financial economics,
  5(2):177вҖ“188, 1977.
J. von Neumann and O. Morgenstern. Theory of games and economic behavior. Princeton University
   Press, 1947.
Jessica A Wachter. Portfolio and consumption decisions under mean-reverting returns: An exact
  solution for complete markets. Journal of financial and quantitative analysis, 37(1):63вҖ“91, 2002.
Haoran Wang, Thaleia Zariphopoulou, and Xunyu Zhou. Exploration versus exploitation in reinforce-
  ment learning: a stochastic control approach. arXiv preprint arXiv:1812.01552, 2018.
Lingxiao Wang, Qi Cai, Zhuoran Yang, and Zhaoran Wang. Neural policy gradient methods: Global
  optimality and rates of convergence. arXiv preprint arXiv:1909.01150, 2019.
Manuel Watter, Jost Springenberg, Joschka Boedecker, and Martin Riedmiller. Embed to control: A
 locally linear latent dynamics model for control from raw images. Advances in neural information
 processing systems, 28, 2015.


                                                 14
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Ivo Welch and Amit Goyal. A comprehensive look at the empirical performance of equity premium
  prediction. The Review of Financial Studies, 21(4):1455вҖ“1508, 2008.
Zhuoran Xiong, Xiao-Yang Liu, Shan Zhong, Hongyang Yang, and Anwar Walid. Practical deep
  reinforcement learning approach for stock trading. arXiv preprint arXiv:1811.07522, 2018.
Pan Xu, Felicia Gao, and Quanquan Gu. An improved convergence analysis of stochastic variance-
  reduced policy gradient. In Uncertainty in Artificial Intelligence, pp. 541вҖ“551. PMLR, 2020.
Jiongmin Yong and Xun Yu Zhou. Stochastic controls: Hamiltonian systems and HJB equations,
   volume 43. Springer Science & Business Media, 1999.
Pengqian Yu, Joon Sern Lee, Ilya Kulyatin, Zekun Shi, and Sakyasingha Dasgupta. Model-based
  deep reinforcement learning for dynamic portfolio optimization. arXiv preprint arXiv:1901.08740,
  2019.
Thaleia Zariphopoulou. A solution approach to valuation with unhedgeable risks. Finance and
  stochastics, 5(1):61вҖ“82, 2001.


                                               15
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


A PPENDIX

A     R ELATED L ITERATURE
In this section, we discuss related literature.

A.1    C ONTINUOUS -T IME F INANCE M ODELS

Existing strategies for solving portfolio optimization using continuous-time finance models
can be loosely summarized as performing three steps:

      1. Choosing the model for the dynamics, i.e. the type of stochastic differential equation (SDE).
      2. Estimating the parameter of the selected model (which is also referred to as model fitting,
         model identification, or calibration).
      3. Solving for the optimal policy under the estimated model.

The third step leverages stochastic optimal control tools (Fleming & Rishel, 1975; Fleming & Mitter,
1982; Fleming & Soner, 2006; Yong & Zhou, 1999).
Finding and estimating an appropriate model for stochastic optimal control requires significant
domain knowledge. For instance, in finance, the modeler must specify both which features are
relevant and how they affect stock prices (Fama & French, 1992). If not every relevant factor is
correctly specified, optimal control can hardly lead to good performances. As a result, in stock
trading, control methods would hand pick three to five economic indices as the factors and assume
they follow a simple (often linear) SDE. But indeed trading can benefit from much richer datasets
including related option prices, technical indicators, and interest rates (Aboussalah, 2020; De Prado,
2018; Dixon et al., 2020; Mehtab & Sen, 2019).
Further, even with a correctly specified model and factors, likelihood-based estimation for SDE
control models can be very challenging (Phillips & Yu, 2009). As a result, methods like AДұМҲt-Sahalia
(2008); Ait-Sahalia & Kimmel (2010) seek to replace the exact likelihood with other likelihood-based
objective functions, while maintaining theoretical guarantees. However, the proposed objective
function needs to be derived for each specific problem, and the derivation can be challenging. Other
methods like Fasen (2013); HolyМҖ & TomanovaМҒ (2018) rely on more specific parametric or low-
dimensional setups. To alleviate these issues, our framework extends the existing continuous-time
finance models by allowing for a flexible and generalized definition of stochastic factor dynamics.
Further, we simultaneously conduct policy learning and model calibration in an RL manner, with a
square-loss objective that avoids the calculation of an exact likelihood.

A.2    R EINFORCEMENT L EARNING

RL aims to conduct the aforementioned three steps by (i) relying more on data (ii) in an end-to-end
fashion. Methods like model-free RL assume no parametric forms on the dynamics, and directly learn
the optimal policy while explicitly learning the model (step 1) and estimating the parameters (step 2).

Discrete-Time Model-Free RL There exist many discrete-time model-free RL methods (Sutton &
Barto, 2018). In this category, deep deterministic policy gradient (DDPG) is the most relevant one,
and is empirically most widely used for portfolio optimization (Hambly et al., 2021). The reason
is twofold. First of all, DDPG is a policy-gradient based method, and thus can naturally handle
continuous states and actions in portfolio optimization with simple procedures. Second, DDPG learns
a deterministic policy instead of a stochastic one like Haarnoja et al. (2018). This characteristic is
especially important in portfolio optimization where the policy learning goal is a deterministic policy
since the cost of a stochastic policy is extremely expensive.

Continuous-Time Model-Free RL Continuous-time model-free RL (Wang et al., 2018; Doya,
2000; Munos, 2006) aims to solve for a continuous-time policy. However, such methods do not use
or assume any SDE structure, and thus struggle with the common open questions in model-free RL
like poor stability and sample complexity. As one example, path integral methods stem from the


                                                  16
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


theoretical result that the value function of a type of continuous-time decision-making problems
can be expressed in closed form as a Feyman-Kac path integral (Fleming & Rishel, 1975; Kappen,
2005). A series of control/RL methods follow the rationale of optimizing the policy to maximize
such an integral. Specifically, Theodorou et al. (2010) propose an open-loop control strategy; Kappen
& Ruiz (2016) builds RL with importance sampling; Chebotar et al. (2017a;b); Stulp & Sigaud
(2012) combine path integral with other model-based or model-free RL methods. However, the core
derivation only holds for decision-making satisfying Kappen & Ruiz (2016, Equation (1)), which is
equivalent to assuming that the action does not affect the randomness in decision-making. Such an
assumption is limiting, and does not hold for portfolio optimization, where how to allocate the wealth
in order to minimize the risk is key to a successful policy.

Model-based RL and RL with Representation Learning Model-based RL and RL with represen-
tation learning are two active research areas but without a clear general state-of-the-art (Bharadhwaj
et al., 2022; Eysenbach et al., 2021; Trabucco et al., 2022; Janner et al., 2019; Deisenroth & Ras-
mussen, 2011; Nagabandi et al., 2018; Laskin et al., 2021; Lee et al., 2020; Watter et al., 2015;
Chebotar et al., 2017a; Hafner et al., 2019; Kim et al., 2019). The closest to FaLPO are those that
learn an explicit representation of a latent variable like Lee et al. (2020); Mhammedi et al. (2020).
But such methods are unable to leverage continuous-time finance models for portfolio optimization.

Bayesian RL Our proposed framework is also related to Bayesian models (Ghavamzadeh et al.,
2015; Rawlik et al., 2012), if we treat the learned representation of factors as the hidden variable.
Strictly formulating an NSFM as a Bayesian model requires assumptions specifying the conditional
distributions, and thus requires more domain knowledge. The optimization of Bayesian methods is
also more challenging.

RL for Stock Trading Various efforts have been made on applying RL to stock trading (Corazza &
Bertoluzzo, 2014; Hambly et al., 2021; Nan et al., 2022; Xiong et al., 2018; Guan & Liu, 2021; Liu
et al., 2021; Hu et al., 2018; Yu et al., 2019). However, these methods focus more on feature selection
or empirical performance-improving techniques. Methodologically, they do not take advantage of
continuous-time finance models.

A.3    E MPIRICAL R ISK M INIMIZATION

Another related area is Empirical Risk Minimization (ERM) (Vapnik, 1992). ERM studies the
minimization of an objective function using the averages over training data to construct an empirical
loss function. Recent work connected ERM with simulation-based and data-based offline decision-
making methods (Reppen & Soner, 2020). More specifically, when the random input is observable
and unaffected by actions, and a training set is available, the decision-making problem can be
formulated as an ERM problem. As a result, the portfolio optimization may be reformulated as an
ERM extension.

B     OTHER O BJECTIVE F UNCTIONS
Note that the goal of portfolio optimization is to maximize the return while minimize or constrain
the risk. In practice, one can use different objective functions for such a goal, like mean-variance
objective (Hambly et al., 2021), Sharpe ratio, and so on. In this work, we consider utility maximization
with power utility and exponential utility. The proposed method also works with other objective
functions, as long as we can derive (part of) the optimal policy structure. Note that the selection
among these objective functions is more a user-preference question.


                                                  17
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


C     G RADIENT E STIMATES
In this section, we discuss the gradient estimation for both V and L. Assume that we collect B
independent trajectories for St and Yt , denoted as
          D := {(s0,k , y0,k ), (sвҲҶt,k , yвҲҶt,k ), (s2вҲҶt,k , y2вҲҶt,k ), В· В· В· (sM вҲҶt,k , yM вҲҶt,k )}Bk=1 .
Then, the gradient estimate for V (ОёП• , ОёПҖ ) is defined as
                             B
        ВҜ (ОёП• , ОёПҖ ) := 1                              Лң k (ОёП• , ОёПҖ ) := вҲҮОё ,Оё U (z ПҖ(В·;ОёП• ,ОёПҖ ),вҲҶt ).
                             X
        вҲҮV                         Лң k (ОёП• , ОёПҖ ) with вҲҮV
                                   вҲҮV                                      П• ПҖ     T,k
                        B
                             k=1
                                                                                                   ПҖ(В·;Оё ),вҲҶt
The terminal wealth in the trajectory k under the policy where ПҖ(В·; ОёПҖ ) is denoted as zT,k ПҖ                   with
                                  M             dS
                                                                                   si(m+1)вҲҶt вҲ’ simвҲҶt
                                                X
           ПҖ(В·;Оё ),вҲҶt
                                  X
          zT,k ПҖ        := z0 +         zmвҲ’1          ПҖ i (mвҲҶt, ymвҲҶt ; ОёП• , ОёПҖ )                        .
                                  m=1           i=1
                                                                                           simвҲҶt

Next, we consider the gradient of L:
                                                           B
                                   ВҜ                1      X
                                                                 Лң k (ОёП• , ОёS ).
                                   вҲҮL(Оё П• , ОёS ) :=              вҲҮL
                                                    B
                                                           k=1

Specifically for likelihood and negative mean square loss, we have
                                         M вҲ’1
          Лң Likelihood,k (ОёП• , ОёS ) := 1
                                         X
          вҲҮL                                  вҲҮОё ,Оё log(P(s(m+1)вҲҶt,k , П•(y(m+1)вҲҶt,k ; ОёП• )
                                      M m=0 П• S
                                         | smвҲҶt,k , П•(ymвҲҶt,k ; ОёП• ); ОёS )),

                                       M вҲ’1 X
                                            dS
         Лң N M SL,k (ОёП• , ОёS ) := вҲ’ 1
                                        X
         вҲҮL                                    вҲҮОёП• ,ОёS log(si(m+1)вҲҶt,k ) вҲ’ log(simвҲҶt,k )
                                    M m=0 i=1
                                       Z (m+1)вҲҶt
                                  вҲ’E             fSj (Xs ; ОёS )
                                               mвҲҶt
                                           dS                                             2
                                        1X      ij          2
                                      вҲ’       (g (Xs ; ОёS )) ds smвҲҶt,k , П•(ymвҲҶt,k ; ОёП• )    .
                                        2 i=1 S

As a result, in each iteration, we collect B trajectories to estimate the gradient of H(ОёП• , ОёПҖ ).

D     A P RIMER ON S TOCHASTIC D IFFERENTIAL E QUATIONS (SDE S )
We provide a general formulation of SDEs with two examples.

D.1    F ORMULATION OF SDE S

SDEs are a generalization of ordinary differential equations to dynamic systems influenced by random
fluctuations. The structure of the randomness can in principle be quite general, such as with jump
processes where the state evolution is no longer continuous (Tankov, 2003). Although our method can
be generalized to all SDEs, we restrict ourselves to practical settings where the source of randomness
is a Brownian motion.
Let Wt be a multi-dimensional independent standard Brownian motion. For a random process St , an
SDE is typically expressed using a differential form as
                                                        Z t              Z t
           dSt = f (St ) dt + g(St ) dWt , or St = S0 +     f (St ) dt +     g(St ) dWt ,    (8)
                                                                     0                 0



                                                         18
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023



                                                                      Rt
where f (В·) and g(В·) are functions of St . The stochastic integral 0 g(St )dWt is the accumulation
of influence to the state due to the noise. We refer the reader to Karatzas & Shreve (1987) for
details on the construction of stochastic integrals and SDE theory. Important here is that Equation (8)
defines the transition of St in an infinitesimal time step. The drift coefficient f (St ) characterizes the
deterministic part of the change of St , and the diffusion coefficient g(St ) models the randomness in
the transition of St .

D.2     E XAMPLES

As concrete examples, we discuss two families of SDEs widely used in finance, economics, and
biology: Geometric Brownian motion (GBM) and OrnsteinвҖ“Uhlenbeck (OU) processes (Merton
et al., 1973; Vasicek, 1977; Bartoszek et al., 2017; Blomberg et al., 2020; Rohlfs et al., 2014). The
OU structure appears in both applications below, and the financial application uses GBM as a base,
but extends it with OU drift coefficients. The two types of SDEs are given by
                           dSt
                    GBM:        = Вө dt + Пғ dWt ,      OU: dSt = ВөSt dt + Пғ dWt ,
                            St
                n      o
where dS St :=
           t      dSit
                   Sit   denotes the component-wise division of St , and the matrices Вө and Пғ define
the drift and diffusion coefficients.
We refer the interested reader to Fleming & Soner (2006) for more information on these topics.
We now briefly formulate two classic stochastic optimal control models for decision-making with
stochastic factors. The stochastic factors appear as the drift coefficients of other state variables and
are themselves modeled as SDEs.

D.3     I T OМӮ вҖҷ S F ORMULA

ItoМӮвҖҷs Formula is a fundamental analytical tool for SDEs, and crucial for their analysis. We only
provide a simple version here, which is sufficient for our analysis. A more general and rigorous
statement with assumptions and proof of ItoМӮвҖҷs formula and integral can be found in Karatzas & Shreve
(1987, Theorem 3.3).
L EMMA D.1 (ItoМӮвҖҷs Formula) Consider a twice differentiable function G, and St following
                                             dSt = f (St ) dt + g(St ) dWt .
Then, we have
                                         вҠӨ                                          вҠӨ
                                                         вҲӮ2G

                       вҲӮG         вҲӮG   1                                      вҲӮG
    dG(t, St ) =          +               Tr g(St )вҠӨ 2 g(St ) dt +
                                             f (St ) +                                g(St )dWt .
                       вҲӮt         вҲӮSt  2                 вҲӮSt                  вҲӮSt
                                                                 Rt
L EMMA D.2 For a suitable bounded process St , the ItoМӮ integral 0 St dWt satisfies:
                  Z t                     " Z
                                                 t           2 #      Z t
                                                                           2
              E       St dWt = 0,       E          St dWt        =E       St dt .
                         0                                   0                 0

The latter is also referred to as ItoМӮвҖҷs isometry

E     M ODEL C ALIBRATION
We discuss two model calibration loss functions, log-likelihood and negative mean square loss.

E.1    L OG -L IKELIHOOD

We can use log-likelihood as L for model calibration. The log-likelihood of SDEs is derived in a
sequential manner. Specifically, for (2) the log-likelihood is derived as
          LLogвҲ’Likelihood (ОёП• , ОёS ) := E[log(PОёS (St+вҲҶt , П•(Yt+вҲҶt ; ОёП• ) | St , П•(Yt ; ОёП• )))], (9)
where PОёS denotes the conditional likelihood according to (2) but with parameter ОёS instead of ОёSвҲ— .
Then, in specific models, one can derive PОёS (St+вҲҶt , П•(Yt+вҲҶt ) | St , П•(Yt ); Оё) (Phillips, 1972; HolyМҖ &
TomanovaМҒ, 2018; Beskos & Roberts, 2005) or the approximation of it (Ait-Sahalia & Kimmel, 2010).


                                                           19
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


E.2   N EGATIVE M EAN S QUARE L OSS

For the SDE system (2), one can also use a negative mean square loss (NMSL) as the calibration
objective. To derive this loss function, we first drive the dynamics of log price by applying ItoМӮвҖҷs
Formula Lemma D.1 to (2):
                                               dW                           dW
                                             1X                             X
          d log(Sti ) = fSi (Xt ; ОёS )dt вҲ’         (gSij (Xs ; ОёS )])2 dt +     gSij (Xs ; ОёS )]dWtj .   (10)
                                             2 j=1                          j=1

Then, combined with Lemma D.2, under proper assumptions of Lemma D.2, we pose expectation
over both sides of the above equation, and derive
                                                                dW
                                                              1X
                      E[d log(Sti )] = fSi (Xt ; ОёS )dt вҲ’          (g ij (Xs ; ОёS )])2 dt.
                                                              2 j=1 S

In words, the expectation of the log price change in an infinitesimal time is fSi (Xt ; ОёS )dt вҲ’
1
  PdW ij                2
2   j=1 (gS (Xs ; ОёS )]) dt. Therefore, one can estimate the parameter ОёS by minimizing the mean
square loss between the log price change and the expected log price change:
                                  XdS                                 Z t+вҲҶt
                                              i
            LN M SL (ОёS ) := вҲ’E          log(St+вҲҶt ) вҲ’ log(Sti ) вҲ’ E         fSi (Xs ; ОёS )
                                    i=1                                         t
                                                d                                     2                  (11)
                                               W
                                            1X
                                          вҲ’      (g ij (Xs ; ОёS ))2 ds St , Xt           .
                                            2 j=1 S
It can be easily proved that the true data generating SDE parameter satisfies
                                     ОёSвҲ— вҲҲ arg max LN M SL (ОёS ).
Further,
         if we take Xt = П•(Yt ; ОёП• ) and parameterize  the objective as LN M SL (ОёП• , ОёS ) :=
                                                       i 2
     PdS          i            i      i

вҲ’E      i=1 log(St+вҲҶt ) вҲ’ log(St ) вҲ’ П• (Yt ; ОёП• )вҲҶt вҲ’ ОёS   , we can prove

                                 ОёП•вҲ— , ОёSвҲ— вҲҲ arg max LN M SL (ОёП• , ОёS ).
                                                                               R t+вҲҶt i
Note that in practice it can be very hard to calculate the expectation E t            fS (Xs ; ОёS ) вҲ’
1
  PdW ij               2

2   j=1 (gS (Xs ; ОёS )) ds St , Xt . Therefore, when вҲҶt is small, we replace the conditional ex-
                                     PdW ij
pectation via E fSi (XS ; ОёS )вҲҶt вҲ’ 21 j=1

                                           (gS (XS ; ОёS ))2 вҲҶt St , Xt . Accordingly the calibration
objective is defined as
                      X dS                                                dW                    2
                                  i             i      i                1X     ij          2
LN M SL (ОёS ) вүҲ вҲ’E           log(St+вҲҶt ) вҲ’ log(St ) вҲ’ fS (Xs ; ОёS )вҲҶt +      (g (Xs ; ОёS )) вҲҶt      .
                       i=1
                                                                        2 j=1 S
                                                                                                         (12)

E.3   OTHER M ODEL C ALIBRATION O BJECTIVE

Another potential model calibration objective following the same rationale as (11) is
                                   XdX
     LN M SLвҲ’X (ОёП• , ОёS ) := вҲ’E          П•(Yt+вҲҶt ; ОёП• )i вҲ’ П•(Yt ; ОёП• )i
                                      i=1
                                                 Z t+вҲҶt                                          2
                                                         i
                                             вҲ’E         fX (П•(Ys ; ОёП• )i ; ОёS )ds П•(Yt ; ОёП• )i      ,
                                                     t
which is derived using the conditional expectation of Xt+вҲҶ given Xt . However, the true data-
generating parameter (ОёП•вҲ— , ОёSвҲ— ) is not a maximal point of LN M SLвҲ’X . To more clearly see this, this
loss function encourages the representation function П• to take a constant output so that Xt is constant
                  i
over time with fX   (Xs ; ОёS ) = 0, and LN M SLвҲ’X (ОёП• ) = 0. We also try this loss in experiments, and
it leads to poor validation and test performances.


                                                         20
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


F     A PPLICATIONS OF FA LPO TO D IFFERENT S TOCHASTIC FACTOR M ODELS
      IN C ONTINUOUS -T IME F INANCE

FaLPO can be used with many stochastic factor models in continuous-time finance models. In
this section, we discuss the Merton model (Appendix F.1), KimвҖ“Omberg (Appendix F.2) and EVE
(Appendix F.3).

F.1     M ERTON M ODEL

Merton model (Merton, 1969) is a classic setup for portfolio optimization. It studies the allocation of
capital across a set of financial assets in order to maximize profits and minimize risks.

F.1.1    M ODELING
Consider p risky assets with prices St = {Sti }pi=1 and an additional risk-free money market account
with, for simplicity, zero interest rate of return (like cash). The Merton model does not include factors.
The dynamics for asset prices is formulated as
                                            dSti
                                                 = Вө dt + ПғdWt .                                     (13)
                                             Sti
The parameters Вө, Пғ are p Г— p matrices, with Пғ denoting the volatility of assets. Further, we use ZМғtПҖМғ
to denote the wealth at time point t under the continuous-time policy ПҖМғ. Under the famous and widely
used self-financing assumption (BjoМҲrk, 2009), we have
                                          dZМғtПҖМғ
                                                 = ПҖМғt Вөdt + ПҖМғt ПғdWt .
                                           ZМғtПҖМғ

An investorвҖҷs goal is to maximize the expected utility of capital U (ZT ) at some future time point T :
                                         h                          i
                               max EПҖМғt U (ZМғTПҖМғ )|Z0 = z, S0 = s .                              (14)
                                    ПҖМғt

Negative values in the policy output are allowed, meaning the agent can short any asset.

F.1.2    P OLICY F UNCTIONAL F ORM
For the Merton model, О  in (3) can be explicitly derived.
L EMMA F.1 (Policy Functional Form for Merton Model) For a Merton model defined in (13), under
common assumptions, the optimal policy for portfolio optimization (14), with power utility follows
                                              ПҖМғ вҲ— = Вө(ПғПғ вҠӨ )вҲ’1 .
The optimal policy for portfolio optimization (14) with exponential utility follows
                                                       Вө(ПғПғ вҠӨ )вҲ’1
                                              ПҖМғ вҲ— =            вҲ—
                                                                  .
                                                          ZМғtПҖМғ

Proof. Lemma F.1 is a classic result in continuous-time finance, proposed in Merton (1969).            в–Ў
In words, in a Merton model, the optimal policy is independent of time, stock prices, features, and
factors. The optimal investment strategy is to keep a constant fraction or amount of wealth in each
asset all along, depending on the choice of utility function. Let ОёПҖ be a dS Г— 1 parameter vector.
According to Lemma F.1, in FaLPO, we parameterize the candidate policy function as
                      ПҖ(t, St , Zt , Yt ; ОёП• , ОёПҖ ) = О (t, St , Zt , П•(Yt ; ОёП• ); ОёПҖ ) = ОёПҖ
for power utility, and
                                                                                           ОёПҖ
                      ПҖ(t, St , Zt , Yt ; ОёП• , ОёПҖ ) = О (t, St , Zt , П•(Yt ; ОёП• ); ОёПҖ ) =
                                                                                           Zt
for exponential utility.


                                                        21
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


F.1.3    M ODEL C ALIBRATION
According to the Merton model formulation, there exist no factors affecting the evolution of stock
prices. Therefore, we do not add the model calibration objective in FaLPO for Merton problem.

F.2     K IM вҖ“O MBERG

KimвҖ“Omberg model (Kim & Omberg, 1996) is a standard model for portfolio optimization with
predictable asset returns, which has been discussed extensively in the empirical literature (Welch &
Goyal, 2008; Muhle-Karbe et al., 2017).

F.2.1    M ODELING
In KimвҖ“Omberg model, the stock dynamics are formulated as
                                                     dW
                                     dSti            X
                                          = Xt
                                              i
                                                dt +     Пғ ij dWtj
                                      Sti            j=1

                                    dXt = Вө(Пү вҲ’ Xt ) dt + v dWt .
The portfolio optimization goal is formulated as
                  max VМғ (ПҖМғt ) with VМғ (ПҖМғt ) := EПҖМғt [U (ZМғtПҖМғ )|X0 = x, Z0 = z, S0 = s].           (15)
                   ПҖМғt

F.2.2    P OLICY F UNCTIONAL F ORM
An optimal policy function is derived in Lemma F.2
L EMMA F.2 Under common assumptions in Kim & Omberg (1996); Herzog et al. (2004), an optimal
policy functional form for (15) with power utility is derived as
                                   1
                          ПҖМғ вҲ— =       (ПғПғ вҠӨ )вҲ’1 Xt + Пғv вҠӨ (k3 (t)Xt + k2 (t)) ,

                                 1вҲ’Оі
where k2 (t) and k3 (t) satisfy
dk1 (t) 1   вҠӨ                                                            Оі
         + Tr v (k2 (t)k2 (t)вҠӨ + k3 (t))v + (ВөПү)вҠӨ k2 (t) вҲ’                     (k2 (t)вҠӨ vv вҠӨ k2 (t)) = 0,
   dt       2                                                        2(Оі вҲ’ 1)
dk2 (t)                                                   Оі
         + k3 (t)vv вҠӨ k2 (t) вҲ’ ВөвҠӨ k2 (t) + k3 (t)ВөПү вҲ’         ((ПғПғ вҠӨ )вҲ’1 Пғvk2 (t) + k3 (t)vv вҠӨ k2 (t)) = 0,
   dt                                                   ОівҲ’1
dk3 (t)
         + k3 (t)vv вҠӨ k3 (t) вҲ’ k3 (t)Вө вҲ’ ВөвҠӨ k3 (t)
   dt
          Оі
    вҲ’         ((ПғПғ вҠӨ )вҲ’1 + (ПғПғ вҠӨ )вҲ’1 Пғv вҠӨ k3 (t) + k3 (t)vПғ вҠӨ (ПғПғ вҠӨ )вҲ’1 + k3 (t)vv вҠӨ k3 (t)) = 0,
       ОівҲ’1
with k1 (T ) = 0, k2 (T ) = 0, and k3 (T ) = 0. Note that k1 (t) is a scalar, k2 (t) is a dS Г— 1 vector, and
k3 (t) is a dX Г— dX . And the ODE of k3 (t) is the famous matrix Ricatti equation.
Similarly, an optimal policy functional form for (15) with exponential utility is derived as

                                        1
                     ПҖМғtвҲ— = (ПғПғ вҠӨ )вҲ’1          X(t) + Пғv вҠӨ
                                                           (k 3 (t)Xt + k2 (t))  ,
                                      вҲ’Оі 2 Zt
where k2 (t) and k3 (t) satisfy
   dk1 (t) 1   вҠӨ                                                    1
           + Tr v (k2 (t)k2 (t)вҠӨ + k3 (t))v + (ВөПү)вҠӨ k2 (t) вҲ’ (k2 (t)вҠӨ vv вҠӨ k2 (t)) = 0,
     dt       2                                                     2
   dk2 (t)
           + k3 (t)vv вҠӨ k2 (t) вҲ’ Вөk2 (t) + k3 (t)ВөПү вҲ’ ((ПғПғ вҠӨ )вҲ’1 Пғvk2 (t) + k3 (t)vv вҠӨ k2 (t)) = 0,
     dt
   dk3 (t)
           + k3 (t)vv вҠӨ k3 (t) вҲ’ k3 (t)Вө вҲ’ ВөвҠӨ k3 (t)
     dt
      вҲ’ ((ПғПғ вҠӨ )вҲ’1 + (ПғПғ вҠӨ )вҲ’1 Пғv вҠӨ k3 (t) + k3 (t)vПғ вҠӨ (ПғПғ вҠӨ )вҲ’1 + k3 (t)vv вҠӨ k3 (t)),
with k1 (T ) = 0, k2 (T ) = 0, and k3 (T ) = 0.


                                                    22
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


F.2.3     M ODEL C ALIBRATION
Following the derivation in Appendix
                                     E.2, the negative mean square loss for KimвҖ“Omberg model can
                                                                                  i 2
                                 PdS           i              i     i

be derived as L(ОёП• , ОёS ) := вҲ’E    i=1 log(St+вҲҶt ) вҲ’ log(St ) вҲ’ П• (Yt ; ОёП• )вҲҶt вҲ’ ОёS    , where in
this case ОёS is a dS Г— 1 vector.

F.3     EVE M ODEL WITH S TOCHASTIC M ARKOVIAN FACTORS

We take EVE model (Avanesyan et al., 2018) with stochastic Markovian factors as another example.

F.3.1     M ODELING
We first detail the modeling of EVE, which formulates the dynamics of asset prices by
                                            dW
                  dSti                      X
                       = Вөi (Xt ; Оё S )dt +     Пғji (Xt ; ОёS )dWtj ,   i = 1, 2, В· В· В· , dS ,
                   Sti                      j=1
                                                                                                        (16)
                  dXt = M Xt + Пү dt + Оә(Xt ; ОёS )вҠӨ dBt ,
                             вҠӨ


                   Bt = ПҒвҠӨ Wt + AвҠӨ WtвҠҘ .
We use Wt and WtвҠҘ to denote two sets of independent Brownian motions. ПҒ denotes a correlation
matrix with components ПҒij вҲҲ [вҲ’1, 1]. Therefore, B is indeed another Brownian motion. We let Вө,
Пғ, and Оә be parametric functions, with ОёS denoting all the parameters. The SDE parameters include
all the parameter matrices and ОІвҖҷs. Again, with Zt as the wealth, we aim to maximize the power
utility at the terminal time T > 0 as the performance objective:
                                                         ПҖМғ 1вҲ’Оі
                                                        (ZМғT )
                                       VМғ (ПҖМғt ) = EПҖМғ           .
                                                          1вҲ’Оі

EVE model poses further assumptions on (16).
A SSUMPTION F.3 M has non-negative off-diagonal entries and Пү вҲҲ [0, вҲһ)k . Further, we assume
that there exist О»(x), Оӣ and L, and N such that Вө(В·), Пғ(В·), Оә(В·) and ПҒ satisfy
                                                     вҠӨ
               О»(x)вҠӨ О»(x) = Вө(x)вҠӨ Пғ(x)вҲ’1 Пғ(x)вҲ’1 Вө(x) = ОӣвҠӨ x
              Оә(x)вҠӨ Оә(x) = diag(L1 x1 , L2 x2 , В· В· В· , Lk xk ), with L1 , L2 , В· В· В· , Lk вүҘ 0          (17)
                      вҠӨ вҠӨ             вҠӨ
              О“Оә(x) ПҒ О»(x) = N x.

The conditions in Assumption F.3 are necessary for the process of Xt to be [0, вҲһ)k -valued and affine.
Under these conditions, the SDE in (16) has a unique weak solution which is affine and takes values
in [0, вҲһ)k (FilipovicМҒ & Mayerhofer, 2009). Further, the EVE model requires the following two
assumptions:
A SSUMPTION F.4 (Assumption 2.2 in Avanesyan et al. (2018)) The functions Вө : dX вҶ’ dS ,             R   R
      R       R
Пғ : dX вҶ’ dW Г—dS are continuous. More over, the columns of ПҒ belong to the range of left-
                                     R
multiplication by Пғ(x) for all x вҲҲ dX .
A SSUMPTION F.5 (EVE Condition in Avanesyan et al. (2018)) For some p вҲҲ [0, 1],
                                                ПҒвҠӨ ПҒ = pI,
where I is the identity matrix. Note that when p = 1, ПҒ is a vector and thus we define p := ПҒвҠӨ ПҒ.

F.3.2     C ONCRETE E XAMPLE
We consider a more concrete example of EVE satisfying the formulation and assumptions in Ap-
pendix F.3.1. Specifically, we use DВө , DПғ , and DО» to denote diagonal matrices. Further, let D(x)
denote the diagonal matrix whose diagonal is x. Also, we use xв—Ұk for any k вҲҲ                    R
                                                                                    to denote the
component-wise power operation (Hadamard power).


                                                    23
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Then, we define
                                                            3
                                           Вө(x) := DВө xв—Ұ 2
                                           Пғ(x) := DПғ D(x)
                                                                       1
                                           Оә(x) := ПҒвҲ’1 DОә D(xв—Ұ 2 ).
Then, we have
                                                                   1
                                             О»(x) = DПғвҲ’1 DВө xв—Ұ 2 .
Further, we pose
                                                 ПҒвҠӨ ПҒ = ПҒПҒвҠӨ = I.

Then,
                       вҠӨ                     1
      О»(x) = Пғ(x)вҲ’1    Вө(x) = DПғвҲ’1 xв—Ұ 2 and О»(x)вҠӨ О»(x) = DПғвҲ’2 x,
                           1       вҠӨ             1
      Оә(x)вҠӨ Оә(x) = DОә D(xв—Ұ 2 ) ПҒвҲ’1 ПҒвҲ’1 DОә D(xв—Ұ 2 ) = DОә2 D(x),
                              1          вҠӨ          1          1          1
      О“Оә(x)вҠӨ ПҒвҠӨ О»(x) = О“D(xв—Ұ 2 )DОә ПҒвҲ’1 ПҒвҠӨ DПғвҲ’1 xв—Ұ 2 = О“D(xв—Ұ 2 )DОә DПғвҲ’1 xв—Ұ 2 = О“DОә DПғвҲ’1 x.

Such a setup is shown satisfies (16).

F.3.3     P OLICY F UNCTIONAL F ORM
The policy functional form of the EVE model with Markovian stochastic factors ca be derived as:
L EMMA F.6 Under the assumptions in Appendix F.3.1 and Appendix F.3.2, the optimal policy
function follows:
                       вҲ—   1       вҲ’1                          вҠӨ
                      ПҖt = Пғ(Xt )       О»(Xt ) + qПҒОә(Xt )k2 (t) ,
                           Оі
with
                                     dX
          dk2i (t) 1                 X                       О“
                  + Li (k2 (t)i )2 +     (M + N )ij k2 (t)j + Оӣi = 0,                 i = 1, 2, В· В· В· , dX
            dt     2                 j=1
                                                             2q
          dk1 (t)
                  + Пү вҠӨ k2 (t) = 0.
            dt
For the specific example in F.3.2, in FaLPO, we parameterize the candidate policy as
                                                                                  1
                     ПҖ(t, Yt , Zt ; ОёП• , ОёПҖ ) = О (t, Yt , Zt ; ОёП• , ОёПҖ ) = П•(Yt ) 2 k(t; ОёПҖ ).

F.4     M ODEL C ALIBRATION

Following the derivations in Section E.2, we can derive the calibration objective as:
                                                                           3                         2
           L(ОёS ) := вҲ’ min           E вҲҶ log(St ) вҲ’ C1 П•(Yt ; ОёП• )в—Ұ 2 вҲҶt вҲ’ C2 П•(Yt ; ОёП• )в—Ұ2 вҲҶt           .
                     ОёS =(C1 ,C2 )                                                                   2


G      S OLUTIONS OF R ICCATI D IFFERENTIAL E QUATIONS
According to the analysis in Section F, the optimal policy function is closely related to the solutions
of Riccati differential equations, which also have closed-form solutions.
Specifically, with abuse of notation, let A, B and D be p Г— p matrices, and X(t) : [0, T ] вҶ’                 RpГ—p as
a function of t solving the following Riccati differential equation:
                      вҲӮdX(t)
                             = AвҠӨ X(t) + X(t)A вҲ’ X(t)BB вҠӨ X(t) + DвҠӨ D,
                        dt                                                                                      (18)
                        X(0) = X0 .


                                                       24
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Following the analysis and assumptions in (Behr et al., 2019), the unique symmetric positive stabiliz-
ing solution of X(t) follows:
                             вҠӨ                                      вҠӨ              вҲ’1
          X(t) = XвҲһ вҲ’ etAМӮ XвҲһ вҲ’ X0 I вҲ’ (XL вҲ’ etAМӮ XL etAМӮ )(XвҲһ вҲ’ X0 ) etAМӮ ,


where
                                    AМӮXL + XL AМӮвҠӨ + BB вҠӨ = 0,
with AМӮ := A вҲ’ BB вҠӨ XвҲһ , and
                                   0 = AвҠӨXвҲһ + XвҲһ A + DвҠӨ D.

Note that with (18) we can further derive the policy functional forms without using neural networks
to parameterize time-dependent fucntions.

H     E XTENSION TO L INEAR Q UADRATIC C ONTROL (LQC)
The methodology of FaLPO can also be applied to decision-making problems other than portfolio
optimization. To implement FaLPO, one needs to first construct a neural stochastic factor model
combining factor representation with a continuous-time model. Then, the policy learning is conducted
while leveraging policy functional form and model calibration. As an example, we implement
FaLPO to linear quadratic control (LQC), and detail modeling (Section H.1), policy functional form
(Section H.2) and model calibration (Section H.3).

H.1     M ODELING

We consider the problem of LQC (Sun & Yong, 2020) but with stochastic factor Xt following an OU
process. With slight abuse of notation, we use St to denote the sate variable in this section:
                                                               dW
                                                               X
                          dSt = (BSt + U At + Xt ) dt +           Dj At dWtj ,
                                                               j=1
                                                                                                  (19)
                           Xt = ВөXt dt + v dWt ,
where B, U , Вө, v, and Dj are redefined as matrices with appropriate dimensions. With At = ПҖ(В·)
following the policy ПҖ, we aim to solve
                                       Z T
                                            (QSt )вҠӨ St + (RAt )вҠӨ At dt + (GST )вҠӨ ST ,

         max V (ПҖ) with V (ПҖ) := EПҖ                                                        (20)
           ПҖ                               0

with Q, R, and G as known matrices with appropriate dimensions, and T is terminal time. Further,
we apply the modeling strategy in Section 3.1 and aim to learn the representation of stochastic factors
from the available features Yt :
                                          Xt = П•(Yt ; ОёП•вҲ— ).

H.2     P OLICY F UNCTIONAL F ORM

By taking Оһt (the combination of St and Xt ) as the state variables, we can reformulate the problem
as a classic LQC problem:
                                                     dW
                                                     X
                         dОһt = B Оһ Оһt + U Оһ At +           (DjОһ At + ОІtОһ )dWtj ,
                                                     j=1

with all the coefficients redefined. Then, under common assumptions in Sun & Yong (2020); Yong &
Zhou (1999), it can be derived that the optimal policy satisfies:
                                                                 вҠӨ
                              ПҖМғ вҲ— (t, Оҫ) = ОӣОһ (K Оһ (t))вҲ’1 (U Оһ ) K Оһ (t)Оҫ,
where
                                                    dW
                                                    X
                              ОӣОһ (K Оһ (t)) = R +          (DjвҠӨ K Оһ (t)Dj ).
                                                    j=1


                                                   25
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Also, K Оһ (t) solves the differential Riccati equation:
                        Оһ вҠӨ                        Оһ
      K Оһ (t) = вҲ’ e(B ) (T вҲ’t) GОһ eB (T вҲ’t)
                  Z T
                         Оһ вҠӨ                                      вҲ’1 Оһ вҠӨ Оһ        Оһ вҠӨ
                вҲ’     e(B ) (T вҲ’П„ ) K Оһ (П„ )вҠӨ U Оһ ОӣОһ (K Оһ (П„ ))вҠӨ    (U ) K (П„ )e(B ) (T вҲ’П„ ) dП„,
                    t
with
                                          K Оһ (T ) = 0.
Therefore, we can formulate the candidate policy as
            ПҖ(t, St , Yt ; ОёП• , ОёПҖ ) = О (t, St , Yt ; ОёП• , ОёПҖ ) = k1 (t; ОёПҖ )St + k2 (t; ОёПҖ )П•(Yt ; ОёП• ).   (21)

H.3     M ODEL C ALIBRATION

According to (19) and following the derivation strategy in Appendix E.2, we can derive the negative
mean square loss for LQC as
                                                                              2
                 L(ОёП• , ОёS ) := E вҲҘSt+вҲҶt St вҲ’ П•(Yt ; ОёП• )вҲҶt вҲ’ C1 St вҲ’ C2 At вҲҘ2 ,               (22)
with ОёS = {C1 , C2 }.
As a summary, to apply FaLPO to LQC with stochastic factors, we parameterize candidate policies
following (21) and maximize
                                                 (1 вҲ’ О»V (ОёП• , ОёПҖ )) + О»L(ОёП• , ОёS ),
with V in (20) and L in (22).

I     E XTENDED R ESULTS FOR T HEOREM 4.1
I.1    A SSUMPTIONS AND D EFINITIONS

To start with, we consider stochastic factor models such that the optimal feedback admissible policy
admits a functional form as
                                          ПҖМғtвҲ— = О (t, Xt ; ОёПҖМғвҲ— ).
Also, we consider the L function such that the true data generating parameters ОёSвҲ— , ОёП•вҲ— satisfy
                                                   ОёSвҲ— , ОёП•вҲ— вҲҲ arg max L(ОёП• , ОёS ),                         (23)
                                                                   ОёП• ,ОёS

while other options for L can also be empirically used in our method.
D EFINITION I.1 For a continuous-time policy ПҖМғt := О (t, St , Zt , П•(Yt ; ОёП• ); ОёПҖМғ ), we define its value
function as
                                    VМғ (ОёП• , ОёПҖ ) := E[U (ZTПҖМғ )].
Accordingly, we define the continuous-time version objective function as
                                  HМғ(ОёП• , ОёПҖМғ , ОёS ) := (1 вҲ’ О»)VМғ (ОёП• , ОёПҖМғ ) + О»L(ОёП• , ОёS ).
D EFINITION I.2 For t вҲҲ [mвҲҶt, (m + 1)вҲҶt), define вҢҠtвҢӢ := mвҲҶt and вҢҠПҖМғtвҲ— вҢӢ := ПҖМғвҢҠtвҢӢ
                                                                             вҲ—
                                                                                 .
D EFINITION I.3 For the continuous-time optimal policy ПҖМғ вҲ— , we use вҢҠПҖМғ вҲ— вҢӢ to denote the piece-wise
                                   вҢҠПҖМғ вҲ— вҢӢ
constant version ПҖМғ вҲ— . We use ZМғt         to denote the wealth process when implementing the optimal
continuous-time policy ПҖМғ(В·; ОёП•вҲ— , ОёПҖвҲ— ) in the piece-wise constant manner. Specifically,
                                                  dS    вҲ— i
                        вҢҠПҖМғ вҲ— вҢӢ         вҢҠПҖМғ вҲ— вҢӢ
                                                  X  (ПҖМғвҢҠtвҢӢ ) dSti
                   dZМғt           :=ZМғвҢҠtвҢӢ                    i
                                                  i=1
                                                            SвҢҠtвҢӢ
                                       dS
                                       X                                                   Sti вҢҠПҖМғвҲ— вҢӢ
                                   =              О i (вҢҠtвҢӢ, XвҢҠtвҢӢ ; ОёПҖМғвҲ— )fSi (Xt ; ОёSвҲ— )     i
                                                                                               ZМғвҢҠtвҢӢ dt
                                       i=1
                                                                                          SвҢҠtвҢӢ
                                                                     dW                 i

                                                                                   вҲ— St    вҢҠПҖМғ вҲ— вҢӢ
                                                                     X    ij                       j
                                       + О  (вҢҠtвҢӢ, XвҢҠtвҢӢ ; ОёПҖМғвҲ— )
                                             i
                                                                         gS (Xt ; ОёS ) i ZМғвҢҠtвҢӢ dWt .
                                                                     j=1
                                                                                      SвҢҠtвҢӢ


                                                                     26
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                              вҲ—
Further, remember ZМғtПҖМғ is used to denote the continuous-time wealth process under the policy ПҖМғ вҲ— . By
                                                                                         вҲ—
the dynamics of continuous-time wealth process ZМғtПҖМғ in Section 2.3 the dynamics of ZМғtПҖМғ is derived as
                    вҲ—
               dZМғtПҖМғ
                      вҲ—
                        = О (t, Xt ; ОёПҖМғвҲ— )вҠӨ fS (Xt ; ОёSвҲ— )dt + О (t, Xt ; ОёПҖМғвҲ— )вҠӨ gS (Xt ; ОёSвҲ— )вҠӨ dWt .
                ZМғtПҖМғ
A SSUMPTION I.4 For each R > 0, if вҲҘxвҲҘ вүӨ R and t вүӨ T , we assume that there exists a CR > 0
such that
         вҲҘО (t, x; ОёПҖвҲ— )вҲҘ вҲЁ вҲҘfS (x; ОёSвҲ— )вҲҘ вҲЁ вҲҘgS (x; ОёSвҲ— )вҲҘ вҲЁ вҲҘfX (x; ОёSвҲ— )вҲҘ вҲЁ вҲҘgX (x; ОёSвҲ— )вҲҘ вүӨ CR ,
and О (t, x; ОёПҖвҲ— ) is locally Lipschitz with Lipschitz constant CR .
For some p > 2, there exists a constant A such that
                вҲ—                    вҢҠПҖМғ вҲ— вҢӢ        p              p
   E sup |ZМғtПҖМғ |p вҲЁ E sup |ZМғt |p вҲЁ E sup вҲҘXt вҲҘ вҲЁ E sup вҲҘlog(St )вҲҘ вүӨ A.

       0вүӨtвүӨT                      0вүӨtвүӨT                   0вүӨtвүӨT                    0вүӨtвүӨT


Note that Assumption I.4 requires the stochastic processes to have bounded high-order moments. For
a specific model like KimвҖ“Omberg, this is not guaranteed to hold for every initial value and SDE
coefficient, but one can derive model-specific sufficient conditions for Assumption I.4. In practice
when implementing the method, we calculate the empirical moments of wealth, factors and asset
prices to approximately check whether Assumption I.4 holds.
With Assumption I.4, we define a stopping time:
D EFINITION I.5 For R > 0, define a stopping time

                              вҲ—                                           вҢҠПҖМғ вҲ— вҢӢ
         П„R :=    inf | |ZМғtПҖМғ | вүҘ R or вҲҘXt вҲҘ вүҘ R or вҲҘlog(St )вҲҘ вүҘ R or |ZМғt | вүҘ R .
                     0вүӨtвүӨT

A SSUMPTION I.6 The utility function U (z) has a linear bound on Z:
                                            |U (z)| вүӨ CU (|z| + 1).

Note that Assumption I.6 holds as long as the utility function is bounded at the smallest value in Z.
Specifically for power utility, Assumption I.6 is equivalent to setting Оі вҲҲ (0, 1).
A SSUMPTION I.7 There exists вҲҶtвҖІ > 0 such that for any вҲҶt < вҲҶtвҖІ , вҢҠПҖМғ вҲ— вҢӢ is also an admissible
policy.

I.2   L EMMAS

L EMMA I.8 Consider n non-negative constants c1 , c2 , В· В· В· , cn . The following inequality is true:
                                              Xn            n
                                                            X
                                             (   ci ) 2 вүӨ n   c2i .
                                              i=1             i=1


Proof. The proof follows the Cauchy-Schwartz inequality.                                                 в–Ў
L EMMA I.9 (ОёП•вҲ— , ОёПҖМғвҲ— , ОёSвҲ— ) maximizes both VМғ (ОёП• , ОёПҖМғ ) and L(ОёП• , ОёS ).

Proof. First of all, since ОёПҖМғвҲ— is defined to be the optimal parameter for the continuous-time policy
and ОёП•вҲ— is defined to be the true data generating parameter, (ОёП•вҲ— , ОёПҖвҲ— ) maximizes VМғ . Then, by (23),
(ОёП•вҲ— , ОёSвҲ— ) maximize L.                                                                            в–Ў
L EMMA I.10 For any Оҙ > 0,
                    вҢҠПҖМғ вҲ— вҢӢ          вҲ—                вҢҠПҖМғ вҲ— вҢӢ  ПҖМғ вҲ—
                                                                          2p+1 ОҙA   (p вҲ’ 2)8A
                              вҲ’ ZМғtПҖМғ )2 ] вүӨ E sup (ZМғtвҲ§П„R вҲ’ ZМғtвҲ§П„    )2 +

      E[ sup (ZМғt                                                                 + 2/(pвҲ’2) p .
         0вүӨtвүӨT                                  0вүӨtвүӨT
                                                                    R
                                                                             p     pОҙ       R

Proof. Proof by applying YoungвҖҷs inequality. See derivation in Higham et al. (2002, Equation (2.8)).
в–Ў


                                                        27
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                                                                                                                                                вҲ—
L EMMA I.11 For any t вүӨ П„R , the difference between the coefficients of the dynamics of ZМғtПҖМғ and
  вҢҠПҖМғ вҲ— вҢӢ
ZМғt       are bounded by:

           dS                                                dS                                                                                         2
           X                                        вҲ—        X                                               вҢҠПҖМғ вҲ— вҢӢ                         Sti
                 О (t, Xt ; ОёПҖвҲ— )fSi (Xt ; ОёSвҲ— )ZМғtПҖМғ вҲ’                   О (вҢҠtвҢӢ, XвҢҠtвҢӢ ; ОёПҖвҲ— )fSi (Xt ; ОёSвҲ— )ZМғвҢҠtвҢӢ                              i
           i=1                                                   i=1
                                                                                                                                            SвҢҠtвҢӢ
                                                                              2                                                      2
           вүӨ 5d2S exp(2R)CR
                          4
                                            exp(2R)R |t вҲ’ вҢҠtвҢӢ| + exp(2R)R2 Xt вҲ’ XвҢҠtвҢӢ
                                                        2


                                                                                        2                                                          2
                                    2                            вҲ—            вҢҠПҖМғ вҲ— вҢӢ                                   вҢҠПҖМғ вҲ— вҢӢ          вҢҠПҖМғ вҲ— вҢӢ
           + R2 SвҢҠtвҢӢ вҲ’ St               + exp(2R) ZМғtПҖМғ вҲ’ ZМғt                               + exp(2R) ZМғt                         вҲ’ ZМғвҢҠtвҢӢ            ,

and

  dS                     dW                                     dS                  dW                                                                              2
                                             i
                                                             X
                                       вҲ— St      вҢҠПҖМғ вҲ— вҢӢ                                                  ПҖМғ вҲ—
 X                       X    ij
                                                                                    X        ij
                     вҲ—                                                           вҲ—                   вҲ—

      О (вҢҠtвҢӢ, XвҢҠtвҢӢ ; ОёПҖ )     gS (Xt ; ОёS ) i ZМғвҢҠtвҢӢ           вҲ’      О (t, Xt ; ОёПҖ )         gS (Xt ; ОёS )ZМғt
 i=1                     j=1
                                          SвҢҠtвҢӢ                 i=1                  j=1

                                               2                                  2
   вүӨ5d2S exp(2R)CR   4
                         exp(2R)R2 |t вҲ’ вҢҠtвҢӢ| + exp(2R)R2 Xt вҲ’ XвҢҠtвҢӢ

                                                           2                                  2
                          2                вҲ—     вҢҠПҖМғ вҲ— вҢӢ                  вҢҠПҖМғ вҲ— вҢӢ     вҢҠПҖМғ вҲ— вҢӢ
     + R2 SвҢҠtвҢӢ вҲ’ St + exp(2R) ZМғtПҖМғ вҲ’ ZМғt                    + exp(2R) ZМғt        вҲ’ ZМғвҢҠtвҢӢ        .


Proof.
By triangle inequality

                   dS                                  dS
                   X                              вҲ—    X                                            вҢҠПҖМғ вҲ— вҢӢ    Sti
                         ПҖМғti fSi (Xt ; ОёSвҲ— )ZМғtПҖМғ вҲ’           i
                                                             ПҖМғвҢҠtвҢӢ fSi (Xt ; ОёSвҲ— )ZМғвҢҠtвҢӢ                         i
                   i=1                                 i=1
                                                                                                              SвҢҠtвҢӢ
                 dS
                X    1                                       вҲ—                                  вҲ—
              вүӨ       i
                        fSi (Xt ; ОёSвҲ— )            ПҖМғti ZМғtПҖМғ SвҢҠtвҢӢ
                                                               i       i
                                                                   вҲ’ ПҖМғвҢҠtвҢӢ ZМғtПҖМғ SвҢҠtвҢӢ
                                                                                  i
                    S
                i=1 вҢҠtвҢӢ
                       i        вҲ—               вҢҠПҖМғ вҲ— вҢӢ i           вҢҠПҖМғ вҲ— вҢӢ i           вҢҠПҖМғ вҲ— вҢӢ
                           ZМғtПҖМғ SвҢҠtвҢӢ
                                  i       i                   i                   i
                                                                                      ZМғвҢҠtвҢӢ Sti .

                   + ПҖМғвҢҠtвҢӢ            вҲ’ ПҖМғвҢҠtвҢӢ ZМғвҢҠtвҢӢ SвҢҠtвҢӢ  + ПҖМғвҢҠtвҢӢ ZМғвҢҠtвҢӢ SвҢҠtвҢӢ  вҲ’ ПҖМғвҢҠtвҢӢ

For any t вүӨ П„R , we can further bound the right hand side by Assumption I.4

                     dS                                  dS
                     X                              вҲ—    X                                             вҢҠПҖМғ вҲ— вҢӢ    Sti
                           ПҖМғti fSi (Xt ; ОёSвҲ— )ZМғtПҖМғ вҲ’                 i
                                                                     ПҖМғвҢҠtвҢӢ fSi (Xt ; ОёSвҲ— )ZМғвҢҠtвҢӢ                    i
                     i=1                                 i=1
                                                                                                                 SвҢҠtвҢӢ
                            2

                 вүӨdS exp(R)CR   exp(R)R |t вҲ’ вҢҠtвҢӢ| + Xt вҲ’ XвҢҠtвҢӢ
                                вҲ—    вҢҠПҖМғ вҲ— вҢӢ     вҢҠПҖМғ вҲ— вҢӢ     вҢҠПҖМғ вҲ— вҢӢ
                  + exp(R) ZМғtПҖМғ вҲ’ ZМғt

                                             + ZМғt       вҲ’ ZМғвҢҠtвҢӢ       + R SвҢҠtвҢӢ вҲ’ St .


Then, by Lemma I.8

            dS                                   dS                                                            2
            X                               вҲ—    X                            вҢҠПҖМғ вҲ— вҢӢ                Sti
                   ПҖМғti fSi (Xt ; ОёSвҲ— )ZМғtПҖМғ вҲ’           i
                                                       ПҖМғвҢҠtвҢӢ fSi (Xt ; ОёSвҲ— )ZМғвҢҠtвҢӢ                     i
             i=1                                 i=1
                                                                                                    SвҢҠtвҢӢ
                                                     2                2
         вүӨ5d2S exp(2R)CR
                       4
                           exp(2R)R2 |t вҲ’ вҢҠtвҢӢ| + Xt вҲ’ XвҢҠtвҢӢ


                                       2                        2
                         вҲ—     вҢҠПҖМғ вҲ— вҢӢ       вҢҠПҖМғ вҲ— вҢӢ     вҢҠПҖМғ вҲ— вҢӢ                  2
          + exp(2R) ZМғtПҖМғ вҲ’ ZМғt          + ZМғt       вҲ’ ZМғвҢҠtвҢӢ       + R2 SвҢҠtвҢӢ вҲ’ St
                                                   2                           2
         =5d2S exp(2R)CR
                       4
                           exp(2R)R2 |t вҲ’ вҢҠtвҢӢ| + exp(2R)R2 Xt вҲ’ XвҢҠtвҢӢ


                                                                                            2                                                        2
                                        2                            вҲ—            вҢҠПҖМғ вҲ— вҢӢ                                 вҢҠПҖМғ вҲ— вҢӢ          вҢҠПҖМғ вҲ— вҢӢ
            + R2 SвҢҠtвҢӢ вҲ’ St                  + exp(2R) ZМғtПҖМғ вҲ’ ZМғt                               + exp(2R) ZМғt                       вҲ’ ZМғвҢҠtвҢӢ                 .


                                                                         28
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Similarly
                                                                                                                                    2
             dS        dW                 i
                                                         X dS      dW
                                     вҲ— St    вҢҠПҖМғ вҲ— вҢӢ                                  ПҖМғ вҲ—
            X          X    ij
                                                                   X    ij
                   i                                             i               вҲ—

                 ПҖМғвҢҠtвҢӢ     gS (Xt ; ОёS ) i ZМғвҢҠtвҢӢ        вҲ’      ПҖМғt     gS (Xt ; ОёS )ZМғt
            i=1        j=1
                                        SвҢҠtвҢӢ              i=1      j=1
                                                        2                             2
            вүӨ 5d2S exp(2R)CR  4
                                  exp(2R)R2 |t вҲ’ вҢҠtвҢӢ| + exp(2R)R2 Xt вҲ’ XвҢҠtвҢӢ


                                                                                      2                                             2
                                   2                              вҲ—         вҢҠПҖМғ вҲ— вҢӢ                         вҢҠПҖМғ вҲ— вҢӢ       вҢҠПҖМғ вҲ— вҢӢ
            + R2 SвҢҠtвҢӢ вҲ’ St             + exp(2R) ZМғtПҖМғ вҲ’ ZМғt                              + exp(2R) ZМғt               вҲ’ ZМғвҢҠtвҢӢ            .

                                                                                                                                             в–Ў
L EMMA I.12 With П„R defined in Definition I.5,
                                                              2       2
                        E XtвҲ§П„R вҲ’ XвҢҠtвҲ§П„R вҢӢ                        вүӨ 2CR (вҲҶt2 + вҲҶt),
                                                          2               2
                        E StвҲ§П„R вҲ’ SвҢҠtвҲ§П„R вҢӢ                    вүӨ 2 exp(2R)CR (вҲҶt2 + вҲҶt),
                                                          2
                                вҢҠПҖМғ вҲ— вҢӢ         вҢҠПҖМғ вҲ— вҢӢ
                        E ZМғвҢҠtвҲ§П„R вҢӢ вҲ’ ZМғtвҲ§П„R                      вүӨ 2R2 exp(4R)CR
                                                                                4
                                                                                  (вҲҶt2 + вҲҶt).

Proof. By the dynamics of Xt and Lemma I.8, we can derive
                               Z tвҲ§П„R                         Z tвҲ§П„R                                                                             2
                     2                                 2
E XtвҲ§П„R вҲ’ XвҢҠtвҲ§П„R вҢӢ вүӨ 2вҲҶtE              вҲҘfX (Xs ; ОёSвҲ— )вҲҘ ds+2E                                                           gX (Xs ; ОёSвҲ— )вҠӨ dWs          ,
                                           mtвҲ§П„R вҲҶt                                                       mtвҲ§П„R вҲҶt

where mtвҲ§П„R satisfies mtвҲ§П„R вҲҶt вүӨ (t вҲ§ П„R ) < (mtвҲ§П„R + 1)вҲҶt. Further, we apply ItoМӮвҖҷs isometry
with stopping time (Lemma D.2), and derive
                                Z tвҲ§П„R                              Z tвҲ§П„R
                      2                                    2                               2
E XtвҲ§П„R вҲ’ XвҢҠtвҲ§П„R вҢӢ вүӨ 2вҲҶtE                  вҲҘfX (Xs ; ОёSвҲ— )вҲҘ ds + 2E        вҲҘgX (Xs ; ОёSвҲ— )вҲҘ ds.
                                            mtвҲ§П„R вҲҶt                                                      mtвҲ§П„R вҲҶt

By Assumption I.4, we derive
                                                                        2       2
                                E XtвҲ§П„R вҲ’ XвҢҠtвҲ§П„R вҢӢ                          вүӨ 2CR (вҲҶt2 + вҲҶt).

Similarly
                                                              2                   2
                         E StвҲ§П„R вҲ’ SвҢҠtвҲ§П„R вҢӢ                           вүӨ 2 exp(2R)CR (вҲҶt2 + вҲҶt),
and
                                                          2
                                вҢҠПҖМғ вҲ— вҢӢ         вҢҠПҖМғ вҲ— вҢӢ
                        E ZМғвҢҠtвҲ§П„R вҢӢ вҲ’ ZМғtвҲ§П„R                      вүӨ 2R2 exp(4R)CR
                                                                                4
                                                                                  (вҲҶt2 + вҲҶt).
                                                                                                                                             в–Ў
L EMMA I.13
            ПҖМғ вҲ—       вҢҠПҖМғ вҲ— вҢӢ
                   вҲ’ ZМғtвҲ§tk )2 вүӨ10(T + 4)T d2S CR
                                                4
                                                  exp(4R)R2 вҲҶt2 + 2CR
                                                                    2
                                                                      (вҲҶt2 + вҲҶt)

  E sup (ZМғtвҲ§t   k
       0вүӨtвүӨП„
                                               2
                                                 (вҲҶt2 + вҲҶt) + 2 exp(4R)CR4
                                                                           (вҲҶt2 + вҲҶt)

                                          + 2CR
                                                                    Z П„                              2
                                                                                 ПҖМғ вҲ—        вҢҠПҖМғ вҲ— вҢӢ
                                          + 10(T + 4)d2S CR
                                                          4
                                                            exp(4R)     E sup ZМғrвҲ§П„   R
                                                                                         вҲ’ ZМғrвҲ§П„R ds.
                                                                                              0         0вүӨrвүӨs

Proof.
                                                                                      вҲ—       вҢҠПҖМғ вҲ— вҢӢ
By CauchyвҖ“Schwarz inequality and the dynamics of ZМғtПҖМғ and ZМғt                                          , for any П„ вүӨ T
              ПҖМғ вҲ—       вҢҠПҖМғ вҲ— вҢӢ
                     вҲ’ ZМғtвҲ§tk )2

    E sup (ZМғtвҲ§t   k
           0вүӨtвүӨП„
                  Z tвҲ§П„R XdS                          dS                                  2
                                                                                       i

                                                ПҖМғ вҲ—                          вҢҠПҖМғ вҲ— вҢӢ Ss
                                                     X
                               i i         вҲ—               i    i        вҲ—
      вүӨ2T E sup              ПҖМғs fS (Xs ; ОёS )ZМғs вҲ’      ПҖМғвҢҠsвҢӢ fS (Xs ; ОёS )ZМғвҢҠsвҢӢ i        ds
             0вүӨtвүӨП„ 0     i=1                         i=1
                                                                                     SвҢҠtвҢӢ
                                                                                        2
                              dS
                  dW Z tвҲ§П„R   X
                                                   ПҖМғ вҲ—
                  X
                                   i ij       вҲ—          i    ij        вҲ—   i   i     j
         + 2E sup                ПҖМғs g (Xs ; ОёS )ZМғs вҲ’ ПҖМғвҢҠsвҢӢ g (XвҢҠsвҢӢ ; ОёS )Ss /SвҢҠsвҢӢ dWs .
               0вүӨtвүӨП„ j=1    0             i=1



                                                                       29
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Then, by DoobвҖҷs martingale inequality


                  ПҖМғ вҲ—       вҢҠПҖМғ вҲ— вҢӢ
                         вҲ’ ZМғtвҲ§tk )2

         E sup (ZМғtвҲ§t  k
            0вүӨtвүӨП„
                Z tвҲ§П„R XdS                                 dS                                     2
                                                                                               i

                                                  ПҖМғ вҲ—                               вҢҠПҖМғ вҲ— вҢӢ Ss
                                                          X
                             i i            вҲ—                   i     i        вҲ—
    вүӨ2T E sup              ПҖМғs fS (Xs ; ОёS )ZМғs вҲ’             ПҖМғвҢҠsвҢӢ fS (Xs ; ОёS )ZМғвҢҠsвҢӢ i           ds
           0вүӨtвүӨП„ 0     i=1                                i=1
                                                                                            SвҢҠtвҢӢ
               dW Z tвҲ§П„R   X
               X            dS                                                                          2
                                                          вҲ—
     + 8T E                     ПҖМғsi g ij (Xs ; ОёSвҲ— )ZМғsПҖМғ вҲ’ ПҖМғвҢҠsвҢӢ
                                                                i
                                                                    g ij (XвҢҠsвҢӢ ; ОёSвҲ— )Ssi /SвҢҠsвҢӢ
                                                                                             i
                                                                                                  dWsj     .
                         j=1   0           i=1


Next, we apply Lemma I.11,
              ПҖМғ вҲ—       вҢҠПҖМғ вҲ— вҢӢ
                     вҲ’ ZМғtвҲ§tk )2

     E sup (ZМғtвҲ§t  k
           0вүӨtвүӨП„
                                              Z П„ вҲ§П„R
                                                                                        2                  2
   вүӨ10(T + 4)d2S CR
                  4
                    exp(2R)E                exp(2R)R2 |s вҲ’ вҢҠsвҢӢ| + exp(2R)R2 Xs вҲ’ XвҢҠsвҢӢ
                                   0

                                                       2                                2
                          2            ПҖМғ вҲ—    вҢҠПҖМғ вҲ— вҢӢ               вҢҠПҖМғ вҲ— вҢӢ     вҢҠПҖМғ вҲ— вҢӢ
         + R2    SвҢҠsвҢӢ вҲ’ Ss + exp(2R) ZМғs вҲ’ ZМғs           + exp(2R) ZМғs       вҲ’ ZМғвҢҠsвҢӢ       ds .

Therefore, combined with I.12,
             ПҖМғ вҲ—       вҢҠПҖМғ вҲ— вҢӢ
                    вҲ’ ZМғtвҲ§tk )2 вүӨ10(T + 4)T d2S CR
                                                 4
                                                   exp(4R)R2 вҲҶt2 + 2CR
                                                                     2
                                                                       (вҲҶt2 + вҲҶt)

  E sup (ZМғtвҲ§t    k
     0вүӨtвүӨП„
                                                  2
                                                    (вҲҶt2 + вҲҶt) + 2 exp(4R)CR4
                                                                              (вҲҶt2 + вҲҶt)

                                             + 2CR
                                                                       Z П„                              2
                                                                                    ПҖМғ вҲ—        вҢҠПҖМғ вҲ— вҢӢ
                                             + 10(T + 4)d2S CR
                                                             4
                                                               exp(4R)     E sup ZМғrвҲ§П„   R
                                                                                            вҲ’ ZМғrвҲ§П„R ds.
                                                                                   0        0вүӨrвүӨs

                                                                                                               в–Ў
L EMMA I.14 With the definitions and assumptions in Section I.1,
                                                          вҢҠПҖМғ вҲ— вҢӢ         вҲ—
                                                 lim E[(ZМғT         вҲ’ ZМғTПҖМғ )2 ] = 0.
                                             вҲҶtвҶ’0


Proof.
By Lemma I.13, we apply the Gronwall inequality and obtain
             ПҖМғ вҲ—       ПҖМғ вҲ—
                               )2

   E sup (ZМғtвҲ§t   k
                    вҲ’ ZМғtвҲ§t  k
         0вүӨtвүӨT

                 вүӨ 10(T + 4)T d2S CR
                                   4
                                     exp(4R)R2 вҲҶt2 + 2CR 2
                                                           (вҲҶt2 + вҲҶt)


                     2
                       (вҲҶt2 + вҲҶt) + 2 exp(4R)CR 4
                                                  (вҲҶt2 + вҲҶt) exp(10(T + 4)d2S CR
                                                                               4

                 + 2CR                                                           exp(4R)).

Then, combined with Lemma I.10, for any Оҙ > 0,
                     вҲ—         вҢҠПҖМғ вҲ— вҢӢ 2
    E[ sup (ZМғtПҖМғ вҲ’ ZМғt              ) ]
         0вүӨtвүӨT

                 вүӨ 10(T + 4)T d2S CR
                                   4
                                     exp(4R)R2 вҲҶt2 + 2CR 2
                                                           (вҲҶt2 + вҲҶt)


                     2
                       (вҲҶt2 + вҲҶt) + 2 exp(4R)CR 4
                                                  (вҲҶt2 + вҲҶt) exp(10(T + 4)d2S CR
                                                                               4

                 + 2CR                                                           exp(4R))
                     2p+1 ОҙA   (p вҲ’ 2)8A
                 +           + 2/(pвҲ’2) p .
                        p     pОҙ       R
                                     вҲ—       вҢҠПҖМғ вҲ— вҢӢ 2
Therefore, E[sup0вүӨtвүӨT (ZМғtПҖМғ вҲ’ ZМғt                 ) ] converges to 0 as вҲҶt goes to 0.                         в–Ў


                                                               30
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


I.3   P ROOF

For ease of presentation, we define
               Оё := (ОёП• , ОёПҖ , ОёS ), ОёвҲ— := (ОёП•вҲ— , ОёПҖМғвҲ— , ОёSвҲ— ) and ОёвҲҶt
                                                                    вҲ—       вҲ—
                                                                       := (ОёП•,вҲҶt    вҲ—
                                                                                 , ОёПҖ,вҲҶt    вҲ—
                                                                                         , ОёS,вҲҶt ).
Note that every discrete-time admissible policy is a continuous-time admissible policy. Thus, the
continuous-time admissible policy set includes the discrete-time admissible policy set. Therefore,
                                                VМғ (ОёвҲ— ) вүҘ VвҲҶt
                                                            вҲ—
                                                               .
In other words, it is enough to bound VМғ (ОёвҲ— ) вҲ’ V (ОёвҲҶt
                                                     вҲ—
                                                        ) for the proof. By Lemma I.9, ОёвҲ— maximizes
VМғ and L simultaneously, leading to
                                                                 HМғ(ОёвҲ— ) вҲ’ H(ОёвҲҶt
                                                                              вҲ—
                                                                                 )
                                 VМғ (ОёвҲ— ) вҲ’ V (ОёвҲҶt
                                                вҲ—
                                                   )вүӨ                              .
                                                                       1вҲ’О»
By Assumption I.7, for вҲҶt вүӨ вҲҶtвҖІ , ОёвҲ— is also an admissible parameter ОёвҲ— вҲҲ A, leading to H(ОёвҲ— ) вҲ’
   вҲ—
H(ОёвҲҶt ) вүӨ 0. Further, for any Оҙ > 0, by adding and subtracting equal terms,
                              VМғ (ОёвҲ— ) вҲ’ V (ОёвҲҶt
                                              вҲ—
                                                )
                                  1
                             вүӨ        [HМғ(ОёвҲ— ) вҲ’ H(ОёвҲ— ) + H(ОёвҲ— ) вҲ’ H(ОёвҲҶt
                                                                      вҲ—
                                                                         )]                                (24)
                               1вҲ’О»
                                  1
                             вүӨ         HМғ(ОёвҲ— ) вҲ’ H(ОёвҲ— ) .
                               1вҲ’О»
Next, we focus on HМғ(ОёвҲ— ; Оҙ) вҲ’ H(ОёвҲ— ; Оҙ) , which by definition has
                                                                          вҲ—            вҢҠПҖМғ вҲ— вҢӢ
                   HМғ(ОёвҲ— ; Оҙ) вҲ’ H(ОёвҲ— ; Оҙ) = (1 вҲ’ О») E[U (ZМғTПҖМғ ; Оҙ) вҲ’ U (ZМғT                     ; Оҙ)] ,

where О»L(ОёвҲ— ) in both HМғ(ОёвҲ— ; Оҙ) and H(ОёвҲ— ; Оҙ) omit each other. By Lemma I.14, we have
          вҢҠПҖМғ вҲ— вҢӢ P      вҲ—
limвҲҶtвҶ’0 ZМғT       вҶ’ ZМғTПҖМғ . Since U (z; Оҙ) is a continuous function, we implement the continuous
                  вҲ’
mapping theorem and derive
                                                 вҢҠПҖМғ вҲ— вҢӢ             P        вҲ—
                                      lim U (ZМғT                вҶ’ U (ZМғTПҖМғ ; Оҙ).
                                                           ; Оҙ) вҲ’                                          (25)
                                     вҲҶtвҶ’0

                     вҢҠПҖМғ вҲ— вҢӢ
                  n          o
By assumption I.4, ZМғT                   with different finite вҲҶt is uniformly integrable. Then, following
                             вҲҶt<вҲҶtвҖІ
                     вҢҠПҖМғ вҲ— вҢӢ
Assumption I.6, U (ZМғT ; Оҙ) is also uniformly integrable since U (z; Оҙ) has a linear bound. Combined
with (25), we derive
                                                 вҢҠПҖМғ вҲ— вҢӢ                          вҲ—
                                  lim E[U (ZМғT                   вҲ’ E[U (ZМғTПҖМғ ; Оҙ)],
                                                           ; Оҙ)] вҶ’
                                 вҲҶtвҶ’0
which finishes the proof.

J     E XTENDED R ESULTS OF T HEOREM 4.2
In this section, we study the non-asymptotic guarantees on the performance of FaLPO.

J.1   A NOTHER V ERSION OF T HEOREM 4.2

D EFINITION J.1 For two random vectors v and w, we define the trace of the covariance matrix as
                                                                 2            2
                                       Var(v) :=E[вҲҘvвҲҘ2 вҲ’ вҲҘE[v]вҲҘ2 ],
                                   Cov(v, w) :=E[v вҠӨ w] вҲ’ E[v]вҠӨ E[w].
Further, we use Var Оё (v) and CovОё (v, w) to denote the conditional version of the two given Оё:
                                                             2                2
                                   VarОё (v) :=E[вҲҘvвҲҘ2 вҲ’ вҲҘE[v|Оё]вҲҘ2 |Оё],
                               CovОё (v, w) :=E[v вҠӨ w|Оё] вҲ’ E[v|Оё]вҠӨ E[w|Оё].

                                                            31
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Note that it is challenging to theoretically analyze a non-convex stochastic optimization (5), while
there are various ad-hoc procedures providing good empirical performances. To provide theoretical
analysis, in this section, we study a projection-based version of FaLPO (Algorithm 2). Specifically,
the learning/optimization process is conducted in a bounded parameter space B, under which we
assume that the objective function is strongly concave regarding the parameters.

Algorithm 2 Projected FaLPO
 1: Input: Hyperparameter О», learning rate О·, number of iterations N , the strongly concave region
      B, and batch size B.
 2: Output: ОёП• , ОёПҖ , and ОёS
 3: Initialize neural networks with initial parameters (ОёП• , ОёПҖ , ОёS ) вҲҲ B.
 4: Parameterize the policy function by (3).
 5: for n вҲҲ [N ] do
 6:    Collect B trajectories.
 7:    Estimate the gradients of H following the procedure in Appendix C with the parameter О».
 8:    Update ОёS and ОёR with learning rate О· by gradients.
 9:    Project the achieved update to B.
10: end for
11: Return ОёП• , ОёПҖ , and ОёS .


For ease of presentation, we define
                                                                                   вҖ        вҖ        вҖ 
            ОёвҲ— := (ОёП•вҲ— , ОёПҖМғвҲ— , ОёSвҲ— ), ОёвҲҶt
                                        вҲ—       вҲ—
                                           := (ОёП•,вҲҶt    вҲ—
                                                     , ОёПҖ,вҲҶt    вҲ—
                                                             , ОёS,вҲҶt ) and ОёвҖ  := (ОёП•,вҲҶt , ОёПҖ,вҲҶt , ОёS,вҲҶt ).
                                                                      PN вҲ’1
                                                                              Оё
Let Оёn be the estimation after the nth iteration, and ОёМ„ := n=0
                                                             N
                                                                 n
                                                                    the average estimation. It is a
common technique to consider the average estimation ОёМ„ instead of the final estimations ОёN for such
analysis. Then, we provide a new version of Theorem 4.2.
D EFINITION J.2 With the gradient estimations discussed in Appendix C, we define
                                  Лң k (Оё) := (1 вҲ’ О»)вҲҮV
                                  вҲҮH                Лң k (Оё) + О»вҲҮL
                                                               Лң k (Оё).
T HEOREM J.3 With assumptions in Section J.2, О» вҲҲ [0, 1), and О· < C1L as the learning rate,
           вҲ—
        E[VвҲҶt вҲ’ V (ОёМ„)]
            HМғ(ОёвҲ— ) вҲ’ H(ОёвҲҶt
                         вҲ—
                            ) H(ОёвҲҶt  вҲ—
                                        ) вҲ’ H(ОёвҖ  ) CB log(N )
        вүӨ                     +                    +
                  1вҲ’О»                  1вҲ’О»            2N (1 вҲ’ О»)
                               NX вҲ’1
                     1                 1
                                                             Лң k (Оёn ) + О»2 Var Оё вҲҮL Лң k (Оёn )

            +               E              [(1 вҲ’ О»)2 Var Оёn вҲҮV                   n
               2N B(1 вҲ’ О»)      n=0
                                     n+1

                                 Лң         Лң
            + 2О»(1 вҲ’ О»)CovОёn (вҲҮVk (Оёn ), вҲҮLk (Оёn ))] .


                                                                                         Лң k (Оёn ) +
Also, there exits situations where a О» вҲҲ (0, 1) provides smaller value for (1 вҲ’ О»)2 Var вҲҮH

О»2 Var вҲҮLЛң k (Оёn ) + 2О»(1 вҲ’ О»)Cov(вҲҮH    Лң k (Оёn ), вҲҮR
                                                    Лң k (Оёn )) than О» = 0. In other words, there exist
cases where tuning О» may provide better performances.

J.2    A SSUMPTIONS

A SSUMPTION J.4 There exits a constant CB > 0 such that the parameter region B is a convex set
and satisfies the following conditions

       1. In B вҠҶ A, H(ОёП•,вҲҶt , ОёПҖ,вҲҶt , ОёS,вҲҶt ) is locally m-strongly concave with a local maximal point
            вҖ        вҖ        вҖ 
          (ОёП•,вҲҶt , ОёP,вҲҶt , ОёS,вҲҶt ) вҲҲ B.

       2. For any Оё вҲҲ B, вҲҘОёвҲҘ вүӨ CB .


                                                         32
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


      3. For any Оё вҲҲ B, the expectation of the gradient estimation is bounded by
                                                   PB Лң           2
                                                    k=1 вҲҮHk (Оё)
                                                E                   вүӨ CB .
                                                        B

These assumptions are widely used in existing analysis (Papini et al., 2018; Karimi et al., 2019;
Agarwal et al., 2021; Bhandari & Russo, 2019; Wang et al., 2019; Xu et al., 2020).
                                                                          1
A SSUMPTION J.5 At the nth iteration, we use the learning rate as О·n+1 = nm .

Note that in practice we will tune the learning rate О· as a hyperparameter, since we may not know m.
However, it is a common practice to set the learning rate as in Assumption J.5 (Hazan & Kale, 2011;
Nemirovski et al., 2009; Shalev-Shwartz et al., 2011)

J.3   T ECHNICAL L EMMAS FOR T HEOREM 4.2

L EMMA J.6 With Assumption J.4 and J.5, we have
                                  пЈ®                         пЈ№
                             N вҲ’1           PB Лң          2
                           1 X        1           вҲҮH (Оё
                                                    k n )
         H(ОёвҖ  ) вҲ’ H(ОёМ„) вүӨ         пЈ°           k=1           пЈ»
                          2N n=0 n + 1            B

                                          N вҲ’1                        PB                          !вҠӨ
                                                                                 Лң
                                      1 X                                    k=1 вҲҮHk (Оёn )                 вҖ 
                                    +                  вҲҮH(Оёn ) вҲ’                                       (Оё вҲ’ Оёn ) .
                                      N n=0                                      B

Proof. By the strong concavity of H in Assumption J.4,
                                                                                   m         2
                      вҲҮH(Оёn )(ОёвҖ  вҲ’ Оёn ) вүҘ H(ОёвҖ  ) вҲ’ H(Оёn ) +                          Оёn вҲ’ Оё вҖ  .                        (26)
                                                                                   2
                                                               PB        Лң
                                                                  k=1 вҲҮHk (Оёn )
Further, since Оёn+1 is the projection of Оёn + О·n+1                       B            to B, the projection satisfies
                                          PB                                 2
                                                   Лң
                                              k=1 вҲҮHk (Оёn )                                        2
                        Оёn + О·n+1                                 вҲ’ ОёвҖ            вүҘ Оёn+1 вҲ’ ОёвҖ            ,
                                                   B

which suggests
                            2                      2
                 Оёn вҲ’ Оё вҖ        вҲ’ Оёn+1 вҲ’ ОёвҖ 
                                                       PB                                 2
                                                                  Лң
                                2                           k=1 вҲҮHk (Оёn )
              вүҘ Оёn вҲ’ Оё вҖ             вҲ’ Оёn + О·n+1                                    вҲ’ ОёвҖ 
                                                                  B
                            PB                     вҠӨ                     PB                                            (27)
                                      Лң                                              Лң
                                k=1 вҲҮHk (Оёn )                                    k=1 вҲҮHk (Оёn )
                                                                                                   вҲ’ 2ОёвҖ 

              = вҲ’О·n+1                                  2Оёn + О·n+1
                                      B                                              B
                                PB               2                                        PB
                                       Лң k (Оёn )
                                       вҲҮH                                                          Лң
                  2                 k=1                                             вҖ  вҠӨ       k=1 вҲҮHk (Оёn )

              = вҲ’О·n+1                                       вҲ’ 2О·n+1 Оёn вҲ’ Оё                                         .
                                          B                                                        B
                                                        2

We reorder (27) and derive

                   вҠӨ B      Лң
                     P
                        k=1 вҲҮHk (Оёn )     1              2
       вҲ’ Оёn вҲ’ Оё вҖ                      вүӨ         Оёn вҲ’ Оё вҖ 
                            B           2О·n+1
                                                PB Лң            2
                                            2     k=1 вҲҮHk (Оёn )              вҖ  2
                                        + О·n+1                    вҲ’ Оёn+1 вҲ’ Оё       .
                                                       B
                                                                                              2



                                                             33
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Taking the result back to (26):
                                       PB                  !вҠӨ
                                               Лң
       вҖ                                  k=1 вҲҮHk (Оёn )
  H(Оё ) вҲ’ H(Оёn ) вүӨ вҲҮH(Оёn ) вҲ’                                    (ОёвҖ  вҲ’ Оёn )
                                               B
                                  пЈ«                                                                       пЈ¶
                                                                                 PB                   2
                                                                                          Лң
                            1     пЈӯ Оёn вҲ’ Оё     вҖ  2                вҖ  2      2          k=1 вҲҮHk (Оёn )
                      +                              вҲ’ Оёn+1 вҲ’ Оё         + О·n+1                            пЈё
                          2О·n+1                                                           B
                       m           2
                      вҲ’    Оёn вҲ’ ОёвҖ  ,
                       2
                                 PB Лң             !вҠӨ
                                    k=1 вҲҮHk (Оёn )                1 вҲ’1                 2
                    = вҲҮH(Оёn ) вҲ’                      (ОёвҖ  вҲ’ Оёn ) + (О·n+1  вҲ’ m) Оёn вҲ’ ОёвҖ 
                                         B                       2
                                                      PB Лң             2
                         1              вҖ  2  1           k=1 вҲҮHk (Оёn )
                     вҲ’         Оёn+1 вҲ’ Оё     + О·n+1                       .
                       2О·n+1                 2               B
                                                                                      (28)
By averaging over n with Assumption J.5 we get
                           N
                           X вҲ’1
          H(ОёвҖ  ) вҲ’ H(ОёМ„) вүӨ     (H(ОёвҖ  ) вҲ’ H(Оёn ))/N
                                n=0
                                     пЈ®                      пЈ№
                                N вҲ’1      PB Лң            2
                              1 XпЈ° 1       k=1 вҲҮHk (Оё n )
                           вүӨ                                пЈ»
                             2N n=0 n + 1      B

                                      N вҲ’1                  PB                   !вҠӨ
                                                                     Лң
                                  1 X                           k=1 вҲҮHk (Оёn )
                                +              вҲҮH(Оёn ) вҲ’                              (ОёвҖ  вҲ’ Оёn ) ,
                                  N n=0                              B
where the first inequality is due to condition 1 of Assumption J.4.                                           в–Ў

J.4   P ROOF OF T HEOREM 4.2

Note that every discrete-time admissible policy is a continuous-time admissible policy. Thus, the
continuous-time admissible policy set includes the discrete-time admissible policy set. Therefore,
                                          VМғ (ОёвҲ— ) вүҘ VвҲҶt
                                                      вҲ—
                                                         .
Therefore, it is enough to bound VМғ (ОёвҲ— ) вҲ’ V (ОёМ„) for the proof. By Lemma I.9, ОёвҲ— maximizes VМғ and L
simultaneously. Therefore,
                      HМғ(ОёвҲ— ) вҲ’ H(ОёМ„)     HМғ(ОёвҲ— ) вҲ’ H(ОёвҲҶt вҲ—          вҲ—
                                                             ) + H(ОёвҲҶt ) вҲ’ H(ОёвҖ  ) + H(ОёвҖ  ) вҲ’ H(ОёМ„)
  VМғ (ОёвҲ— ) вҲ’ V (ОёМ„) вүӨ                 =                                                            .
                           1вҲ’О»                                       1вҲ’О»
                                                                                                 (29)
Then, we use the convergence result for Algorithm 2 detailed by Lemma J.6 :
                                     пЈ®                             пЈ№
                                N вҲ’1           PB Лң              2
                            1   X        1           вҲҮH    (Оё
                                                          k n  )
          H(ОёвҖ  ) вҲ’ H(ОёМ„) вүӨ           пЈ°           k=1               пЈ»
                           2N n=0 n + 1               B
                                                                                 !вҠӨ                       (30)
                                      N вҲ’1                  PB      Лң
                                  1 X                           k=1 вҲҮHk (Оёn )           вҖ 
                                +              вҲҮH(Оёn ) вҲ’                              (Оё вҲ’ Оёn ) .
                                  N n=0                             B
Then, we take expectation on both sides
                                        пЈ®                     пЈ№
                                  N вҲ’1        PB Лң          2
                                1 X        1       вҲҮH  (Оё
                                                      k n )
           E[H(ОёвҖ  ) вҲ’ H(ОёМ„)] вүӨ         EпЈ°      k=1            пЈ»
                               2N n=0     n+1      B
                                                                   !вҠӨ                                     (31)
                                    N вҲ’1            PB Лң
                                  1 X                k=1 вҲҮHk (Оёn )      вҖ 
                                +       E вҲҮH(Оёn ) вҲ’                   (Оё вҲ’ Оёn ) .
                                  N n=0                  B


                                                      34
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                      Лң k (Оёn ) is an unbiased gradient estimator:
For the last component of (31), since вҲҮH
                                  PB Лң              !вҠӨ
                                    k=1 вҲҮH k (Оё n )        вҖ 
                E вҲҮH(Оёn ) вҲ’                             (Оё вҲ’ Оёn )
                                        B
                                         PB Лң                 !вҠӨ
                                           k=1  вҲҮH   k (Оё n )      вҖ 
                  = E E вҲҮH(Оёn ) вҲ’                                (Оё вҲ’ Оёn ) Оёn = 0.
                                                 B
Then, for the first component in (31)
                    пЈ®                         пЈ№
                            PB Лң            2
                       1       k=1  вҲҮH (Оё
                                      k n )
                 EпЈ°                           пЈ»
                      n+1           B
                  "        PB Лң              2      #
                      1        k=1 вҲҮHk (Оёn )
               =E E                            |Оёn
                     n+1           B
                      "        PB Лң                      PB Лң                 2#
                  1              k=1 вҲҮHk (Оёn )            k=1 вҲҮHk (Оёn )
               =     E VarОёn (                 )+ E                     |Оёn
                 n+1                 B                        B
                      "        PB Лң                    #
                  1              k=1 вҲҮHk (Оёn )       2
               вүӨ     E VarОёn (                 ) + CB ,
                 n+1                 B
where the last inequality is due to condition 3 of Assumption J.4. Then, (31) can be further derived as
                                     N вҲ’1
                                            "               PB Лң                           #
                 вҖ                 1 X           1            k=1 вҲҮHk (Оёn )         1
         E[H(Оё ) вҲ’ H(ОёМ„)] вүӨ               E         VarОёn (                 )+         CB .
                                2N n=0        n+1                  B             n+1
As a result,
                       вҲ—
                  E[H(ОёвҲҶt ) вҲ’ H(ОёМ„)]
                       вҲ—
                =E[H(ОёвҲҶt ) вҲ’ H(ОёвҖ  ) + H(ОёвҖ  ) вҲ’ H(ОёМ„)]
                    вҲ—               CB log(N )
                вүӨH(ОёвҲҶt ) вҲ’ H(ОёвҖ  ) +
                                       2N
                                   2
                     X О·[(1 вҲ’ О») Var Оёn вҲҮV
                     N вҲ’1                   Лң k (Оёn ) + О»2 Var Оё вҲҮL   Лң k (Оёn ) ]
                                                                 n
                 +E
                     n=0
                                              BN (n + 1)
                     N вҲ’1                    Лң k (Оёn ), вҲҮL
                                                        Лң k (Оёn ))]
                     X    О·[2О»(1 вҲ’ О»)CovОёn (вҲҮV
                 +E                                                   .
                     n=0
                                       BN (n + 1)

Taking the results back to (29) we finish the proof.

K     E XTENDED R ESULTS FOR S YNTHETIC E XPERIMENTS
For synthetic portfolio optimization, we provide details for drift and volatility (Appendix K.1), data
generation (Appendix K.2), hyperparameter tuning (Appendix K.3), and extended experimental results
(Appendix K.4). We consider 21-day trading, and generate 1000 trajectories with 21 observations for
training, 1000 for validation, and 1000 for testing. To compare different methods, we calculate the
average terminal utility as the metric.

K.1    D RIFT AND VOLATILITY

Drift and volatility are two important concepts characterising the strength of signal and noise in
financial markets. To demonstrate this, for an asset price Sti and time interval вҲҶt, define return as:
                                                    i
                                                   St+вҲҶt  вҲ’ Sti
                                      returnit =                .
                                                       Sti

                                                   35
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


The returnit can be daily, monthly or yearly, depending on the length of вҲҶt. For a specific asset,
drift (f i (Xt ; ОёSвҲ— ) in (2)) is approximately the expectation of the return, while volatility (g i (Xt ; ОёSвҲ— ))
is approximately the returnвҖҷs standard deviation. Given multiple assets, drift (f (Xt ; ОёSвҲ— )) is a vector
and volatility (g(Xt ; ОёSвҲ— )) is a matrix. When generating synthetic data (Appendix K.2), we fix the
scale of drift and vary the scale of volatility, which is defined as the average value of each component.

K.2    DATA G ENERATION

We simulate data for St and Xt following SDE (6). To this end, drift and volatility are randomly
picked while mimicking the historical stock price data, with an average annual return around as
                                                                                       0.1
0.1 and average annual volatility in {0.1, 0.2, 0.3}, leading to a daily return around 252 and a daily
volatility around {0.1/252, 0.2/252, 0.3/252}. The true representation function is selected as a
component-wise exponential operation. Then, we discritize the SDE following the explicit Euler
method, and generate data accordingly (Beskos & Roberts, 2005).
The specific configurations for data generation is:

       вҖў Define two scalars: Cd , and Cv determining the scale of drift and volatility:
                            Cd = 0.1/252, , and Cv вҲҲ {0.1/252, 0.2/252, 0.3/252} .

       вҖў Пғ is selected as a random matrix, whose components follow a uniform distribution in
         [0.5Cv , 1.5Cv ].
       вҖў v is selected as a random matrix, whose components follow a uniform distribution in
         [вҲ’1.5Cd Cv , 1.5Cd Cv ].
       вҖў Вө is selected as a diagonal matrix whose diagonal components follow a uniform distribution
         in [0.9, 1].
       вҖў The initial values of X are randomly generated from a uniform distribution on [вҲ’2Cd , 2Cd ].
       вҖў The initial prices of assets are randomly generated from a uniform distribution in [20, 30].

Note that the design makes sure that the simulated price has approximately a yearly return of 0.1 and
yearly volatility in {0.1, 0.2, 0.3}. Table 4 reports the experimental setup parameters.


                         Experiment Configurations                                  Values

                          Time Interval вҲҶt                                       1 (Day)
                          Terminal Time T                                           21
                       Scale of Annual Drift                                        0.1
                     Scale of Annual Volatility                              {0.1, 0.2, 0.3}
                 Number of Simulated Trajectories                                 1000
                          Utility Function                               {P ower, Exponential}
                          Risk Aversion Оі                                     {0.1, 3, 5, 10}
          Number of Replications under Each Hyperparameter                           5
                        Compute Resources                                AWS ec2 m5ad.24xlarge

                                 Table 4: Setup for synthetic experiments


K.3    E ARLY S TOPPING AND H YPERPARAMETER T UNING

For better performance, we conduct early stopping for all methods using the average validation utility
with the patience as 5 steps. The considered hyperparameters include the learning rate, О», and batch
size. For each configuration, we conduct training for 5 times, and average the results. Then, we
pick the configuration providing the best average validation utility, and test it on the test data and
calculate the average test utility per trajectory. The tuning process is conducted using the software
wandb (Biewald, 2020). Table 5 reports the hyperparameter values.


                                                      36
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                            Hyperparameters                 Values

                               Batch Size                  {100, 50}
                                    О»                   {0, 05, 0.1, 0.9}
                              Learning Rate        {0.0005, 0.001, 0.01, 0.1}

                         Table 5: Hyperparameters for synthetic experiments


K.4     S YNTHETIC E XPERIMENT R ESULTS

To gain a more holistic understanding of the performance of FaLPO in a variety of settings, we conduct
experiments under different number of stocks to be traded (Appendix K.4.1), different risk preferences
(Appendix K.4.2), and alternative utility functions (Appendix K.4.3). Finally, we also compare the
performance of various methods under the Merton model as a sanity check (Appendix K.4.4).


K.4.1    S YNTHETIC E XPERIMENT R ESULTS WITH D IFFERENT D IMENSIONS

Tables 6 and 7 report the synthetic experiment results with the number of simulated stocks (dS )
varying in {10, 15}. The performance is not strictly negatively correlated with the number of
dimensions of the problem or the annual volatility in simulation. The reason is that the noise in the
problem is indeed determined by the whole volatility matrix Пғ, which is randomly generated in the
synthetic experiment (Appendix K.2). In other words, the dimension and average scale cannot fully
characterize the extent of the noise in a synthetic task.


                Annual Volatility in Simulation        0.1              0.2              0.3
                          FaLPO                   вҲ’0.465 Вұ 0.446   вҲ’1.35 Вұ 0.155    вҲ’2.737 Вұ 0.219
                           DDPG                   вҲ’1.650 Вұ 0.456   вҲ’3.30 Вұ 1.294    вҲ’5.495 Вұ 1.269
                           SLAC                   вҲ’0.750 Вұ 0.210   вҲ’5.50 Вұ 0.011    вҲ’6.160 Вұ 0.012
      Methods
                           RichID                 вҲ’3.350 Вұ 0.111   вҲ’5.65 Вұ 0.102    вҲ’6.325 Вұ 0.048
                        CT-MB-RL                  вҲ’2.850 Вұ 0.014   вҲ’5.35 Вұ 0.020    вҲ’6.160 Вұ 0.026
                          MMMC                    вҲ’4.723 Вұ 7.619   вҲ’5.602 Вұ 4.299   вҲ’6.124 Вұ 3.217

  Table 6: Average terminal utility after tuning with standard deviation for synthetic data with
  dS = 10 and dW = 10.


                Annual Volatility in Simulation        0.1              0.2              0.3
                          FaLPO                   вҲ’2.463 Вұ 3.744   вҲ’1.021 Вұ 0.278   вҲ’2.243 Вұ 0.547
                           DDPG                   вҲ’3.976 Вұ 1.428   вҲ’1.443 Вұ 0.751   вҲ’5.205 Вұ 1.858
                           SLAC                   вҲ’4.749 Вұ 0.139   вҲ’6.129 Вұ 0.016   вҲ’6.526 Вұ 0.012
      Methods
                           RichID                 вҲ’4.973 Вұ 0.448   вҲ’6.321 Вұ 0.038   вҲ’6.641 Вұ 0.022
                        CT-MB-RL                  вҲ’3.074 Вұ 0.014   вҲ’5.714 Вұ 0.023   вҲ’6.363 Вұ 0.021
                          MMMC                    вҲ’5.388 Вұ 5.688   вҲ’6.465 Вұ 4.978   вҲ’7.155 Вұ 5.965

  Table 7: Average terminal utility after tuning with standard deviation for synthetic data with
  dS = 15 and dW = 15.


K.4.2    S YNTHETIC E XPERIMENT R ESULTS WITH D IFFERENT VALUES OF Оі

Tables 8 and 9 report experimental results with dS = 10, dW = 10, and Оі вҲҲ {3, 10} for an
exponential utility. FaLPO outperforms the competing methods in most scenarios.


                                                    37
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                       Annual Volatility in Simulation                                                0.1                               0.2                                            0.3
                                                 FaLPO                                                          вҲ’0.003 Вұ 0.0021                   вҲ’0.0055 Вұ 0.0008                               вҲ’0.0132 Вұ 0.0028
                                                  DDPG                                                           вҲ’0.003 Вұ 0.001                   вҲ’0.0105 Вұ 0.006                                вҲ’0.0205 Вұ 0.0034
                                                  SLAC                                                          вҲ’0.003 Вұ 0.0007                   вҲ’0.0153 Вұ 0.0013                               вҲ’0.0192 Вұ 0.0011
    Methods
                                                  RichID                                                        вҲ’0.012 Вұ 0.0005                   вҲ’0.0188 Вұ 0.0002                                вҲ’0.0211 Вұ 0.0
                                               CT-MB-RL                                                           вҲ’0.01 Вұ 0.0                      вҲ’0.0179 Вұ 0.0                                  вҲ’0.0206 Вұ 0.0
                                                 MMMC                                                           вҲ’0.0162 Вұ 0.0212                  вҲ’0.0194 Вұ 0.0135                               вҲ’0.0210 Вұ 0.0102

  Table 8: Average terminal utility after tuning with standard deviation for synthetic data with
  Оі = 10.


                                      Annual Volatility in Simulation                                           0.1                                0.2                                                 0.3
                                                FaLPO                                                      вҲ’4.575 Вұ 3.325                   вҲ’17.9358 Вұ 2.3349                                   вҲ’56.0405 Вұ 13.0502
                                                 DDPG                                                     вҲ’23.113 Вұ 4.3472                  вҲ’51.6559 Вұ 11.7981                                  вҲ’50.0399 Вұ 13.8451
                                                 SLAC                                                    вҲ’23.514 Вұ 11.7077                  вҲ’68.6816 Вұ 0.0254                                   вҲ’76.1371 Вұ 0.0355
    Methods
                                                 RichID                                                   вҲ’44.629 Вұ 1.8797                   вҲ’69.481 Вұ 0.9413                                    вҲ’77.232 Вұ 0.1091
                                              CT-MB-RL                                                    вҲ’34.842 Вұ 0.4686                   вҲ’65.41 Вұ 0.1331                                     вҲ’75.4364 Вұ 0.122
                                                MMMC                                                     вҲ’59.2338 Вұ 77.4511                 вҲ’70.8667 Вұ 49.2500                                  вҲ’76.8619 Вұ 37.448

  Table 9: Average terminal utility after tuning with standard deviation for synthetic data with
  Оі = 3.


K.4.3                        S YNTHETIC E XPERIMENT R ESULTS WITH P OWER U TILITY
We also conduct synthetic experiments maximizing the expected power utility for portfolio optimiza-
tion. The results are summarized in Figure 5.
                      28                                                                                                                                               80
    Average Utility


                                                                              Average Utility


                                                                                                                                                     Average Utility


                                                                                                39
                      27
                                                                                                                                                                       70
                                                                                                36
                      26

                                                                                                                                                                       60
                      25                                                                        33


                      24                                                                        30                                                                     50
                           CTвҲ’MBвҲ’RL   FaLPO    DDPG     RichID         SLAC                          CTвҲ’MBвҲ’RL   FaLPO     DDPG    RichID   SLAC                             CTвҲ’MBвҲ’RL   FaLPO    DDPG     RichID   SLAC
                                              Methods                                                                   Methods                                                                Methods


                                      (a) Оі = 0.1                                                                (b) Оі = 0.2                                                           (c) Оі = 0.3

                                                                       Figure 5: Average Terminal Power Utility


K.4.4                        S YNTHETIC E XPERIMENT FOR THE M ERTON C ASE
As a sanity check, we study a Merton problem where the optimal performance can be mathematically
derived, in order to compare the performance of FaLPO to the optimal one. We simulate data
following a Merton model in Appendix F.1, with dS = 10, dW = 10. With an exponential utility
function with Оі = 5, according to Lemma F.1, the optimal policy can be derived as
                                                                                                                        Вө(ПғПғ вҠӨ )вҲ’1
                                                                                                         ПҖМғ вҲ— =                    .                                                                                     (32)
                                                                                                                           Zt
Further, by taking (32) back into (14), we can derive the optimal expected terminal utility as
                                                                                                                           eвҲ’Оіz0 вҲ’ 1 ВөвҠӨ (ПғПғвҠӨ )вҲ’1 ВөT
                                                           max EПҖМғ [U (ZTПҖМғ )|z0 ] = вҲ’                                          e 2                 ,
                                                                 ПҖМғt                                                         Оі
which is the theoretically optimal performance. Then, to implement FaLPO, we generate fake features
which are independent from the asset prices: the optimal policy is not dependent on these features.
Ideally, FaLPO should be able to automatically ignore the fake features, and deliver performance
similar to the theoretically optimal derivation. The results of FaLPO, MMMC, and the theoretically
optimal derivation are reported in Figure 6. Note that FaLPO achieves slightly worse performance
compared to the other two. The reason for the slight suboptimality of FaLPO in the Merton case is
twofold: i. the expected terminal utility is derived for a continuous-time policy while FaLPO learns a


                                                                                                                         38
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


discrete-time policy with time interval вҲҶt; ii. FaLPO uses an over-complicated model with stochastic
factors, while the true data generating process follows a Merton model without stochastic factors.

                                                 5.2


                             Average/Expected
                              Terminal Utility
                                                 5.0


                                 Negative
                                                 4.8


                                                 4.6


                                                             FaLPO        MMMC    Optimal
                                                                     Methods

Figure 6: Negative average terminal utility of FaLPO and MMMC, and negative expected optimal
terminal utility. The smaller the better.


L      E XTENDED R ESULTS OF R EAL -W ORLD S TOCK T RADING
L.1     P ROTOCOL

We consider 21-day stock trading in four different stock sectors using the daily stock price data from
Yahoo finance between January 4, 2006 and April 1, 2022. More specifically, we use the adjusted
close price as the daily trading price. For factors, we consider economic indexes, technical analysis
indexes (generated by python package TA), and sector-specific features such as oil prices, gold prices,
and related ETF prices, leading to around 30 factors for each sector. In each sector we select 10
stocks according to the availability and trading volume in the considered time range. The considered
sectors, stocks, and the features are provided in Table 10. We consider the same competing methods
in Section 5.1 and compare the performance using the average achieved terminal utility over different
trajectories as the metric. The larger the utility the better.


    Sectors                  Stocks                                                 Features for Factors
                                                                         SP500 returns, MACD of stock prices,
                 APA, COP, CVX, HAL, HES,
      Energy                                                          RSI of stock prices, oil prices, gasoline prices
                 MRO, OKE, OXY, VLO, WMB
                                                                      US Dollar/USDX - Index - Cash (DX-Y.NYB)
                                                                         SP500 returns, MACD of stock prices,
                   BA, CAT, DE, EMR, ETN,
    Industrial                                                                     RSI of stock prices,
                  GE, HON, LMT, LUV, PNR,
                                                                      ETF prices including DIA, EXI, IYJ and VIS
                                                                         SP500 returns, MACD of stock prices,
                  APD, AVY, BLL, DD, ECL,
    Materials                                                         RSI of stock prices, gold prices, silver prices,
                  FMC, IFF, IP, NEM, VMC
                                                                          ETF prices including IYM and VAW

                                  Table 10: Selected stocks and features


L.2     E XTRA P ENALTIES

For real-world experiments, we consider two extra penalty terms for better stability. The first penalty
is the model calibration loss discussed in Appendix E.3. Given a trajectory with time interval вҲҶt,
П„ := {ti , sti , xti | i вҲҲ [m]}, it is defined as
                                                       m
                                                       X                                    2
                            вҲ’О»1 min                           П•(Xti+1 ) вҲ’ CП•(Xti ) вҲ’ b 2 ,
                                         C,b
                                                       i=1

where C is a matrix and b a vector of proper dimensions. As discussed in Appendix E.3, this penalty
encourages a simple representation function П•. The second penalty is the negative sample variance of
the terminal wealth, with the parameter О»2 determining its strength. The intuition of this penalty is to
further penalize the instability of the algorithm performance. The second penalty is implemented for
all the competing methods except MMMC for a fair comparison.


                                                                     39
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


L.3   T RAIN -VALIDATION -T EST S PLIT BY S LIDING W INDOW


We detail the sliding window method for train-validation-test split for real-world portfolio optimiza-
tion experiments (Figure 7). In financial markets, the dynamics under asset prices and factors vary
over time, leading us to construct a sliding window on the dataset for training, validation and testing.
Specifically, given a dataset of asset prices and observed features, we construct several windows of
observations of equal length. We divide each window into three contiguous periods, the first used for
training, the second for validation, and the third for testing. We refer to the length (in days) of the
training period as the training size (same for validation and test periods).
After constructing one window, we move the start time point by a fixed number of days (the window
gap), and construct the second window. A given method is trained on the training set of each window
separately, and then validated and tested on the corresponding validation and test sets. The final
validation and test performances are calculated by averaging over each window. The experimental
setup is summarized in Table 11. We report the considered hyperparameter values in Table 12.


                          Window Gap
                                         ...
                                                                                          Time

            Window 1                Train          Validation      Test



            Window 2                      Train          Validation       Test


            Window 3                           Train            Validation       Test


                            Figure 7: Demonstration of sliding window.


                       Experiment Configurations                                 Values

                         Time Interval вҲҶt                                   1 (Day)
                         Terminal Time T                                       21
                         Utility Function                                Exponential
                         Risk Aversion Оі                                        5
         Number of Replications under Each Hyperparameter                      10
                       Compute Resources                              AWS ec2 m5ad.24xlarge

                             Table 11: Setup for real-world experiments.


                                                  40
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                                                        Hyperparameters                                                                    Values

                                                                                      Batch Size                              {100, 200, 400}
                                                                                           О»                                   {0.1, 0.5, 0.9}
                                                                                    Learning Rate                        {0.0005, 0.001, 0.01, 0.1}
                                                                                     Window Gap                                  {63, 126}
                                                                                      Train Size                                  {1260}
                                                                                    Validation Size                                {63}
                                                                                       Test Size                                   {63}

                                                              Table 12: Hyperparameters for real-world experiments


L.4                             S ENSITIVITY A NALYSIS ON О»

According to (5), the value of О» determines the weight of the FaLPO model calibration. In this
section, we conduct sensitivity analysis of FaLPO on О». Under the same protocol as the experiments
in Section 5.2, we also report FaLPO with different values of О» when applied to different sectors.
The results are reported in Figure 8. Compared to the case without model calibration (О» = 0), a
small non-zero О» provides higher terminal utilities and lower variance. This observation justifies our
method of incorporating model calibration into policy learning. Then, when О» gets bigger and close
to one, the performance of FaLPO decays while the variance also gets smaller.

                                                                                   вҲ’2                                                          0
                                                                                                                                                                                                         0
 Average Utility


                                                                 Average Utility


                                                                                                                           Average Utility


                                                                                                                                                                                     Average Utility
                     0                                                                                                                       вҲ’5
                                                                                   вҲ’4
                                                                                                                                                                                                       вҲ’5
                                                                                                                                             вҲ’10
                   вҲ’5
                                                                                   вҲ’6
                                                                                                                                             вҲ’15
                                                                                                                                                                                                       вҲ’10

                   вҲ’10                                                                                                                       вҲ’20
                         0.00     0.25          0.50   0.75                             0.00    0.25       0.50   0.75                             0.00     0.25       0.50   0.75                           0.00   0.25       0.50   0.75

                                            О»                                                          О»                                                           О»                                                       О»


                                         (a) Oil                                               (b) Material                                               (c) Industrials                                            (d) Mix

                                                                                               Figure 8: Sensitivity analysis for О»


M                               M ORE I NFORMATION FOR C OMPETING M ETHODS

Here we provide more information for the implemented competing methods. First of all, we focus
on policy learning methods, without studying other performance improving techniques like data
augmentation or feature engineering. (See Appendix A.2 for a review of such methods.) Such
techniques can be easily applied to FaLPO. Further, for a thorough comparison, we summarize the
existing policy-learning methods for portfolio optimization with the following four representatives.
Note that, all the following methods take asset price data and features as the input for a fair comparison.

                                вҖў DDPG is implemented with the gradient estimation detailed in Appendix C and also dis-
                                  cussed in Nan et al. (2022); Xiong et al. (2018); Jiang et al. (2017). This design makes sure
                                  that DDPG can leverage offline data without exploration.
                                вҖў SLAC (Lee et al., 2020) learns a representation of factors jointly with policy learning. But
                                  in this process, no parametric models are used.
                                вҖў RichID (Mhammedi et al., 2020) falls into the category of model-based policy learning like
                                  Yu et al. (2019). It first learns the representation of factors and then conduct policy learning.
                                  In this process, both steps take advantage of a parametric model. For better performance in
                                  portfolio optimization, we pick Kim-Omberg model as the used model, instead of the LQR
                                  model original proposed with this method.
                                вҖў CT-MB-RL is a policy gradient method optimizing the performance objective using the pol-
                                  icy functional form derived from continuous-time models, but without factor representation
                                  learning.


                                                                                                                          41
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


We also implement MMMC as a representative of continuous-time finance methods. More compli-
cated and advanced continuous-time finance methods are hard to implement for two reasons. First, to
implement such methods, we need to estimate all the parameters of a multivariate SDE (like Пғ, v, Вө
and Пү in Section 3.3). It is challenging since the derivation of likelihood requires solving multivariate
stochastic integrals (Ait-Sahalia & Kimmel, 2010), Second, deriving explicit optimal policy functions
is also difficult, which involves solving high-dimensional PDEs (like k2 (t) and k3 (t) in Lemma F.2).
Further, such pure continuous-time models are expected to underperform, since they assume that the
data exactly follow a parametric SDE and tend to underfit. This can also be seen by our comparison
with CT-MB-RL (Section 5), which is a model-based RL method by relying on a Kim-Omberg model.
As a result, we focus our empirical comparison to more competitive RL methods.
Note that FaLPO circumvents the two aforementioned challenges. First, our model calibration does
not aim to fit all the parameters in an SDE, but only those related to learning ОёП• and ОёПҖ . That is
why our model calibration loss in Section 3.3 has such an easy-to-calculate form with the parameter
ОёS as a simple vector. Second, FaLPO does not need a fully derived closed-form solution for the
optimal policy. Like in Section 3.3, we use neural networks to parameterize K(t) and П•(), instead
of fully deriving them like continuous-time finance methods. Being able to bridge this gap between
continuous-time finance models and high multidimensional stock trading problems is one of our
contributions.

N     E XPERIMENTS WITH T RANSACTION C OSTS
In this section, we consider the case with transaction costs. Usually, the cost of borrowing a stock
to short can vary but typically ranges from 0.3% to 3% per year. Therefore, we take 1% annual
transaction cost for short selling an asset. (The fees are applied daily.) Under this setting, we replicate
our real-world experiments for the oil sector, using the same protocol. After the tuning procedure in
Appendix L.3, the achieved results are reported in Table 13. It should be noticed that the results are
consistent with those without transaction costs.

                                       Methods        Average Utility

                                      FaLPO           вҲ’2.25 Вұ 1.649
                                       DDPG          вҲ’6.795 Вұ 0.8247
                                       SLAC          вҲ’7.115 Вұ 0.8872
                                      RichID         вҲ’6.365 Вұ 0.5989
                                     CT-MB-RL         вҲ’5.57 Вұ 5.036

                   Table 13: Average terminal utility in oil sector with transaction costs


O     E XPERIMENTS WITH D IFFERENT I NITIAL W EALTH
We vary the initial wealth in {3000, 5000, 8000, 1000} for portfolio optimization using stocks in the
oil sector following the same protocol as the experiments in Section 5.2. The results are summarized
in Table 14. Specifically, FaLPO achieves superior performance to the competing methods with
different initial wealth. Also, it should be noticed that all the methods achieve higher terminal utility
given more initial wealth.

  Initial Wealth            3000              5000               8000                    10000

     FaLPO           вҲ’21.08 Вұ 16.775       вҲ’2.4 Вұ 1.9       вҲ’0.243 Вұ 0.1209      вҲ’0.03595 Вұ 0.008896
      DDPG          вҲ’909.5 Вұ 3443.846      вҲ’6.6 Вұ 1.2     вҲ’0.34665 Вұ 0.01809     вҲ’0.046755 Вұ 0.00444
      SLAC          вҲ’11865 Вұ 47260.664     вҲ’6.8 Вұ 0.2      0.35465 Вұ 0.07427     вҲ’0.04558 Вұ 0.00142
     RichID           вҲ’45.51 Вұ 8.368       вҲ’6.5 Вұ 0.1     вҲ’0.33125 Вұ 0.009791   вҲ’0.045365 Вұ 0.0001446
    CT-MB-RL         вҲ’28.715 Вұ 18.303      вҲ’4.2 Вұ 6.2      вҲ’0.30995 Вұ 0.1441    вҲ’0.043055 Вұ 0.002061

              Table 14: Average terminal utility in oil sector with different initial wealth


                                                     42
