Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


R ISK C ONTROL FOR O NLINE L EARNING M ODELS
 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                             A BSTRACT

         To provide rigorous uncertainty quantification for online learning models, we
         develop a framework for constructing uncertainty sets that provably control risk—
         such as coverage of confidence intervals, false negative rate, or F1 score—in
         the online setting. This extends conformal prediction to apply to a larger class
         of online learning problems. Our method guarantees risk control at any user-
         specified level even when the underlying data distribution shifts drastically, even
         adversarially, over time in an unknown fashion. The technique we propose is
         highly flexible as it can be applied with any base online learning algorithm (e.g.,
         a deep neural network trained online), requiring minimal implementation effort
         and essentially zero additional computational cost. We further extend our approach
         to control multiple risks simultaneously, so the prediction sets we generate are
         valid for all given risks. To demonstrate the utility of our method, we conduct
         experiments on real-world tabular time-series data sets showing that the proposed
         method rigorously controls various natural risks. Furthermore, we show how to
         construct valid intervals for an online image-depth estimation problem that previous
         sequential calibration schemes cannot handle.


1    I NTRODUCTION

To confidently deploy learning models in high-stakes applications, we need both high predictive
accuracy and reliable safeguards to handle unanticipated changes in the underlying data-generating
process. Reasonable accuracy on a fixed validation set is not enough, as raised by Sullivan (2015);
we must also quantify uncertainty to correctly handle hard input points and take into account shifting
distributions. For example, consider the application of autonomous driving, where we have a real-time
view of the surroundings of the car. To successfully operate such an autonomous system, we should
measure the distance between the car and close-by objects, e.g., via a sensor that outputs a depth
image whose pixels represent the distance of the objects in the scene from the camera. Figure 1a
displays a colored image of a road and Figure 1b presents its corresponding depth map. Since
high-resolution depth measurements often require longer acquisition time compared to capturing
a colored image, there were developed online estimation models to predict the depth map from a
given RGB image (Patil et al., 2020; Zhang et al., 2020). The goal of these methods is to artificially
speed-up depth sensing acquisition time. However, making decisions solely based on an estimate of
the depth map is insufficient as the predictive model may not be accurate enough. Furthermore, the
distribution can vary greatly and drastically over time, rendering the online model to output highly
inaccurate and unreliable predictions. In these situations, it is necessary to design a predictive system
that reflects the range of plausible outcomes, reporting the uncertainty in the prediction. To this
end, we encode uncertainty in a rigorous manner via prediction intervals/sets that augment point
predictions and have a long-range error control. In the autonomous driving example, the uncertainty
in the depth map estimate is represented by depth-valued uncertainty intervals. In this paper, we
introduce a novel calibration framework that can wrap any online learning algorithm (e.g., an LSTM
model trained online) to construct prediction sets with guaranteed validity.
Formally, suppose an online learning setting where we are given data stream {(Xt , Yt )}t∈N in a
sequential fashion, where Xt ∈ X is a feature vector and Yt ∈ Y is a target variable. In single-output
regression settings Y = R, while in classification tasks Y is a finite set of all class labels. The input
Xt is commonly a feature vector, i.e., X = Rp , although it may take different forms, as in the depth
sensing task, where Xt ∈ RM ×N ×3 is an RGB image and Yt ∈ RM ×N is the ground truth depth.
Consider a loss function L(Yt , Ĉt (Xt )) ∈ R that measures the error of the estimated prediction


                                                   1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


set Ĉt (Xt ) ⊆ Y with respect to the true outcome Yt . Importantly, at each time step t ∈ N, given
all samples previously observed {(Xi , Yi )}t−1
                                              i=1 along with the test feature vector Xt , our goal is to
construct a prediction set Ĉt (Xt ) guaranteed to attain any user-specified risk level r:
                                                      T
                                              1X
                               R(Ĉ) = lim          L(Yt , Ĉt (Xt )) = r.                            (1)
                                         T →∞ T
                                                t=1

For instance, a natural choice for the loss L in the depth sensing task is the image miscoverage loss:
                                                       1
                Limage miscoverage (Yt , Ĉ(Xt )) =      (m, n) : Ytm,n ∈
                                                                        / Ĉ m,n (Xt ) .              (2)
                                                      MN
In words, Limage miscoverage (Yt , C(Xt )) is the ratio of pixels that were miscovered by the intervals
Ĉ m,n (Xt ), where (m, n) is the pixel’s location. Hence, the resulting risk for the loss in (2) measures
the average image miscoverage rate across the prediction sets {Ĉt (Xt )}∞       t=0 , and r = 20% is a
possible choice for the desired miscoverage frequency. Another example of a loss function that is
attractive in multi-label classification problems is the false negative proportion whose corresponding
risk is the false negative rate.
In this work, we introduce rolling risk control (Rolling RC): the first calibration procedure to form
prediction sets in online settings that achieve any pre-specified risk level in the sense of (1) without
making any assumptions on the data distribution, as guaranteed by Theorem 1. We accomplish this
by utilizing the mathematical foundations of adaptive conformal inference (ACI) (Gibbs & Candes,
2021) which is a groundbreaking conformal calibration scheme that constructs prediction sets for any
arbitrary time-varying data distribution. The uncertainty sets generated by ACI are guaranteed to
have valid long-range coverage, being a special case of (1) with the choice of the 0-1 loss (indicator
function) defined in Section 2. Importantly, one cannot simply plug an arbitrary loss function into
ACI and achieve risk control. The reason is that ACI works with conformity scores—a measure of
goodness-of-fit—that are only relevant to the 0-1 loss, but do not exist in the general risk-controlling
setting. Therefore, our Rolling RC broadens the set of problems that ACI can tackle, allowing
the analyst to control an arbitrary loss. Furthermore, the technique we proposed in Section 3.3 is
guaranteed to control multiple risks, and thus constructs sets that are valid for all given risks over
long-range windows in time. Additionally, the proposed online calibration scheme is lightweight and
can be integrated with any online learning model, with essentially zero added complexity. Lastly, in
Section 3.2.1 we carefully investigated design choices of our method to adapt quickly to distributional
shifts. Indeed, the experiments conducted on real benchmark data sets, presented in Section 4,
demonstrate that sophisticated designed choices lead to improved performance.


                (a) Input Frame                                      (b) Ground Truth Depth


                (c) Estimated Depth                                    (d) Uncertainty Size

Figure 1: Online depth estimation. The input frame, ground truth depth map, estimated depth image,
and interval’s size at time step t = 8020. All values are in meter units.


                                                       2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


1.1   U NCERTAINTY Q UANTIFICATION FOR O NLINE D EPTH E STIMATION

Recall the online depth sensing problem, where our goal is to construct a prediction interval
C m,n (Xt ) ⊂ R for each pixel (m, n) that contains the ground truth depth Ytm,n at 80% frequency.
That is, we aim at controlling the image miscoverage loss (2) at level r = 20%. To accomplish this,
we apply our Rolling RC framework using a neural network model for depth estimation; in Ap-
pendix C.2.4 we give more information regarding the online training scheme and the implementation
details. At a high level, we fit (offline) an initial predictive model on the first 6000 samples to obtain
a reasonable predictive system. Next, passing time step 6001, we proceed by training the model in an
online fashion while applying our calibration procedure, and then measure the performance on the
data points corresponding to time steps 8001 to 10000.
Figure 1c shows the estimated depth image generated by the base model and Figure 1d displays
the size of the prediction interval of each pixel at timestamp t = 8020. These figures suggest that
the calibrated uncertainty intervals properly reflect the ground truth depth. Furthermore, Figure 2
presents the image coverage rate and average length across the test timestamps, revealing that the
proposed method accurately controls the risk with an average image coverage rate of 80%.


Figure 2: The coverage rate and average interval length (in meters) over each image in the test se-
          quence achieved by the proposed uncertainty quantification method. The average coverage
          is 80.00% and the average length is 18.04 meters.


2     BACKGROUND

Conformal inference (Angelopoulos & Bates, 2021; Vovk et al., 2005) is a generic approach for
constructing prediction sets in regression or classification tasks that attain any pre-specified coverage
rate, under the assumption that the training and testing points are i.i.d., or exchangeable. One example
of such a method is Split conformal prediction (Lei et al., 2018; Papadopoulos et al., 2008). In a
nutshell, the idea is to split the observed labeled data into training and calibration sets, fit a model on
the training set, and evaluate the model’s goodness-of-fit on the reserved holdout calibration points.
Under the i.i.d assumption stated above, the prediction sets produced by split conformal prediction
are guaranteed to have the following coverage property: 1 − E[1{Y ∈           / C(X)}] ≥ 1 − α, where
(X, Y ) is a fresh data point and α is a pre-specified miscoverage rate.
While coverage rate is an important property, in real-world applications, it is often desired to control
metrics other than the binary loss 1{Y ∈      / C(X)} that defines the coverage requirement. Such
losses include the F1-score or the false negative rate, where the latter is attractive for data with
high-dimensional Y as in image segmentation tasks or image recovery applications. Indeed, there
have been developed extensions of the conformal approach that go beyond the 0-1 loss, rigorously
controlling more general loss functions (Angelopoulos et al., 2021a; 2022a; Bates et al., 2021).
Analogously to split conformal prediction, these methods provide a risk-controlling guarantee that
holds under the i.i.d. assumption. In particular, such guarantees do not hold for time-varying data
with arbitrary distributional shifts, as the i.i.d. assumption would not hold anymore.
Since the i.i.d assumption of the conformal approach is often violated in real-world applications, there
have been developed extensions to conformal inference that impose relaxed notions of exchangeability
(Cauchois et al., 2020; Chernozhukov et al., 2018; Stankeviciute et al., 2021; Tibshirani et al., 2019;
Xu & Xie, 2021a;b). Such methods, however, are not guaranteed to construct prediction sets with a
valid coverage rate for general time-series data with arbitrary distributional shifts. By contrast, ACI


                                                    3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


(Gibbs & Candes, 2021) generates uncertainty sets that are guaranteed to achieve a user-specified
level of the 0-1 loss:

                                                                1, Yt ∈
                                                                      / Ct (Xt ),
                       L0-1 (Yt , C(Xt )) = 1{Yt ∈C
                                                 / t (Xt )} =                                 (3)
                                                                0, otherwise.
A recent work by Gibbs & Candès (2022) proposes a more sophisticated approach to track past
coverage rates to better adapt to distributional shifts. In general, this line of research is based on
a common, simple idea—if the past coverage rate is too high, we shorten the intervals, and if it is
too low, we widen them. In this paper, we also rely on the above update rule, however, guarantee
the control of a general risk, standing in contrast with ACI that controls only the binary loss in (3).
Therefore, our approach is the first online calibration scheme that can control risks other than the
coverage frequency.

3     P ROPOSED M ETHOD

3.1   G ENERAL FORMULATION

We now turn to present Rolling RC—a general framework for uncertainty quantification in an
online learning setting, which satisfies the risk requirement in (1). Towards that end, we define a set
construction function
                                   Ĉt (Xt ) = f (Xt , θt , Mt ) ∈ 2Y                               (4)
that gets as an input (i) the test Xt , (ii) a fitted model Mt trained on all data {Xt′ , Yt′ }t−1
                                                                                                 t′ =1 up to
time t, and (iii) a calibration parameter θt , and returns a prediction set. Above, 2Y is the power set
of Y. For instance, in the depth prediction task in Section 1.1, f constructs a prediction interval for
each pixel in the image, as visualized in Figure 1d. The model Mt (Xt ) is used to form a prediction
for Yt given the current feature vector Xt ; we will provide soon concrete formulations for the set
constructing function f as well as examples for M. The calibration parameter θt ∈ R controls the
size of the prediction set generated by f : larger θt leads to larger sets, and smaller θt leads to smaller
sets. Under the assumption that larger sets produce a lower loss, θt allows us to control the risk
over long-range windows in time: by increasing (resp. decreasing) θt over time we increase (resp.
decrease) the empirical risk. Once Yt is revealed to us, we tune θt according to the following rule:
                                         θt+1 = θt + γ(lt − r).                                         (5)
This update rule is exactly that of ACI (Gibbs & Candès, 2022), extended to our more general
setting. Above, lt = L(Yt , C(Xt )) is the loss at time t, and γ > 0 is a fixed step size, e.g., 0.05. In
Appendix C.3.3 we study the effect of γ on the resulted sets and provide a suggestion for properly
setting it. The pre-defined constant r is the desired risk level, specified by the user, e.g., 0.2 for the
image miscoverage loss in (2). Lastly, we obtain a new predictive model Mt+1 by updating the
previous Mt with the new labeled pair (Xt , Yt ), e.g., by applying a single gradient step to reduce
any given predictive loss function. For convenience, the Rolling RC procedure is summarized in
Algorithm 1. The validity of our proposal is given below, whose proof is deferred to Appendix A.1.
In Appendix A.2 we introduce a more general theorem that extends the domain of Ĉt beyond the
power set 2Y .
Theorem 1. Suppose that f : (X , R, M) → 2Y is an interval/set constructing function. In addition,
suppose that there exist constants m and M such that for all x ∈ X , y ∈ Y and M ∈ M,
f (x, θ, M) = Y for all θ > M , f (X, θ, M) = ∅ for all θ < m. Further suppose that the loss is
bounded and satisfies L(y, Y) < r and L(y, ∅) > r. Consider the following series of calibrated
intervals: {Ĉt (Xt )}∞t=1 , where Ĉt (Xt ) is defined according to (4). Then, the calibrated intervals
satisfy the risk requirement in (1).

Crucially, this theorem states that the risk-control guarantee of Rolling RC holds for any distri-
bution {PXt ,Yt }t , any set-valued function f , and any sequence of online-updated predictive models
{Mt }t . The requirements for Theorem 1 to hold are (i) the function f must yield the empty set for
small enough θ and the full label space for large enough θ; and (ii) the loss is smaller than the desired
level r for the full label set Y and exceeds r for the empty set. Also, note that the step size γ and the
bounds m, M must be fixed in order to control the risk.


                                                     4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Algorithm 1 Rolling RC
Input:
  Data {(Xt , Yt )}Tt=1 ⊆ X × Y, given as a stream, desired risk level r ∈ R, a step size γ > 0, a set
  constructing function f : (X , R, M) → 2Y and an online learning model M.
Process:
 1: Initialize θ0 = 0.
 2: for t = 1, ..., T do
 3:     Construct a prediction set for the new point Xt : Ĉt (Xt ) = f (Xt , θt , Mt ).
 4:     Obtain Yt .
 5:     Compute lt = L(Yt , Ĉt (Xt )).
 6:     Update θt+1 = θt + γ(lt − r).
 7:     Fit the model Mt on (Xt , Yt ) and obtain the updated model Mt+1 .
 8: end for
Output:
  Uncertainty sets Ĉt (Xt ) for each time step t ∈ {1, ...T }.


Observe that our method is immune to over-fitting by design even though we use the same data point
twice: the evaluation of θt is conducted by using the predictions produced by an “old” model, before
updating it with the new labeled point. We also note that the proof of Theorem 1 gives finite-sample
bounds for how close the realized risk is to the desired level; the empirical risk falls within a C/T
factor of the desired level r, where C = (M − m + 4 · γB) is a known constant; see Appendix A.1
for details. Furthermore, our new formulation unlocks new design possibilities: we can define any
prediction set function f while guaranteeing the validity of its output by calibrating any parameter θt .
This parameter can affect f in a highly non-linear fashion to attain the most informative (i.e., small)
prediction sets. Of course, the performance of the proposed scheme is influenced by the design of f ,
which is the primary focus of the next sections.

3.2     R O L L I N G RC FOR R EGRESSION

In this section, we focus on 1-dimensional response variable Y and aim to control the 0-1 loss
in (3). Note that in Section 4.1.3 we will also deal with 1-dimensional responses but show how to
control a more sophisticated notion of error for which the loss is defined on the time-horizon, and in
Appendix B we provide a concrete scheme for handling a multi-dimensional Y .
Suppose we are interested in constructing prediction intervals with 1 − α coverage frequency, using a
quantile regression model Mt that produces estimates for the α/2 and 1 − α/2 conditional quantiles
of the distribution of Yt | Xt . We denote these estimates as Mt (Xt , α/2) and Mt (Xt , 1 − α/2),
respectively, which can be obtained by fitting an LSTM model that minimizes the pinball loss; see
Appendix C.1.2 for further details. The guiding principle here is that a model that perfectly estimates
the conditional quantiles will form tight intervals with valid risk, attaining 1 − α coverage level. In
practice, however, the model Mt may not be accurate, and thus may result in invalid coverage; this is
especially true for data with frequent time-varying distributional shifts. Consequently, to ensure valid
coverage control, we apply Rolling RC. Taking inspiration from the method of conformalized
quantile regression (CQR) (Romano et al., 2019), we use the following interval construction function:
               f (Xt , θt , Mt ) = [Mt (Xt , α/2) − φ(θt ), Mt (Xt , 1 − α/2) + φ(θt )].             (6)
Above, the interval endpoints are obtained by augmenting the lower and upper estimates of the
conditional quantiles by an additive calibration term φ(θt ). The role of θt is the same as before: the
larger θt , the wider the resulting interval is. Here, however, we introduce an additional stretching
function φ that can scale θt non-linearly, providing us the ability to adapt more quickly to severe
distributional shifts. We now present and review three design options for the stretching function φ.

3.2.1     S TRETCHING F UNCTIONS FOR FASTER A DAPTATION
None. The first and perhaps most natural choice is φ(x) = x, which does not stretch the scale of
the interval’s adjustment factor. While this is the most simple choice, it might be sub-optimal when
an aggressive and fast calibration is required. To see this, recall (5), and observe that the step size γ


                                                   5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


used to update θt must be fixed throughout the entire process. As a result, the calibration parameter
θt might be updated too slowly, resulting in an unnecessary delay in the interval’s adjustment.

Exponential. The exponential stretching function, defined as φ(x) = ex − 1 for x > 0 and
φ(x) = −e−x + 1 for x ≤ 0, updates the calibration adjustment factor with an exponential rate:
φ′ (x) = ex , even though the step size for θt is fixed. In other words, it updates φ(θt ) gently when
the calibration is mild (φ(θt ) is close to 0), and faster as the calibration is more aggressive (φ(θt ) is
away from zero).

Error adaptive. The following stretching function updates θt more rapidly when the loss of the
previous data point ℓt−1 is farther from the desired risk r. Furthermore, it makes larger updates
when Yt is far from the interval’s boundaries. More formally, denote the CQR non-conformity score
(Romano et al., 2019) by
                       st = max{Mt (Xt , α/2) − Yt , Yt − Mt (Xt , 1 − α/2)},
which measures the signed distance of Yt from its closest boundary. Next, define

φt (θ) = θ + λerror , where λerror = clip(λerror   score
                                                         · st−1 · exp β loss · |ℓt−1 − r| , β low , β high ),

              t              t             t−1 − β

where β loss , β score , β low and β high are hyperparameters. The clipping function clip(x, m, M ) =
max{min{x, M }, m} is applied to restrain the effect of an outlier Yt that is far from the boundaries.
This discussion above sheds light on the great flexibility of Rolling RC: we can accurately find
the correct adjustment to the uncertainty set while being adaptive to rapid distributional shifts in the
data. Furthermore, Theorem 1 guarantees the risk validity regardless of the choice of the stretching
function. In Appendix D.1.1 we propose an additional stretching function and compare all proposed
stretching functions. This analysis indicates that the ‘error adaptive’ stretching is the best choice.

3.3   C ONTROLLING M ULTIPLE R ISKS

In this section, we show how to control more than one risk and construct intervals that are valid for
all given risks. To motivate the need for such a multiple risks controlling guarantee it may be best to
consider the depth estimation example from Section 1.1. Here, we may wish to control not only the
coverage of the entire depth image, as in Section 1.1, but also the frequency at which the coverage at
the center of the image falls below a certain threshold. This design choice meets reality since the
coverage at the center falls below 60% in more than 17% of the time-steps, as presented in Figure 10
in Appendix D.2. This figure also indicates that controlling the center coverage does not control the
center failure loss. Concretely, we formulate the center failure loss as:

                                            1
     Lcenter failure (Yt , C(Xt )) = 1            |(m, n) ∈ center : Ytm,n
                                                                           ∈C m,n
                                                                                  (Xt )| ≤ 60% .   (7)
                                         |center|
We define the center of an image as the middlemost 50x50 grid of pixels. Controlling the center
failure loss at level r = 10% ensures that more than 60% of the center will be covered for 90% of the
images.
More generally, suppose we are given k arbitrary loss functions {Li }ki=1 and aim to control their
corresponding risks, each at level ri . In this setting, the set constructing function f (·) gets as an input
the test Xt , the fitted model Mt , and a calibration vector θt ∈ Rk , and returns a prediction set

                                     Ĉt (Xt ) = f (Xt , θt , Mt ) ∈ 2Y .                                 (8)
Similarly to the single risk-controlling formulation described in Section 3.1, θt controls the size of
the generated set: by increasing the coordinates in θt we encourage the construction of larger sets
with lower risks, and we tune it likewise:
                                         θit+1 = θit + γ i (lti − ri ),

where lti = Li (Yt , Ĉt (Xt )) and γ i > 0, i = 1, . . . , L is the corresponding step size. We now show
that this procedure is guaranteed to produce uncertainty sets with valid risks.


                                                       6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Theorem 2. Suppose that f : (X , R, M) → 2Y is an interval/set constructing function. In addition,
suppose that there exist constants {M i }ki=1 such that for all X and M, f (X, θ, M) = Y if θi > M i
for some i ∈ {1, ...k}. Further suppose that the losses are bounded and satisfy Li (y, Y) < ri for
every y ∈ Y and i ∈ {1, ...k}. Consider the following series of calibrated intervals: {Ĉt (Xt )}∞
                                                                                                 t=1 ,
where Ĉt (Xt ) is defined according to (8). Then, the calibrated intervals attain valid risk:
                                                 T
                                              1X                               Di
           ∀i ∈ {1, ..., k} ∃Di ∈ R s.t             Li (Yt , Ĉt (Xt )) ≤ ri +    −−−−→ ri .
                                              T t=1                            T T →∞

If we further assume that the risks are more synchronized with each other, we can achieve an exact
multiple risks control, as stated next.
Theorem 3. Suppose that f is an interval/set constructing function and {Li }ki=1 are loss functions
as in Theorem 2. Further suppose that there exist constants {mi }ki=1 such that f (X, θ, M) = ∅
if θi < mi for some i ∈ {1, ...k} and that the losses satisfy Li (y, ∅) > ri for every y ∈ Y and
i ∈ {1, ...k}. Then, the intervals achieve the exact risk:
                                                          T
                                                     1X
                    ∀i ∈ {1, ..., k} : R(Ĉ) = lim         Li (Yt , Ĉt (Xt )) = ri
                                                T →∞ T
                                                       t=1


The proofs of the theoretical results are given in Appendix A. In words, Theorem 2 guarantees the
validity of the risks, while Theorem 3 guarantees that all risks are exactly controlled by assuming
that during the calibration process there are no two coordinates in θt such that the first is too low
(requires widening the interval), and the other is too high (requires shrinking the interval). Lastly, we
note that in this section we presented one implementation of Rolling RC to control multiple risks,
although other approaches may be valid as well, e.g., techniques with calibration parameters that are
independent of the number of risks.

4     E XPERIMENTS
4.1     S INGLE R ESPONSE : C ONTROLLING A S INGLE R ISK IN R EGRESSION TASKS

In this section, we study the effectiveness of our proposed calibration scheme for time series data
with 1-dimensional response variables. Towards that end, we describe two performance metrics that
we will use in the following numerical simulations to assess conditional/local coverage rate.

4.1.1    T IME -S ERIES C ONDITIONAL C OVERAGE M ETRICS
MC: The miscoverage counter counts how many miscoverage events happened in a row until time t:

                                     MCt−1 + 1, Yt ̸∈ Ĉt (Xt )
                            MCt =                               ,
                                     0,          otherwise

where MC0 = 0. Similarly to the coverage metric, MCt = 0 at timestamps for which Yt ∈ Ĉt (Xt ). By
contrast, when Yt ̸∈ Ĉt (Xt ), the value of MCt is the length of the sequence of previous miscoverage
events. Therefore, we can apply Rolling RC to control the MC level and prevent long sequences
of failures. Interestingly, controlling the miscoverage counter immediately grants a control over the
standard coverage metric, as stated next.
Proposition 1. If the MC risk is at most α, then the miscoverage risk is at most α.

In Appendix A.5 we provide the proof of this proposition and in Section E.2 we explain how to
choose the nominal MC level to achieve a given coverage rate 1 − α. In a nutshell, we argue that a
model that has access to the true conditional quantiles attains an MC of α/(1 − α). Therefore, in our
experiments we seek to form the tightest intervals with an MC risk controlled at this level.
MSL: As implied by its name, the metric miscoverage streak length evaluates the average length of
miscoverage streaks of the constructed prediction intervals. In contrast to MC, which is defined on a


                                                     7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


single timestamp, the MSL is defined over a sequence of uncertainty sets {Ĉt (Xt )}Tt=T
                                                                                      1
                                                                                         0
                                                                                           ⊆ 2Y and
                        T1
response variables {Yt }t=T0 ⊆ Y as:
                               1 X
                     MSL :=          min{i : Yt+i ∈ Ĉt+i (Xt+i ) or t = T1 },
                              |I|
                                   t∈I
where I is a set containing the starting times of all miscoverage streaks. The formal description is
given in Appendix E.1, where we also show that an ideal model that has access to the true conditional
quantiles attains an MSL of 1/(1 − α). Therefore, we seek to produce the narrowest intervals having
an MSL close to this value.

4.1.2   C ONTROLLING THE B INARY L OSS
In this section, we focus on the more standard long-range coverage loss as in ACI (Gibbs & Candes,
2021). We test the performance of Rolling RC on five real-world benchmark data sets with a
1-dimensional Y : Power, Energy, Traffic, Wind, and Prices. We commence by fitting an initial
quantile regression model on the first 5000 data points, to obtain a reasonable predictive system.
Then, passing time step 5001, we start applying the calibration procedure while continuing to fit the
model in an online fashion; we keep doing so until reaching time step 20000. Lastly, we measure the
performance of the deployed calibration method on data points corresponding to time steps 8001 to
20000. In all experiments, we fit an LSTM predictive model (Hochreiter & Schmidhuber, 1997) in
an online fashion, minimizing the pinball loss to estimate the 0.05 and 0.95 conditional quantiles of
Yt | Xt ; these estimates are used to construct prediction intervals with target 90% coverage rate. We
calibrate the intervals according to (6) and examine two options for the stretching function: (i) no
stretching, and (ii) ‘error adaptive’ stretching, described in Section 3.2.1. Appendix C.1.1 provides
more details regarding the data sets and this experimental setup.


Figure 3: Performance of Rolling RC on real data sets, aiming to control the coverage rate at level
1 − α = 90%. The length of the prediction intervals is scaled per data set by the average length of
the constructed intervals. Results are evaluated on 20 random initializations of the predictive model.

Figure 3 summarizes the performance metrics presented in Section 4.1.1, showing that both stretching
methods attain the desired coverage level; this is guaranteed by Theorem 1. Additionally, this figure
indicates that Rolling RC with the ‘error adaptive’ stretching constructs narrower intervals with
better conditional coverage compared to Rolling RC applied without stretching, as indicated by
the MSL metric. In Appendix D.1 we compare Rolling RC to a calibration-set-based method
and evaluate the methods using another metric for evaluating conditional coverage for time-series
data. These experiments show that constructing uncertainty sets using the conformity scores of a
calibration set performs worse than Rolling RC with or without stretching.

4.1.3   C ONTROLLING M ISCOVERAGE C OUNTER
Figure 4c shows that Rolling RC applied on the real data sets with the goal of controlling the
long-range coverage at level 1 − α = 90% achieves MC risk that is higher than α/(1 − α) = 1/9.
Following the discussion in Section 4.1.1, this indicates that the constructed intervals tend to miscover
one or more response variables in consecutive data points. To alleviate this, we repeat the same
experiment in Section 4.1.2, but apply Rolling RC to control the MC at level r = 1/9. The results
are summarized in Figure 4, revealing that (i) the MC risk is rigorously controlled even though it is
defined over the time horizon, and (ii) by controlling the MC risk we also achieve valid coverage rate.


                                                   8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


            (a) MC calibration              (b) MC calibration          (c) Miscoverage calibration

Figure 4: Performance of Rolling RC on real data sets. In (a) and (b) we aim to control the MC
risk at level r = α/(1 − α) = 1/9. In (c) we aim to control the coverage at level 1 − α = 90%.
Other details are as in Figure 3.


4.2   H IGH D IMENSIONAL R ESPONSE : C ONTROLLING M ULTIPLE R ISKS

In this section, we analyze Rolling RC for multiple risks in the depth prediction setting. In
particular, we follow the protocol described in Section 1.1 and apply the multiple risks controlling
method from Section 3.3 to control the image miscoverage rate defined in (2) at level 20% and the
center failure rate from (7) at level 10%. We construct the intervals according to (9) from Appendix B,
using exponential stretching where the vector θt is aggregated into a scalar by taking the maximal
coordinate in this vector. We repeat this experiment for 10 trials. In Appendix C.2 we provide the full
details about this experimental setup.
Figure 5 displays the results of Rolling RC obtained by controlling (i) only the image miscoverage
loss, and (ii) both the image miscoverage loss and the center failure loss. As portrayed, when
Rolling RC is set to control only the image miscoverage risk, it violates the center failure loss;
the center coverage falls below 60% for 17% of the time-steps. However, when applying Rolling
RC to control the two risks, it achieves both a valid image coverage rate, of approximately 85.6%,
and a valid center failure rate, of 9.9%. This is not a surprise, as it is guaranteed by Theorem 2.


Figure 5: Performance of Rolling RC applied to control only the ‘image coverage’ (single risk) or
both ‘image coverage’ and ‘center failure’ (multiple risks).


5     C ONCLUSION
In this paper, we introduced Rolling RC, a novel method for quantifying prediction uncertainty
for any time-series data using any online learning model. Our proposal is guaranteed to achieve any
desired level of risk (1) without making assumptions on the data, and can be applied for a broad class
of tasks, such as regression, classification, image-to-image regression, and more. Furthermore, in
Section 3.3 we extended Rolling RC to provably control multiple risks, so that the uncertainty sets
it constructs are valid for all given risks. One limitation of our method is the reliance on a fixed step
size γ, used to tune the raw risk level; improper choice of this parameter may introduce undesired
delays in adapting to distributional shifts. Therefore, it is of great interest to develop a procedure that
would automatically choose γ, e.g., by borrowing ideas from (Gibbs & Candès, 2022; Zaffran et al.,
2022). Meanwhile, we suggested a way to overcome this limitation using a stretching function φ,
which leads to improved performance, as indicated by the experiments.



                                                    9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


E THICS S TATEMENT

While valid calibration is an important step toward making learning systems safer, fairer, and more
robust, we emphasize that calibration is not a panacea and one must always treat data with care—
especially when data-driven predictions are used for high-stakes decisions. In particular, the flexibility
of our proposed method is a mixed blessing, in that the system builder has the ability and responsibility
to make important design choices. These choices can have important consequences, so they must
be treated with care. We offer initial guidelines herein, acknowledging that of course, they do not
anticipate the consequences in all possible use cases. Nonetheless, we highlight that uncertainty
quantification is an important component to designing learning systems to have a positive impact
in the real world, where the data are complex and distributions are continually shifting. Our work
makes one step toward this goal.
For reproducibility, our code carrying out the experiments herein is included as Supplementary
Material with this submission.


R EFERENCES
Anastasios N. Angelopoulos, Stephen Bates, Emmanuel J. Candès, Michael I. Jordan, and Lihua Lei.
  Learn then test: Calibrating predictive algorithms to achieve risk control. arXiv preprint, 2021a.
  arXiv:2110.01052.

Anastasios N Angelopoulos, Stephen Bates, Adam Fisch, Lihua Lei, and Tal Schuster. Conformal
  risk control. arXiv preprint arXiv:2208.02814, 2022a.

Anastasios N Angelopoulos, Amit Pal Kohli, Stephen Bates, Michael Jordan, Jitendra Malik, Thayer
  Alshaabi, Srigokul Upadhyayula, and Yaniv Romano. Image-to-image regression with distribution-
  free uncertainty quantification and applications in imaging. In International Conference on
 Machine Learning, pp. 717–730. PMLR, 2022b.

Anastasios Nikolas Angelopoulos and Stephen Bates. A gentle introduction to conformal prediction
  and distribution-free uncertainty quantification. arXiv preprint, 2021. arXiv:2107.07511.

Anastasios Nikolas Angelopoulos, Stephen Bates, Michael Jordan, and Jitendra Malik. Uncertainty
  sets for image classifiers using conformal prediction. In International Conference on Learning
 Representations, 2021b.

Stephen Bates, Anastasios Angelopoulos, Lihua Lei, Jitendra Malik, and Michael I. Jordan.
  Distribution-free, risk-controlling prediction sets. Journal of the ACM, 68(6), September 2021.

Maxime Cauchois, Suyash Gupta, Alnur Ali, and John C Duchi. Robust validation: Confident
 predictions even when distributions shift. arXiv preprint arXiv:2008.04267, 2020.

Maxime Cauchois, Suyash Gupta, and John C. Duchi. Knowing what you know: valid and validated
 confidence sets in multiclass and multilabel prediction. Journal of Machine Learning Research, 22
 (81):1–42, 2021.

Victor Chernozhukov, Kaspar Wüthrich, and Zhu Yinchu. Exact and robust conformal inference
  methods for predictive machine learning with dependent data. In Conference On Learning Theory,
  pp. 732–749. PMLR, 2018.

Victor Chernozhukov, Kaspar Wüthrich, and Yinchu Zhu. Distributional conformal prediction.
  Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 118(48), 2021.

Youngseog Chung, Willie Neiswanger, Ian Char, and Jeff Schneider. Beyond pinball loss: Quantile
  methods for calibrated uncertainty quantification. In A. Beygelzimer, Y. Dauphin, P. Liang, and
  J. Wortman Vaughan (eds.), Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2021.

Energy. Appliances energy prediction. https://archive.ics.uci.edu/ml/datasets/
  Appliances+energy+prediction. Accessed: April, 2021.


                                                   10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Shai Feldman, Stephen Bates, and Yaniv Romano. Improving conditional coverage via orthogonal
  quantile regression. In A. Beygelzimer, Y. Dauphin, P. Liang, and J. Wortman Vaughan (eds.),
  Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2021.

Andreas Geiger, Philip Lenz, Christoph Stiller, and Raquel Urtasun. Vision meets robotics: The kitti
  dataset. International Journal of Robotics Research (IJRR), 2013.

Isaac Gibbs and Emmanuel Candes. Adaptive conformal inference under distribution shift. In
   A. Beygelzimer, Y. Dauphin, P. Liang, and J. Wortman Vaughan (eds.), Advances in Neural
   Information Processing Systems, 2021.

Isaac Gibbs and Emmanuel Candès. Conformal inference for online prediction with arbitrary
   distribution shifts. arXiv preprint arXiv:2208.08401, 2022.

Sepp Hochreiter and Jürgen Schmidhuber. Long short-term memory. Neural computation, 9:1735–80,
  12 1997.

Rafael Izbicki, Gilson Shimizu, and Rafael Stern. Flexible distribution-free conditional predictive
  bands using density estimators. In Proceedings of the Twenty Third International Conference on
  Artificial Intelligence and Statistics, volume 108, pp. 3068–3077. PMLR, 26–28 Aug 2020.

Yichen Jia and Jong-Hyeon Jeong. Deep learning for quantile regression under right censoring:
  DeepQuantreg. Comput. Stat. Data Anal., 165(C), jan 2022.

Diederik P. Kingma and Jimmy Ba. Adam: A method for stochastic optimization. In 3rd International
  Conference on Learning Representations, 2015.

Roger Koenker and Gilbert Bassett. Regression quantiles. Econometrica, 46(1):33–50, 1978.

Roger Koenker and Kevin F. Hallock. Quantile regression. Journal of Economic Perspectives, 15(4):
  143–156, December 2001.

Jing Lei, Max G’Sell, Alessandro Rinaldo, Ryan J Tibshirani, and Larry Wasserman. Distribution-free
   predictive inference for regression. Journal of the American Statistical Association, 113(523):
   1094–1111, 2018.

Anat Levin, Dani Lischinski, and Yair Weiss. Colorization using optimization. In ACM SIG-
 GRAPH 2004 Papers, SIGGRAPH ’04, pp. 689–694, New York, NY, USA, 2004. Association for
  Computing Machinery. ISBN 9781450378239.

Zhenyu Li, Zehui Chen, Xianming Liu, and Junjun Jiang. Depthformer: Exploiting long-range
  correlation and local information for accurate monocular depth estimation. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2203.14211, 2022a.

Zhenyu Li, Xuyang Wang, Xianming Liu, and Junjun Jiang. Binsformer: Revisiting adaptive bins for
  monocular depth estimation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2204.00987, 2022b.

Marius Lindauer, Katharina Eggensperger, Matthias Feurer, André Biedenkapp, Difan Deng, Carolin
 Benjamins, Tim Ruhkopf, René Sass, and Frank Hutter. Smac3: A versatile bayesian optimization
 package for hyperparameter optimization. Journal of Machine Learning Research, 23(54):1–9,
 2022.

Nicolai Meinshausen. Quantile regression forests. J. Mach. Learn. Res., 7:983–999, December 2006.

Harris Papadopoulos, Kostas Proedrou, Volodya Vovk, and Alex Gammerman. Inductive confidence
  machines for regression. In Tapio Elomaa, Heikki Mannila, and Hannu Toivonen (eds.), Machine
  Learning: ECML 2002, pp. 345–356, Berlin, Heidelberg, 2002. Springer Berlin Heidelberg. ISBN
  978-3-540-36755-0.

Harris Papadopoulos, Alex Gammerman, and Volodya Vovk. Normalized nonconformity measures
  for regression conformal prediction. In Proceedings of the IASTED International Conference on
 Artificial Intelligence and Applications (AIA 2008), pp. 64–69, 2008.


                                                11
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Youngsuk Park, Danielle Maddix Robinson, Yuyang (Bernie) Wang, and Jan Gasthaus. Learning
  quantile function without quantile crossing for distribution-free time series forecasting. In ICML
  2021 Workshop on Distribution-Free Uncertainty Quantification, 2021.
Vaishakh Patil, Wouter Van Gansbeke, Dengxin Dai, and Luc Van Gool. Don’t forget the past:
  Recurrent depth estimation from monocular video. IEEE Robotics and Automation Letters, 5(4):
  6813–6820, 2020.
Power. Power consumption of tetouan city. https://archive.ics.uci.edu/ml/
  datasets/Power+consumption+of+Tetouan+city. Accessed: April, 2021.
Prices.   French electricity spot prices. https://github.com/mzaffran/
  AdaptiveConformalPredictionsTimeSeries/blob/main/data_prices/
  Prices_2016_2019_extract.csv. Accessed: April, 2021.
Yaniv Romano, Evan Patterson, and Emmanuel Candes. Conformalized quantile regression. In
  Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 32, 2019.
Yaniv Romano, Matteo Sesia, and Emmanuel Candes. Classification with valid and adaptive coverage.
  In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 33, pp. 3581–3591, 2020.
Matteo Sesia and Yaniv Romano. Conformal prediction using conditional histograms. In A. Beygelz-
 imer, Y. Dauphin, P. Liang, and J. Wortman Vaughan (eds.), Advances in Neural Information
 Processing Systems, 2021.
Kamile Stankeviciute, Ahmed M Alaa, and Mihaela van der Schaar. Conformal time-series forecasting.
  Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 34, 2021.
Timothy John Sullivan. Introduction to uncertainty quantification, volume 63. Springer, 2015.
Ryan J Tibshirani, Rina Foygel Barber, Emmanuel Candes, and Aaditya Ramdas. Conformal
  prediction under covariate shift. Advances in neural information processing systems, 32, 2019.
Traffic. Metro interstate traffic volume. https://archive.ics.uci.edu/ml/datasets/
  Metro+Interstate+Traffic+Volume. Accessed: April, 2021.
Jonas Uhrig, Nick Schneider, Lukas Schneider, Uwe Franke, Thomas Brox, and Andreas Geiger.
  Sparsity invariant cnns. In International Conference on 3D Vision (3DV), 2017.
Vladimir Vovk, Alex Gammerman, and Glenn Shafer. Algorithmic Learning in a Random World.
  Springer, 2005.
Wind. Wind power in germany. https://www.kaggle.com/datasets/l3llff/
 wind-power. Accessed: April, 2021.
Chen Xu and Yao Xie. Conformal prediction interval for dynamic time-series. In Marina Meila
  and Tong Zhang (eds.), Proceedings of the 38th International Conference on Machine Learning,
  volume 139 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pp. 11559–11569. PMLR, 18–24 Jul
  2021a.
Chen Xu and Yao Xie. Conformal prediction interval for dynamic time-series. In Marina Meila
  and Tong Zhang (eds.), Proceedings of the 38th International Conference on Machine Learning,
  volume 139 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pp. 11559–11569. PMLR, 18–24 Jul
  2021b.
Wei Yin, Jianming Zhang, Oliver Wang, Simon Niklaus, Long Mai, Simon Chen, and Chunhua
 Shen. Learning to recover 3d scene shape from a single image. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF
 Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 204–213, 2021.
Weihao Yuan, Xiaodong Gu, Zuozhuo Dai, Siyu Zhu, and Ping Tan. New crfs: Neural window
 fully-connected crfs for monocular depth estimation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2203.01502, 2022.
Margaux Zaffran, Olivier Féron, Yannig Goude, Julie Josse, and Aymeric Dieuleveut. Adaptive
 conformal predictions for time series. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp.
 25834–25866. PMLR, 2022.


                                                12
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Zhenyu Zhang, Stephane Lathuiliere, Elisa Ricci, Nicu Sebe, Yan Yan, and Jian Yang. Online depth
  learning against forgetting in monocular videos. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on
  Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 4494–4503, 2020.


                                              13
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Appendices
A     T HEORETICAL R ESULTS
A.1    P ROOF OF T HEOREM 1

The proof of Theorem 1 is based on that of Proposition 4.1 in (Gibbs & Candes, 2021). While the
proof is similar, our work greatly enlarges the scope of the result.
We begin by showing that θt is bounded throughout the entire calibration process. For this purpose,
we assume that the loss satisfies that for all y ∈ Y and C ∈ 2Y : L(y, C) ∈ [−B, B] where B > 0 is
a real number.
Lemma 1. Under the assumptions of Theorem 1, for all t ∈ N, θt ∈ [m − γ2B, M + γ2B].

Proof. Assume for the sake of contradiction that there exists t ∈ N such that θt > M + 2γB
(the complementary case is similar). Further assume that for all t′ < t: θt′ ≤ M + 2γB. Since
lt , r ∈ [−B, B], we get that:
                   θt−1 = θt − γ(lt − r) ≥ θt − 2γB > M + 2γB − 2γB = M.
Therefore, θt−1 > M . Since L(y, f (X, θ, M) = Y) < r for θ > M , we get that lt < r. As a result:
                            θt = θt−1 + γ(lt − r) < θt−1 ≤ M + γ2B.
Which is a contradiction to our assumption.

Next, we prove Theorem 1.

Proof. By applying Lemma 1 we get that θt ∈ [m − γ2B, M + γ2B] for all t ∈ N. Denote
m′ = m − γ2B, and M ′ = M + γ2B. We follow the proof of (Gibbs & Candes, 2021, Proposition
4.1) and expand the recursion defined in (5):
                                                        T
                                                        X
                             [m′ , M ′ ] ∋ θT +1 = θ1 +   γ(lt − r).
                                                             t=1
By rearranging this we get that:
                                     T
                        m′ − θ1   1X               θT +1 − θ1   M ′ − θ1
                                ≤       (lt − r) =            ≤          .
                          Tγ      T t=1                Tγ         Tγ
Therefore:
                                  T
                              1X               max {θ1 − m′ , M ′ − θ1 }
                                    (lt − r) ≤                           .
                              T t=1                     Tγ
Lastly, the definition of the loss, lt = L(Yt , Ĉt (Xt )), gives us the risk statement in (1).

Notice that the above proof additionally implies a finite-sample bound for the deviation of the
empirical risk from the desired level. In particular, the average loss is within a C/T factor of r, where
C = (M ′ − m′ )/γ = (M − m + 4 · γB)/γ. This bound is deterministic, not probabilistic. Thus,
even for the most erratic input sequences, the method has an average loss very close to the nominal
level.

A.2    G ENERAL V ERSION OF T HEOREM 1

In this section, we provide a general statement with more abstract notations of Theorem 1. The
following notations extend our proposal to a broader class of problems, so that it could be applied for
a larger set of tasks, such as multi-label classification. Here, we assume that the function f generates
                ′                                                       ′
variables in Y and that the loss function is defined as L : (Y, Y ) → R. Furthermore, we assume
                                     ′     ′                          ′   ′                   ′
that there exist a minimal value Y ∈ Y and a maximal value Ȳ ∈ Y for which L(y, Y ) > r and
        ′                         ¯          ′          ′           ′                       ¯
L(y, Ȳ ) < r. In the main text, we set Y = 2Y , Y = ∅ and Ȳ = Y. We now show that the risk is
                                                      ¯
controlled at the desired level even under this general setting.


                                                     14
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                                    ′
Theorem 4. Suppose that f : (X , R, M) → Y is an interval/set constructing function. In addition,
suppose that there exist constants m and M such that for all x ∈ X , y ∈ Y and M ∈ M,
                   ′                                    ′
f (x, θ, M) = Y for all θ > M , f (X, θ, M) = Ȳ for all θ < m. Further suppose that the loss is
                 ¯              ′                    ′
bounded and satisfies L(y, Ȳ ) < r and L(y, Y ) > r. Consider the following series of calibrated
                                                   ¯
intervals: {Ĉt (Xt )}∞t=1 , where Ĉt (Xt ) is defined according to (4). Then, the calibrated intervals
satisfy the risk requirement in (1).

Proof. The proof is similar to the one of Theorem 1 and hence omitted.

A.3   P ROOF OF T HEOREM 2

The proof of Theorem 2 is similar to the proof of Theorem 1. We assume that all losses {Li }ki=1 are
bounded in the interval [−B, B], as in Section A.1, and begin by showing that all coordinates in θt
are upper bounded.
Lemma 2. Under the assumptions of Theorem 2, for all t ∈ N and i ∈ {1, ..., k}, θit ≤ M + γ2B.

Proof. Assume for the sake of contradiction that there exist t ∈ N and i ∈ {1, ..., k} such that
θit > M + 2γB. Further assume that for all t′ < t: θit′ ≤ M + 2γB. Since lti , ri ∈ [−B, B], we get
that:
               θit−1 = θit − γ(lti − ri ) ≥ θit − 2γB > M + 2γB − 2γB = M.
Therefore, θit−1 > M . Since Li (y, f (X, θ, M) = Y) < ri for θi > M , we get that lti < ri . As a
result:
                          θit = θit−1 + γ(lti − r) < θit−1 ≤ M + γ2B.
Which is a contradiction to our assumption.

Next, we prove Theorem 2.

Proof. By applying Lemma 2 we get that θit ≤ M + γ2B for all t ∈ N and i ∈ {1, ..., k}. Denote
M ′ = M + γ2B. We expand the recursion defined in (5):
                                                    T
                                                    X
                                   θiT +1 = θi1 +         γ(lti − ri ) ≤ M ′ .
                                                    t=1

By rearranging this we get that:
                        T                T
                     1X i             1X i              θi    − θi1   M ′ − θi1
                           lt − r i =       (lt − ri ) = T +1       ≤           .
                     T t=1            T t=1                 Tγ          Tγ

Therefore:
                                           T
                                       1X i             M ′ − θi1
                                             lt ≤ r i +           .
                                       T t=1              Tγ
                                                                                       M ′ −θ i1
Lastly, by the definition of the loss, lti = Li (Yt , Ĉt (Xt )) and by setting Di =      γ      , we get the
statement in Theorem 2.

A.4   P ROOF OF T HEOREM 3

The proof of Theorem 3 is similar to the proof of Theorem 2. We assume that all losses {Li }ki=1 are
bounded in the interval [−B, B], as in Section A.1, and begin by showing that all coordinates in θt
are lower bounded.
Lemma 3. Under the assumptions of Theorem 3, for all t ∈ N and i ∈ {1, ..., k}, θit ≥ m − γ2B.


                                                        15
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Proof. Assume for the sake of contradiction that there exist t ∈ N and i ∈ {1, ..., k} such that
θit < m − 2γB. Further assume that for all t′ < t: θit′ ≥ m − 2γB. Since lti , ri ∈ [−B, B], we get
that:
                θit−1 = θit − γ(lti − ri ) ≤ θit + 2γB < m − 2γB + 2γB = m.
Therefore, θit−1 < m. Since Li (y, f (X, θ, M) = Y) > ri for θi < m, we get that lti > ri . As a
result:
                            θit = θit−1 + γ(lti − r) > θit−1 > m − γ2B.
Which is a contradiction to our assumption.

Next, we prove Theorem 3.

Proof. By applying Lemma 2 and Lemma 3 we get that θit ∈ [m − γ2B, M + γ2B] for all t ∈ N
and i ∈ {1, ..., k}. Denote m′ = m − γ2B and M ′ = M + γ2B. We expand the recursion defined
in (5):
                                                          T
                                                          X
                             [m′ , M ′ ] ∋ θiT +1 = θi1 +   γ(lti − ri ).
                                                            t=1
By rearranging this we get that:
                                      T
                        m′ − θi1   1X i              θi    − θi1   M ′ − θi1
                                 ≤       (lt − ri ) = T +1       ≤           .
                          Tγ       T t=1                 Tγ          Tγ

Therefore:
                                 T
                              1X i               max {θi1 − m′ , M ′ − θi1 }
                                    (lt − ri ) ≤                             .
                              T t=1                        Tγ
Lastly, the definition of the loss, lti = Li (Yt , Ĉt (Xt )), gives us the statement in Theorem 3.

A.5     P ROOF OF P ROPOSITION 1

Proof. 1{Yt ∈
            / Ĉt (Xt )} ≤ M Ct for any t ∈ N. Therefore:
                            T                     T
                         1X                    1X
                     lim       MCt ≤ α =⇒ lim        1{Yt ∈/ Ĉt (Xt )} ≤ α
                    T →∞ T                T →∞ T
                           t=1                   t=1


B      U NCERTAINTY Q UANTIFICATION IN O NLINE I MAGE - TO -I MAGE
       R EGRESSION P ROBLEMS
B.1     G ENERAL F ORMULATION

Recall the depth estimation problem from Section 1.1, where we construct per-pixel prediction
intervals by online processing an incoming video stream. In what follows, we discuss such image-to-
image regression problems more generally, providing a scheme to construct and calibrate pixel-valued
intervals. Consider a running model Mt (Xt ) that maps the input image Xt to a point prediction of
Yt , and we wish to control the image misocverage loss Limage miscoverage from (2). We take inspiration
from Angelopoulos et al. (2022b) and form the prediction intervals around each pixel (m, n) of the
estimated image Mt (Xt ) as
    Ĉtm,n (Xt ) = f m,n (Xt , θt , Mt ) = [Mm,n
                                             t   (Xt ) − λt ltm,n (Xt ), Mm,n
                                                                          t   (Xt ) + λt um,n
                                                                                          t   (Xt )]. (9)
Above, ltm,n (Xt ) and um,n
                          t  (Xt ) represent the uncertainty in the lower and upper directions, respec-
tively. That is, a large value of ltm,n (Xt ) indicates that the pixel has a high uncertainty in the upper
direction. Similarly, a large value of um,n
                                          t    (Xt ) indicates that the pixel has a high uncertainty in the
lower direction. A natural choice for the lower and upper uncertainty measures is a model estimating
the absolute residual error per-pixel, given by um,n  t  (Xt ) = ltm,n (Xt ) = |Ytm,n − Mm,nt   (Xt )|. We


                                                    16
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


provide more sophisticated examples for such uncertainty functions in Section B.2. The parameter
λt = φ(θt ) ∈ R in (9) stretches the calibration parameter θt , which we update according to (5).
Importantly, this procedure is an instantiation of Rolling RC and thus attains the correct image
coverage, as guaranteed by Theorem 1. This is also validated in the experiment from Section 1.1.

B.2     U NCERTAINTY Q UANTIFICATION H EURISTICS

In this section, we present possible choices for the uncertainty heuristics for the interval constructing
function given in (9).

B.2.1    BASELINE C ONSTANT
The most naive choice for an uncertainty heuristic is outputting a constant value for every m, n, X:
lm,n (X) = um,n (X) = 1. In other words, the set constructing function is defined as:
                     f m,n (Xt , θt , Mt ) = [Mm,n
                                               t   (Xt ) − λt , Mm,n
                                                                 t   (Xt ) + λt ].
This approach has two main limitations: (i) the calibrated intervals are symmetric, having the same
uncertainty size in both the upper and lower directions, and (ii) all the pixel-valued intervals have
the same length. These limitations lead to unnecessarily wide intervals that are less informative. We
show how to overcome these limitations with the methods presented hereafter.

B.2.2    M AGNITUDE OF THE R ESIDUAL
The residual magnitude heuristic was introduced by Angelopoulos et al. (2022b) as a simple uncer-
tainty quantification technique. Here, lm,n (X) = um,n (X) = r̂m,n (x) is an estimate for the residual
|Mm,n (X) − Y m,n | and it is formulated as an online learning model fitted to minimize the squared
residual loss, given by (r̂(x) − |Mm,n (x) − y|)2 . An ideal model that minimizes this loss function
outputs the exact residual: r̂(x) = |Mm,n (x) − y| and thus achieves 100% coverage rate for λ = 1.
In practice, however, the fitted model r̂ may not be accurate and thus we apply Rolling RC, to
ensure valid risk control. Observe that, unlike the constant heuristic, here, each pixel is assigned a
different uncertainty size. Nevertheless, both techniques produce symmetric prediction intervals.

B.2.3    P REVIOUS R ESIDUALS
In contrast to the residual’s magnitude heuristic, here, we take advantage of the online setting in
which the data set is received as a stream, and use the past residuals to estimate the current one. We
define the positive and negative residuals at time t as:
                                    rtm,n = Mm,n (Xt ) − Ytm,n ,
                                            +
                                    rtm,n = max {rtm,n , 0},
                                            −
                                    rtm,n       = max {−rtm,n , 0}.
The uncertainty heuristic in the lower (upper) direction is formulated as the average of the positive
(negative) residual in the previous p time-steps:
                                                          t−1
                                                     1 X m,n +
                                    ltm,n (Xt ) =        rt    ,
                                                     p ′
                                                       t =t−p
                                                                                                    (10)
                                                           t−1
                                                 1         X          −
                                    um,n
                                     t   (Xt ) =                 rtm,n .
                                                     p ′
                                                       t =t−p

In our experiments, we set the sliding window’s size to p = 5.

B.2.4    C ORRECTING P IXELS D ISPLACEMENTS W ITH I MAGE R EGISTRATION
The ‘previous residuals’ method suffers from the following crucial limitation. Objects in the response
image Y may appear in different positions across time, so that an object that lies in pixel (m, n) at
frame t might appear in a different pixel at time t + 1, e.g., (m + 7, n − 11). For example, in our


                                                     17
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


depth prediction example the camera and the depth sensor move during the online process, so objects
change their locations and do not remain in a fixed pixel between consecutive frames. Therefore,
to obtain more accurate residual estimates it is better to correct for the displacement of pixels in
consecutive frames. For this purpose, we apply an image registration algorithm before evaluating
the residuals. In particular, we use optical flow (OF) to register the estimated depth images and the
ground truth depth maps. Suppose that OF(im1 , im2 ) receives two images as an input and returns the
result of the registration of the first image im1 to the second one im2 . We recursively define optical
flow on a sequence as:
                       OFseq (im1 , ∅) = im1 ,
                     OFseq (im1 , {imi }ki=2 ) = OFseq (OF(im1 , im2 ), {imi }ki=3 ).
Then, we register the previous estimated depth images and ground truth depth maps
                       Mreg (Xt−i ) = OFseq (M(Xt−i ), {M(Xt−i+j )}i−1     j=1 ),
                         reg
                       Yt−i  = OFseq (Yt−i , {Yt−i }i−1
                                                    j=1 ).
In plain words, we register each image using the next ones in the sequence. We define the registered
residuals as:
                                    r̄t = Mreg (Xt ) − Ytreg ,
                                     r̄tm,n+ = max {r̄tm,n , 0},
                                   r̄tm,n− = max {−r̄tm,n , 0}.
Then, we compute the average residual, as in (10):
                                                   t−1
                                               1 X m,n+
                                 ltm,n (Xt ) =         r̄t     ,
                                               p ′
                                                    t =t−p
                                                        t−1
                                                   1 X m,n−
                                    um,n
                                     t   (Xt ) =       r̄t  .
                                                   p ′
                                                    t =t−p
This displacement consideration indeed improves the performance, as indicated by the experiments
in Section D.2.

C     E XPERIMENTAL S ETUP
C.1     S INGLE -O UTPUT TASKS

C.1.1    T HE Q UANTILE R EGRESSION M ODEL’ S A RCHITECTURE
The neural network architecture is composed of four parts: an MLP, an LSTM, and another two MLPs.
To estimate the uncertainty of Yt | Xt , we first map the previous k samples {(Xt−i , Yt−i , τ )}ki=1
through the first MLP, denoted as f1 ,
                                        1
                                      wt−i   = f1 (xt−i , yt−i , τ ),
where we set k to 3 in our experiments. The outputs are then forwarded through the LSTM network,
denoted as f2 :
                                       2
                                    {wt−i  }ki=1 = f2 ({wt−i1
                                                               }ki=1 ).
                                          2                             2                    2
Note that since f2 is an LSTM model, wt−i      is used to compute wt−i+1  . The last output wt−1 of the
LSTM model, being an aggregation of the previous k samples, is fed, together with (Xt , τ ), to the
second MLP model, denoted as f3 :
                                         wt3 = f3 (wt−1
                                                      2
                                                          , Xt ).
Lastly, we pass wt3 through the third MLP, denoted by f4 , with one hidden layer that contains 32
neurons:
                                       q̂τ (Xt ) = f4 (wt3 , τ ).
The networks contain dropout layers with a parameter equal to 0.1. The model’s optimizer is Adam
(Kingma & Ba, 2015) and the batch size is 512, i.e., the model is fitted on the most recent 512
samples in each time step. Before forwarding the input to the model, the feature vectors and response
variables were normalized to have unit variance and zero mean using the first 8000 samples of the
data stream.


                                                   18
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


C.1.2    T RAINING T HE Q UANTILE R EGRESSION M ODEL
Estimating the conditional quantile function can be done, for example, by minimizing the pinball
loss in lieu of the standard mean squared error loss used in classic regression; see (Izbicki et al.,
2020; Jia & Jeong, 2022; Koenker & Bassett, 1978; Koenker & Hallock, 2001; Meinshausen, 2006).
Specifically, in our experiments with time-series data we minimize the objective function:
                       t
                       X
                 min           ρα/2 (Yt′ , Mt (Xt′ , α/2)) + ρ1−α/2 (Yt′ , Mt (Xt′ , α/2)),
                  Mt
                       t′ =1
where
                                            α(y − ŷ)         y − ŷ > 0,
                                 ρα (y, ŷ) =
                                            (1 − α)(ŷ − y) otherwise.
is the pinball loss. Since the data points arrive sequentially, we formulate Mt as an LSTM
model and minimize the above cost function in an online fashion as follows. Given a new la-
beled test point (Xt , Yt ), we (i) compute the pinball loss both for the lower and upper quantiles,
i.e., ρα/2 (Yt , Mt (Xt , α/2)) and ρ1−α/2 (Yt , Mt (Xt , 1 − α/2)), respectively; and (ii) update the
parameters of the LSTM model Mt by applying a few gradient steps with ADAM optimizer. More
details on the network architecture are given in Appendix C.1.1.

C.1.3    H YPER -PARAMETERS T UNING
For both real and synthetic data sets, we examined all combinations of the raw model’s hyperparame-
ters (with no calibration applied) on one initialization of the model, and chose the setting in which
the model attained the smallest pinball loss, evaluated on the validation set, indexed by 6001 − 8000.
The combinations we tested are presented in Table 1. Some of the configurations required more than
11GB of memory to train the model, so we did not consider them in our experiments. The chosen
configuration was later used for choosing the calibration’s learning rate γ, as explained next. We note
that using the validation set to tune the hyperparameters and the choice of the stretching function
is a heuristic. Yet, we found this rule of thumb to work well empirically, as visualized in Figure 7
in Appendix D.1.1. Of course, there are situations where this approach would not be most effective
since the data is not i.i.d., but we believe it is a sensible suggestion. Another advantage of tuning the
hyperparameters this way is that it facilitates the comparison between the different methods since
they all follow the same automatic tuning approach.
The updating rates we tested are: γ ∈ {0.025, 0.03, 0.05, 0.09, 0.1, 0.15, 0.2, 0.35}. We chose γ that
attained the smallest pinball loss, evaluated on points 5001 − 8000.
In Appendix C.4 we explain how we chose the hyper-parameters for the stretching functions.

C.2     T HE D EPTH P REDICTION S ETUP

C.2.1    DATA S ET AND AUGMENTATIONS
We used the KITTI data set which contains pairs of a colored (RGB) image (Geiger et al., 2013)
and a latent ground truth depth map (Uhrig et al., 2017). We filled the missing depth values with
the colorization algorithm developed by Levin et al. (2004). Then, we scaled the depth values to the
range [0,10]. We augmented the images according to the following protocol. Images and depths
used for training the model were resized using one of the following ratios [0.5, 0.6, 0.7, 0.8, 0.9, 1.0,
1.1, 1.2, 1.3, 1.4, 1.5], chosen with equal probability, cropped randomly and re-scaled to 448 × 448,
and then flipped horizontally with a 50% chance. Images and depths used for testing and updating
the calibration model were resized with a ratio of 0.5 and re-scaled to 448 × 448. In both cases, we
augmented the colors of the RGB image and blurred it, as described in (Yin et al., 2021). Notice
that the augmentations are deterministic during inference and random during training. Therefore, the
augmentations are chosen randomly in each trial. The main purpose of these augmentations is to
improve the model’s training.

C.2.2    T HE D EPTH P REDICTION M ODEL
The base prediction model M we used is LeReS (Yin et al., 2021) with ResNeXt101 backbone
initialized with the pre-trained network from https://cloudstor.aarnet.edu.au/plus/


                                                      19
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


s/lTIJF4vrvHCAI31. This pre-trained network was not fitted on the KITTI data set used in
our experiments. We fitted the model offline on the first 6000 samples for 60 epochs, to obtain a
reasonable predictive system. Then, passing time step 6001 we start training the model in an online
fashion while applying the calibration procedure. Lastly, we measure the performance of the deployed
calibration method on data points corresponding to time steps 8001 to 10000.

C.2.3    T RAINING T HE U NCERTAINTY Q UANTIFICATION M ODELS
For each uncertainty quantification model presented in Section B.2, we used a pre-trained LeReS
(Yin et al., 2021) network as the base network architecture and initialized the last two components of
the network with random weights. We simultaneously trained the uncertainty quantification model
and the LeReS depth model on the first 6000 samples for 60 epochs, and in an online fashion at
timestamps 6001 to 10000, as mentioned in Section C.2.2.

C.2.4    D EPTH E XAMPLE S ETUP
In this section, we describe the setup we used for the depth experiment presented in Section 1.1 in the
main text. As explained in Section C.2.2, we used LeReS (Yin et al., 2021) as the base depth prediction
model. The model’s predictions were calibrated by our Rolling RC, with the design choice for f
given in Section 9. The uncertainty heuristics we used in this experiment are the previous residuals
with registration, as described in Section B.2.4, with a sliding window of size p = 5. We used scikit-
image’s implementation of optical flow. We set the parameter "num_iter" to 2 and the "num_warp" to
1, to reduce the computational complexity. The figures are taken from one trial of the experiment, for
which the random seed value was set to 0. The only hyper-parameter we tuned in this experiment
is the calibration’s learning rate γ which we tuned in the following way. We applied Rolling
RC with the following learning rates: γ ∈ {0.001, 0.005, 0.01, 0.05, 0.1, 0.2, 0.5, 1, 2, 10} and chose
the γ that achieved the narrowest intervals among those with coverage greater than 79.9% on the
validation set. The validation samples are those that correspond to timestamps 7001 to 8000. The
value that was finally chosen is γ = 0.2.

C.2.5    M ULTIPLE R ISKS C ONTROLLING S ETUP
In this section, we describe the setup we used for the multiple risks controlling experiment presented
in Section 4.2. We followed the experimental protocol described in Section C.2.4 except for the
tuning of γ. When Rolling RC is applied to control multiple risks, the learning rate γ is a vector,
so we examine all possible choices of γ 1 , γ 2 ∈ {0.00001, 0.0001, 0.001, 0.005, 0.01, 0.1, 0.5, 2}.
We chose the vector γ that achieved the narrowest intervals among those with coverage greater than
79.9% and center failure rate lower than 11%, evaluated on the validation samples, corresponding to
timestamps 7001 to 8000. In this experiment, we set λt in (9) to be the maximal value in the vector
θt . That is, we used the ‘max aggregation’ described in Section D.3.

C.2.6    I MPLEMENTATION D ETAILS
In this section, we describe the technical details of implementing the depth prediction model and the
uncertainty quantification heuristics. Popular depth prediction models estimate the depth up to an
unknown scale and shift (Li et al., 2022a;b; Yuan et al., 2022). That is, an ideal model M satisfies
that for every Xt ∈ X there exist µX , σX ∈ R such that:
                                         σt M(Xt ) + µt = Yt .
We correct the model’s outputs to actual depth estimates in the following way. First, we assume that
we are given the ground truth depth of a small set of pixels. Then, we use this information to estimate
the scale and shift: when Xt is revealed, we uniformly choose 200 pixels of it and assume that their
depth is given along with Xt . Next, we obtain the learning model’s output M(Xt ) and apply least
squares polynomial fitting to compute the estimated scale µ̂t and shift σ̂t . Finally, we produce the
following depth estimate:
                                        Ŷt = σ̂t Mt (Xt ) + µ̂t .                                 (11)
Throughout this paper, we consider the quantity in (11) as the output of the depth model M.
We utilize the sparse ground truth depth map to correct the estimates of the uncertainty heuristics as
well. Recall that the residual heuristic from Section B.2.2 produces an estimate r̂(Xt ) for the residual


                                                   20
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


|Mm,n (Xt )−Yt |, where M(Xt ) is the scaled model’s prediction. We compute the scale and shift for
the residual’s prediction via polynomial fitting, and output the scaled residual, as in (11). Similarly,
we correct the previous residuals heuristic defined in Section B.2.3 by re-scaling the positive and
negative residuals.
Another important technical detail is dealing with invalid pixels. Invalid pixels are pixels with depth
that is too small (below 10−8 ), or pixels that are padded to the image. We do not consider these pixels
for updating the calibration scheme or for evaluating the methods’ performance. For instance, the
image coverage rate is practically the coverage rate over all valid pixels in a given image.
Lastly, throughout the depth prediction experiments we used the following formulation of the
exponential stretching function for Rolling RC:
                                       x
                                      e − 1,      x > 0.1,
                           φexp. (x) = x,          −0.1 ≤ x ≤ 0.1,
                                       −x
                                        −e + 1, x < −0.1.
Notice that this stretching function is the identity function around 0, and therefore it updates φ(θt )
gently when the calibration is mild (θt is close to 0), and faster (exponentially) as the calibration is
more aggressive (θt is away from zero).

C.3     T HE C ALIBRATION ’ S H YPERPARAMETERS

C.3.1    T HE B OUNDS m, M
the lower and upper bounds–m and M are predefined constants serve as safeguards against extreme
situations where the data change adversarially over time. In such extreme cases, these bounds allow
controlling the coverage: once θ exceeds the upper bound we return the infinite interval (the full
label space) and once it exceeds the lower bound we return the empty set. By outputting the full
label space, we can guarantee to control the risk at any user-specified level, as the full label space
is assumed to attain loss lower than the nominal level. In practice, however, we do not expect a
reasonable predictive model to reach the safeguard induced by m and M . In fact, in our experiments,
we set m = −9999, and M = 9999 to be extremely large values relative to the scale of Y , and the
coverage we obtained is exactly 90%.
For classification problems, we can set the bounds to be (0, 1), similarly to ACI. For regression
problems, it depends on the interval constructing function f . If the intervals are constructed in the
quantile scale, according to Section F of the main text, we can set the bounds to be (0, 1) since θ
is bounded in this range, as in ACI. If the intervals are constructed in the Y scale, according to
Section 3.2 of the main text, we can set them to be 100 times the difference between the lowest and
highest values of the response variables in the training data.

C.3.2    T HE I NITIAL VALUE OF θ
The recommended way to set the initial value of θ depends on the design of the interval constructing
function f : for example, for the interval constructing function in Y scale, presented in Section 3.2
in the main text, we set the initial θ to zero as this is the right choice for a model that correctly
estimates the conditional quantiles. If the model is inaccurate, θ will be updated over time, in a way
that guarantees that the desired long-range coverage will be achieved.

C.3.3    T HE L EARNING R ATE γ
In this section, we analyze the effect of the learning rate γ on the performance of the calibration
scheme. Figure 6 presents the results of our Rolling RC with a linear stretching function applied
with different step-size γ on the synthetic data described in Section C.6.1 of the main manuscript.
We choose the linear stretching instead of the exponential one to better isolate the effect of γ on the
performance. Following that figure, observe that by increasing γ we increase the adaptivity of the
method to changes in the distribution of the data, as indicated by the MSL. Recall that (i) the lower
the MSL the smaller the average streak of miscoverage events; and (ii) the MSL for the ideal model
is ≈ 1.11. On the other hand, the improvement in MSL comes at the cost of increasing the intervals’
lengths: observe how the largest γ results in too conservative intervals, as their MSL is equal to 1.


                                                  21
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


To set a proper value for γ in regression problems, we suggest evaluating the pinball loss of the
calibrated intervals, using a validation set. With this approach, one can choose the value of γ that
yields the smallest loss. We note that our method is guaranteed to attain valid coverage for any choice
of γ, so the trade-off here is between the intervals’ lengths and faster adaptivity to distributional
shifts.


Figure 6: Rolling RC with linear stretching applied to control the 0-1 loss at level r = 10% with
different learning rates on the synthetic described in Section C.6.1.


C.4     T HE H YPER -PARAMETERS FOR THE S TRETCHING F UNCTIONS

The ‘score adaptive’ φ function has three hyper-parameters, and the ‘error adaptive’ has four. Choos-
ing them wisely greatly affects the performance of the method. To do so, we used SMAC3 (Lindauer
et al., 2022), which is a hyper-parameter tuning library written in python. We let it find a combination
of β score ∈ [0.01, 0.4], β loss ∈ [0.1, 0.2] that minimizes the pinball loss (or to be exact, the average of
the pinball losses of the 0.95 and 0.05 quantiles), with runcount-limit of 40. We chose β low , β high to
be −∆mean , +∆mean (respectively) where:
                                                    1 X
                                       ∆mean =              |Yt − Yt−1 |,
                                                  |Ival |
                                                     t∈Ival

where Ival are indices 5001 − 8000. The rationale behind this choice is that we want the clipping to
be on the scale of an average change in the intervals’ lengths.

C.5     M ACHINE ’ S S PEC

The resources used for the experiments are:

        • CPU: Intel(R) Xeon(R) E5-2650 v4.
        • GPU: Nvidia titanx, 1080ti, 2080ti.
        • OS: Ubuntu 18.04.


C.6     DATA S ETS D ETAILS

C.6.1     S YNTHETIC DATA S ET
In this section, we define a synthetic data set that we use in our ablation study. First, we define a
group indication vector, denoted as gt :
                                      g = 1m1 · 2m2 · 3m3 · 4m4 ...


                                                    22
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                Table 1: Hyperparameters tested for each data set

                                        Parameter                         Options
                          f1 - LSTM input layers                [32], [32, 64], [32, 64, 128]
                              f2 -LSTM layers                            [64], [128]
                          f3 -LSTM output layers                        [32], [64, 32]
                                learning rate                          10−4 , 5 · 10−4


where wn is a vector of the number w repeated n times, · is a concatenation of two vectors, mi ∼
N (500, 102 ) and N (µ, σ 2 ) is the normal distribution with mean µ and variance σ 2 . In words, each
group lasts for approximately 500 time steps, and the vector is a concatenation of the group’s indexes.
The generation of the feature vectors and the response variable is done in the following way:
                   β̂i ∼ Uniform(0, 1)p ,
                                β̂i
                   βi =         ,
                        ∥β̂i ∥1

                          N (20, 10), gt ≡ 0 mod 2,
                   ωi =                             ,
                          1,          otherwise,
               Xt ∼ Uniform(0, 1)5 ,
               εt ∼ N (0, 1),
                       1
               Yt = Yt−1 + ωg2t |βgTt Xt | + 2 sin(2Xt,1 · εt ),
                       2
where Uniform(a, b) is a uniform distribution on the interval (a, b).

C.6.2    R EAL DATA S ETS
In addition to the features given in the raw data set, we added for each sample the day, month, year,
hours, minutes, and the day of the week. Table 2 presents the number of samples in each data set, the
number of samples we used in the quantile regression experiments 4.1.2, and the dimension of the
feature vector.
                                  Table 2: Information about the real data sets.

               Data Set               Total Number of Samples    Number of Used Samples   Feature Dimension

            power (Power)                     52416                      20000                   11
           energy (Energy)                    19735                      20000                   33
            traffic (Traffic)                 48204                      20000                   12
             wind (Wind)                      385565                     20000                   6
            prices (Prices)                   34895                      20000                   61



D     A DDITIONAL E XPERIMENTS
D.1     S INGLE R ESPONSE Q UANTILE R EGRESSION

D.1.1    A BLATION S TUDY ON THE S TRETCHING F UNCTION
In this section, we evaluate Rolling RC in the regression setting for different stretching functions.
We follow the procedure described in Section 3.2 and use the following stretching functions:

None.
                                                         φ(x) = x


                                                                23
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Exponential.
                                                 x
                                                e − 1,          x > 0,
                                     φ(x) =
                                                −e−x + 1,       x ≤ 0,

Score adaptive. The following stretching function makes a larger update to θt the farther the test
Yt from the interval’s boundaries. This is in contrast with the exponential function described above,
which does not take into account the quality of the constructed interval. More formally, denote the
CQR non-conformity score (Romano et al., 2019) by
                       st = max{Mt (Xt , α/2) − Yt , Yt − Mt (Xt , 1 − α/2)},
which measures the signed distance of Yt from the its closest boundary. Next, define
             φt (θ) = θ + λscore
                           t     , where λscore
                                          t     = clip(λscore
                                                        t−1 − β
                                                                score
                                                                      · st−1 , β low , β high ),
where β score , β low and β high are hyperparameters. Similarly to the ‘error adaptive’ stretching function
presented in Section 3.2.1, the clipping function is used to restrain the effect of an outlier Yt that is
far from the boundaries.

Error adaptive. By adding awareness of previous points’ loss to the ‘score adaptive’ stretching, we
forge a stretching function that is aware of both the error margin and the constructed intervals’ loss:
 φt (θ) = θ + λerror , where λerror = clip(λerror   score
                                                          · st−1 · exp β loss · |ℓt−1 − r| , β low , β high ).

                t             t             t−1 − β


Figure 7 displays the performance of Rolling RC aiming to control coverage rate at level 1 − α =
90% with the stretching functions described above, and Figure 8 presents the results of Rolling
RC applied to control the MC risk at level α/(1 − α) = 1/9. Following these figures, we can see that
Rolling RC with each stretching function performs well on most of the metrics on most of the
data sets.
Although the ‘no stretching’ and the ‘exponential stretching’ functions converge faster to the desired
risk level, it is clear from the results that the ‘score adaptive’ and the ‘error adaptive’ stretching
functions construct narrower intervals. Moreover, the ‘error adaptive’ approach is superior in several
terms:

        • It constructs the shortest intervals.
        • It achieves MSL that is closer to the ideal level 1.111..., which means that consecutive
          miscoverage events are less likely to occur (see Appendix E.1).
        • It achieves MC that is closer to the desired level 0.111... when aiming to control the coverage
          rate, and its coverage rate is closer to 90% when aiming to control the MC risk level, which
          is a desired outcome (see Appendix E.2).
        • Rolling RC with ‘error adaptive’ stretching performs similarly to the competitive stretch-
          ings in terms of ∆Coverage.

D.1.2     C ONSTRUCTING U NCERTAINTY S ETS W ITH A C ALIBRATION S ET
In this section, we analyze an instantiation of ACI (Gibbs & Candes, 2021), which we refer to as
calibration with cal that constructs uncertainty sets with a controlled miscoverage rate
using a calibration set. It is more out-of-the-box because it allows the user to take any conformal
score function from the conformal prediction literature to get a confidence set function f . Many
conformal scores have been developed and extensively studied, so this approach directly inherits all
of the progress made on this topic. calibration with cal uses calibration points, but does
not hold out a large block. Rather, previous points are simultaneously used both for calibration and
model fitting.
Turning to the details, denote by S(Mt (Xt ), Yt ) ∈ R a non-conformity score function that takes
as an input the model’s prediction Mt (Xt ) at time t and the corresponding label Yt , and returns
a measure for the model’s goodness-of-fit or prediction error. Here, the convention is that smaller
scores imply a better fit. For instance, adopting the same notations from (6), the quantile regression


                                                     24
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Figure 7: Performance of Rolling RC on real data sets, aiming to control the coverage rate at level
1 − α = 90%. The length of the prediction intervals is scaled per data set by the average length of
the constructed intervals. Results are evaluated on 20 random initializations of the predictive model.
The ∆Coverage metric is scaled between 0 to 100.


score presented in (Romano et al., 2019) are given by S(Mt (Xt ), Yt ) = max{Mt (Xt , α/2) −
Yt , Yt − Mt (Xt , 1 − α/2)}. Next, define the prediction set constructing function in (4) as:
                    f (Xt , θt , Mt ) = {y ∈ Y : S(Mt (Xt ), y) ≤ Q1+θt (Scal )},                  (12)
                                       ′
where Scal = {S(Mt′ (Xt′ ), Yt′ ) : t = t − n, . . . , t − 1} is a set containing the n most recent
non-conformity scores. The function Q1+θt (Scal ) returns the (1 + θt )-th empirical quantile of the
scores in Scal , being the ⌈(1 + θt )(n + 1)⌉ largest element in that set. Here, −1 ≤ θt ≤ 0 is the
calibration parameter we tune recursively, as in (5). The reason for having the negative sign, is to
form larger prediction sets as θ increases. In plain words, f in (12) returns all the candidate target
values y for the test label, whose score S(Mt (Xt ), y) is smaller than (1 + θt ) × 100% of the scores
in Scal , which are evaluated on truly labeled historical data S(Mt′ (Xt′ ), Yt′ ). As such, the size of
the set in (12) gets smaller (larger) as 1 + θt gets smaller (larger).
For reference, calibration with cal procedure is summarized in Algorithm 2. The reason
for this method’s name is to emphasize that we now use calibration scores to formulate the prediction
set function f . In fact, the coverage guarantee of calibration with cal follows directly from
Theorem 1 for f (Xt , θt , Mt ) defined in (12).
We run Rolling RC with either ‘error adaptive’ stretching and without stretching, as described in
Section 3.2.1, and calibration with cal, as presented in Algorithm 2 on the real data sets
detailed in Appendix C.6.2. Figure 9 summarizes the results, showing that all methods attain the
desired coverage level; this is guaranteed by Theorem 1. This figure also shows that Rolling RC


                                                  25
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Figure 8: Performance of Rolling RC on real data sets, where we aim to control the MC risk at
level α/(1 − α) = 1/9. The length of the prediction intervals is scaled per data set by the average
length of the constructed intervals. Results are evaluated on 20 random initializations of the predictive
model. The ∆Coverage metric is scaled between 0 to 100.


with ‘error adaptive’ stretching constructs the narrowest intervals while attaining the best conditional
coverage metrics. Furthermore, one can see that even without stretching, Rolling RC performs
better than calibration with cal, as indicated by the intervals’ lengths and the conditional
coverage metrics.

D.2    U NCERTAINTY Q UANTIFICATION FOR O NLINE D EPTH E STIMATION

In this section we analyze the performance of the uncertainty quantification heuristics described
in Section 3.2.1. We follow the experimental protocol explained in Section C.2.4, and display the
results in Figure 10. This figure shows that all heuristics attain the nominal image coverage level, as
guaranteed by Theorem 1. Furthermore, the figure suggests that estimating the current residual with
the five most recent ones outperforms the baseline constant technique, while estimating the residual
with a neural network, does not, as indicated by the average length and center coverage metrics. We
propose two possible explanations for this phenomenon. First, since the residual model’s architecture
is huge, it may require further offline fitting, on a larger data set. For comparison, we trained it for
60 epochs on 6000 samples, while the base depth prediction model, LeReS Yin et al. (2021), was
trained over 300k samples. Second, since one can extract a depth estimate from a residual estimate,
the problem of estimating the residual r is equivalent to estimating the depth:

                                        Ŷt = r(Xt ) + M(Xt ).


                                                   26
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Algorithm 2 calibration with cal
Input:
  Data {(Xt , Yt )}Tt=1 ⊆ X × Y, given as a stream, miscoverage level α ∈ (0, 1), a score function
  S, a calibration set size n2 , a step size γ > 0, and an online learning model M.
Process:
 1: Initialize α0 = α and a set of the previous conformity scores: Scal = ∅.
 2: for t = 1, ..., T do
 3:     Construct a prediction set for the new point Xt :
                          ĈtWC (Xt ) = {y ∈ Y : S(Mt (Xt ), y) ≤ Q1−αt (Scal )}.
 4:    Obtain Yt .
 5:    Compute the current conformity score: st = S(Mt (Xt ), Yt ).
 6:    Add the current conformity score to the set: Scal = Scal ∪ {st }.
 7:    Remove the oldest calibration point from the set: Scal = Scal − {st−n2 }.
 8:    Compute errt = 1{Yt ∈ / ĈtWC (Xt )}.
 9:    Update αt+1 = αt + γ(α − errt ).
10:    Fit the model Mt on (Xt , Yt ) and obtain the updated model Mt+1 .
11: end for
Output:
 Uncertainty sets ĈtWC (Xt ) for each time step t ∈ {1, ..., T }.


Therefore, the fact that estimating a depth map is extremely difficult, as explained in Section C.2.6,
turns the task of estimating the residual to be difficult as well. As a consequence, the residual
estimates may be inaccurate.

D.3    M ULTIPLE R ISKS C ONTROL : A NALYZING THE AGGREGATION F UNCTIONS

In this section we examine two options for aggregating the vector θt into a scalar through λt :

Mean. λmean t    = 12 (φ(θ1t ) + φ(θ2t )). Taking the average of the entries compromises between the
different risks and results in intervals that are not too conservative and not too liberal.

Max. λmax t    = max {φ(θ1t ), φ(θ2t )}. Since the maximal coordinate corresponds to the most conser-
vative loss, the constructed intervals may be too conservative.
The third possible aggregation is the minimum function λmin     t   = min(θt ) that consistently follows
the minimal entry in θt . Since the minimal coordinate in θt corresponds to the most liberal loss,
this approach is likely to result in intervals that are too liberal, as it ignores the conservative losses.
Therefore, we do not examine this aggregation in our experiments.
We follow the experimental setup described in Section 4.2 and display in Figure 11 the performance
of the mean and max aggregation for θt . This figure shows that the two methods perform similarly,
and using mean aggregation leads to slightly narrower intervals compared to the mean aggregation
approach.

E     T IME -S ERIES C ONDITIONAL C OVERAGE M ETRICS
E.1   AVERAGE M ISCOVERAGE S TREAK L ENGTH

Following Section 4.1.1, recall that the miscoverage streak length of a series of intervals {Ĉt (Xt )}TT10
is defined as:
                                1 X
                     MSL :=             min{i : Yt+i ∈ Ĉt+i (Xt+i ) or t = T1 },
                               |I|
                                    t∈I
where I is a set containing the starting times of all miscoverage streaks:
                  n                                                                   o
            I = t ∈ [T0 , T1 ] : t = T0 or Yt−1 ∈ Ĉt−1 (xt−1 ) and Yt ∈   / Ĉt (Xt ) .


                                                    27
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Figure 9: Performance of calibration with cal (Algorithm 2) (blue), Rolling RC with-
out stretching (orange), and Rolling RC with ‘error adaptive’ stretching (green). Results are
evaluated on 20 random initializations of the predictive model. The ∆Coverage metric is scaled
between 0 to 100.


Above, [T0 , T1 ] is the set of all integers between T0 and T1 .
To clarify this definition of the MSL, we now analyze the MSL in two concrete examples. Denote by
“1” a coverage event and by “0” a miscoverage event, and consider a sequence of 15 observations. A
method that results in the following coverage sequence:
                                   1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 0, 1, 0,0, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1,
has an MSL = (2 + 1)/2 = 1.5, and coverage = 12/15 = 80%. By contrast, a method that results in
the following sequence
                                  1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 0,0,0,
has the same average coverage of 80% but much larger MSL = 3/1 = 3. This emphasizes the role of
MSL: while the two methods cover the response in 12 out of 15 events, the second is inferior as it has,
on average, longer streaks of miscoverage events.
We now compute the MSL of intervals constructed by the true conditional quantiles {C(Xt )}Tt=T
                                                                                            1
                                                                                               0
                                                                                                 .
By construction, these intervals satisfy:
                                  P(Yt ∈ C(Xt ) | Xt = xt ) = 1 − α.

Therefore, Zt = min{i : yt+i ∈ Ĉ(Xt+i ) or t = T1 } is a geometric random variable with success
probability 1 − α. The average miscoverage streak length of the true quantiles is the mean of Zt ,


                                                      28
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Figure 10: Performance of Rolling RC applied to control the image coverage rate with the
following uncertainty quantification heuristics that are described in Section B.2: ‘constant value’
(blue), ‘magnitude of the residual’ (orange), ‘previous residuals’ (green) and ‘previous residuals with
optical flow registration’ (red). All methods use the exponential stretching function introduced in
Section 3.2.1.


Figure 11: Performance of Rolling RC applied to control both ‘image miscoverage’ and ‘center
failure’ risks. All methods use the exponential stretching function introduced in Section 3.2.1.


which is:
                                                1
                                     MSL =            ≈ 1.111.
                                              1 − α α=0.1
Therefore, having MSL = 1 is not necessarily equivalent to an optimal conditional coverage, as it
indicates for undesired anti-correlation between two consecutive time steps: after a miscoverage event
                                                                                                   1
follows a coverage event with probability one. Consequently, we would desire to have MSL = 1−α        ,
which is the MSL attained by the true conditional quantiles.

E.2   T HE M ISCOVERAGE C OUNTER

How should one choose the risk level for the MC risk? If we aim at 1 − α = 90% coverage, we
argue that the right choice is r = α/(1 − α) = 1/9. To see this, suppose we have an ideal model
that attains a perfect coverage rate 1 − α conditional on t. In this case, the coverage events are i.i.d.
realizations of Bernoulli experiments and so MC acts as a geometric random variable that counts
the number of failures until reaching a success, where the success probability is 1 − α. Hence, we
define the MC risk level r to be the expected value of such a geometric random variable, which is
α/(1 − α). By Proposition 1 we know that if we control MC at level r = 1/9, the coverage will be


                                                  29
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


at least 1 − α ≈ 88.89%, where an ideal model will reach an exact 90% coverage. This stands in
striking contrast with a method that only controls the coverage metric, as the constructed prediction
intervals may result in a large MC risk.
Note that Theorem 1 assumes that the loss is bounded, while MC is not bounded. To guarantee that
Rolling RC will converge to the desired risk level of MC, we can use the following loss instead:
MC′ = min {MC, B} for some large B ∈ N. In the experiments, however, we used the regular MC as
we observed that its value does not get too high in practice.

E.3   ∆C O V E R A G E

The time-series data sets we use in the experiments in Section 4.1.2 include the day of the week as an
element in the feature vector. Therefore, we assess the violation of day-stratified coverage (Feldman
et al., 2021; Zaffran et al., 2022), as a proxy for conditional coverage. That is, we measure the average
deviation of the coverage on each day of the week from the nominal coverage level. Formally, given
a series of intervals {Ĉt (Xt )}TT10 , their ∆Coverage is defined as:
                                    1                    1 X
                                                              1Yt ∈Ĉt (Xt ) − (1 − α) ,
                                            X
                  ∆Coverage =
                                    7                   |Di |
                                        i∈{1,2,...,7}        t∈Di

where Di is a set of samples that belong to the i-th day of the week. Since a lower value of this metric
indicates for a better conditional coverage, we desire to have a minimal ∆Coverage.

F     C ALIBRATING ON THE Q UANTILE S CALE I N R EGRESSION TASKS
As an alternative for (6), where the calibration coefficient φ(θt ) is added to each of the interval
endpoints, one can modify the interval’s length by tuning the raw miscoverage level τt = φ(θt )
requested from the model:
                       f (Xt , θt , Mt ) = [Mt (Xt , τt /2), Mt (Xt , 1 − τt /2)].
This formulation is inspired by the work of (Chernozhukov et al., 2021) that suggested tuning the
nominal miscoverage level τ , based on a calibration set. In contrast to (6), where we estimate only
the lower α/2 and upper 1 − α/2 conditional quantiles, here, we need to estimate all the quantiles
simultaneously. To accomplish this, one can apply the methods proposed in (Chung et al., 2021;
Park et al., 2021; Sesia & Romano, 2021). Turning to the choice of the stretching function φ: the
straightforward option is to set φ(θ) = −τ , where θt is bounded in the range: −1 ≤ θt ≤ 0. The
reason for having the negative sign in φ, is to form larger prediction sets (resulted by smaller values
of τ ) as θ increases.

G     C ONSTRUCTING P REDICTION S ETS FOR C LASSIFICATION TASKS
Consider a multi-class classification problem, where the target variable is discrete and unordered
y ∈ Y = {1, 2, ..., K}. Suppose we are handed a classifier that estimates theP    conditional probability
of PYt |Xt (Yt = y | Xt = x) for each class y, i.e., Mt (Xt , y) ∈ [0, 1] and y∈Y Mt (Xt , y) = 1.
With this in place, we follow (Papadopoulos et al., 2002) and define the prediction set constructing
function as:
                              f (Xt , θt , Mt ) = {y : Mt (Xt , y) ≥ φ(θt )} ,                      (13)
where one can choose φ(x) = −x, for instance. While this procedure is guaranteed to attain the
pre-specified risk level r, according to Theorem 1, the function f in (13) may have unbalanced
coverage across different sub-populations in the data (Angelopoulos et al., 2021b; Cauchois et al.,
2021). To overcome this, we recommend using the function f presented next, which is capable of
constructing prediction sets that better adapt to the underlying uncertainty. The idea, inspired by the
work of (Angelopoulos et al., 2021b; Romano et al., 2020), is to initialize an empty prediction set
and add class labels to it, ordered by scores produced by the model. We keep adding class labels until
the total score exceeds 1 − α. Formally, the confidence set function is defined as:
                                                                                              
                                                          X     k                             
       f (Xt , θt , Mt ) = {π1 , ..., πk }, where k = inf k :      (Mt (Xt , πj )) ≥ 1 − φ(θt ) ,
                                                                                              
                                                                    j=1



                                                        30
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


and π is the permutation of {1, 2, ...K} sorted by the scores {Mt (Xt , y) : t ∈ Y} from the highest
to lowest. As for the stretching function φ, we recommend using φ(x) = x.


                                                31
