Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


A comparison of dataset distillation and active learning in
text classification
    Anonymous authors
    Paper under double-blind review



                                          Abstract
          Deep learning has achieved great success over the past few years in dif-
          ferent aspects ranging from computer vision to natural language process.
          However, the huge size of data in deep learning has always been a thorny
          problem in learning the underlying distribution and tackling various human
          tasks. To alleviate this problem, knowledge distillation has been proposed
          to simplify the model, and later dataset distillation as a new method of
          reducing dataset sizes has been proposed, which aims to synthesize a small
          number of samples that contain all the information of a very large dataset.
          Meanwhile, active learning is also an effective method to reduce dataset
          sizes by only selecting the most significant labeling samples from the orig-
          inal dataset. In this paper, we explore the discrepancies in the principles
          of dataset distillation and active learning, and evaluate two algorithms on
          NLP classification dataset: Stanford Sentiment Treebank. The result of the
          experiment is that the distilled data with the size of 0.1% of the original
          text data achieves approximately 88% accuracy, while the selected data
          achieves 52% performance of the original data.
          Keywords: knowledge distillation dataset distillation active learning
          text classification


1     Introduction
Deep learning whose neural network has a large number of layers in order to solve complicate
human tasks has achieved great success over the past few years in many various applications
ranging from computer vision to natural language process. These networks have to be
trained on a large number of data so as to learn the underlying distribution of the task.
However, the huge computational complexity and the massive storage which deep learning
requires are two main setbacks in the study. Therefore, data reduction has become a popular
and feasible method to help people to learn the model and solve the problem by a small
number of data.
Nowadays, to improve the eﬀiciency of deep neural networks, knowledge distillation (Hinton
et al., 2015) has been proposed to compress the complex model into the simpler model and
remain the approximately same accuracy as the original model. In knowledge distillation,
the teacher model transfers the knowledge to the student model which has the less layers and
storage. It asks the student model to achieve two goals: minimizing the loss function between
the teacher model’s soft prediction (softmax(T=t) i.e. T is the distillation temperature) and
student model’s soft prediction which means the distilled model need to achieve as much
performances as the original model; minimizing the loss function between the student’s
hard prediction (softmax(T=1)) and the ground truth. It actually plays a role of model
compression in deep learning which can reduce over-fitting and is widely used in data mining
of infinitely large, unsupervised datasets; less or zero sample learning; migration learning
and etc.
Different from knowledge distillation which transfers the complex model to the simpler
model, data distillation (Wang et al., 2018) is targeted to encapsulate all the knowledge
from a large number of data to a small number of data. It is an alternative formulation
to reduce the data sizes by synthesizing a small number of data points containing all the


                                               1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


information of a large dataset that do not need to come from the correct true dataset dis-
tribution. Compared with other methods which aim to reduce the size of dataset such as
prototype (Garcia et al., 2012) selection in nearest-neighbor classification, dataset distilla-
tion aims to generate a small number of datasets from the original data rather than selecting
samples from the true distribution. It depends on backpropagated gradient to compress a
dataset into a small set of synthetic data samples which is good for a complex neural net-
work to be trained on a small number of data rather than the original massive dataset with
the almost similar accuracy.
Sometimes, we can regard deep learning as a situation that students always learn everything
in detail from teachers in class while the amount of knowledge is very huge, however active
learning is an effective way to learn parts of knowledge actively which is selected deliberately
to master the knowledge to the maximum extent. It is a cyclic procedure between a teacher
or an oracle (usually a human annotator) and an active learner (Schröder & Niekler, 2020).
Compared with passive learning which is only to feed the data to the model, active learning
choose which samples to be labeled by a human expert, the so-called human in the loop.
In this paper, we discuss various discrepancies between two methods of reducing dataset sizes
and use two algorithms to solve text classification on NLP classification dataset: Stanford
Sentiment Treebank (SST) which consists of 21,5154 phrases from movies with fine-grained
sentiment labels in the range of 0 to 1. We use the classification accuracy to compare the
performances of active learning and dataset distillation on text classification.


2     Related Work

2.1   Knowledge Distillation

Hinton et al. have proposed knowledge distillation as a method for imbuing smaller, more
eﬀicient networks with all the knowledge of their larger counterparts (Hinton et al., 2015).
And then knowledge distillation has been used in various aspects. Linfeng Zhang et al.
have proposed self distillation, which notably enhances the accuracy of convolutional neural
networks through shrinking the size of the network rather than aggrandizing it (Zhang et al.,
2019) .To mitigate the massive number of parameters in deep neural networks, Sukmin Yun
et al. have proposed a new regularization method that penalizes the predictive distribution
between similar samples and distill the predictive distribution between different samples
of the same label during training (Yun et al., 2020) . For casual distillation in language
models, Zhengxuan Wu et al. have proposed to augment distillation with a third objective
that encourages the student to imitate the causal computation process of the teacher through
interchange intervention training (Wu et al., 2021) .

2.2   Data Distillation

Data distillation has been proposed firstly by Tongzhou Wang as an alternative formulation
to synthesize a small number of data from the massive original dataset (Wang et al., 2018) .
It has been used in various industries. Tian Dong et al. have explored that dataset distilla-
tion is a better solution to replace the traditional data generators for private data generation
because the distilled data is a set of synthetic data which will not disclose the original in-
formation (Dong et al., 2022). Shengyuan Hu et al. have proposed a new scheme which
includes gradient compression via dataset distillation in federated learning for upstream
communication where every client learners use a light-weight distilled dataset as the train-
ing data instead of transmitting the model update (Hu et al., 2022) . To reduce catastrophic
forgetting in deep neural networks, Wojciech Masarczyk et al. have investigated the use of
synthetic data to generate two-step optimisation process via meta-gradients (Masarczyk &
Tautkute, 2020). To alleviate the storage and time for training neural models on large-scale
graphs in real world applications, Wei Jin et al. have proposed the condensation problem
by imitating the GNN training trajectory on the original graph through the optimization
of a gradient matching loss and design a strategy to condense node futures and structural
information simultaneously (Jin et al., 2021). Yongqi Li et al. have developed a novel data


                                               2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


distillation method for text classification and evaluate their method on eight benchmark
datasets (Li & Li, 2021).

2.3   Active Learning

In the era of the deep learning explosion, various tasks and applications are considered
to be solved using a data-driven learning approach, which places even higher demands on
data. In practice, it is not possible to abandon either labelling or unlabeled data altogether,
and active learning can provide a more reasonable expedient to label valuable data without
labeling it all, selectively. For low-data regimes and on self-trained vision transformers, Amin
Parvaneh et al. have proposed a novel method for batch active learning whose performances
are especially significant (Parvaneh et al., 2022). To remove label noise by fully re-annotating
large datasets is infeasible in resource-constrained settings, Melanie Bernhardt et al. have
proposed to use active label cleaning to rank instances and introduce a simulation framework
to evaluate relabeling eﬀicacy (Bernhardt et al., 2022). Yuhang Zhang et al. have presented
a new active learning framework, which for the first time incorporates contrastive learning
into recently proposed one-bit supervision, which is more eﬀicient than previous active
learning methods requiring assigning accurate labels to the queried samples (Zhang et al.,
2022).


3     Methodology

3.1   Data Distillation

Data distillation pay more attention on transferring knowledge and information from the
original dataset to the distilled data, rather than reconstructing samples from the true
distribution. Therefore, we have to consider the connection between the distilled data and
the original data, which can be linked with the gradient (Wang et al., 2018). When we use
the distilled data to train the model, the weight of the network is from various functions from
synthetic data, and backpropagated gradient can be used to track the original data to close
the gap between the distilled data and the original data. For text dataset, the original data
and the distilled data can be settled, then the distilled data can be seperated into several
batches so as to train the model by applying the gradient descent to these batches. While
we find the appropriate function which input the distilled data and output the well-trained
model, which means that when we divide the dataset into batcher in a proper way then we
can use the distilled data to train the neural network as the normla text data.


            Figure 1: Illustration of knowledge distillation and data distillation


                                               3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


As for data distillation, considering a training dataset x = {xi }Ni=1 , we parameterize our
neural network as θ and denote l(xi , θ) as the loss function that represents the loss of this
network on a data point xi . The target of data distillation is to find the minimizer of the
empirical error over entire training data:


                                           1 ∑
                                               N
                         θ∗ = arg min            l(xi , θ) ≜ arg min l(x, θ)
                                    θ      N i=1                θ


Applying the data distillation in text classification, considering a text training dataset T =
{pi , qi }M
          i=1 , where pi is a piece of text and qi is the corresponding label of the text, and M is
the number of samples in original dataset. It is noticeable that the text data is discrete, we
may use mathematical matrixes rather than these discrete words to form the distilled data.
The current parameters can be updated with the learning rate η and the loss function as
follows:

                                    θs+1 = θs − η∇θs l(p˜s , θs )

However, it takes a number of update steps in the training process, so we use the data
distillation. It means that we aim to learn a small number of synthetic distilled training
data then we can apply random gradient descent on every minibatch to find the optimal.
The distilled dataset T̃ = {p˜i , q˜i }N
                                       i=1 , where N << M . Due to the standard training
usually applies minibatch stochastic gradient descent or its variants, for text classification,
we randomly initialize the distilled data as T˜0 and divide them into various minibatches
{p˜s }Ss=1
        1
           , where S1 is the number of batches. Then, when inputing a minibatch of data, the
parameter is renewed by the learning rate η̃ and the loss function:
                                        θ1 = θ0 − η̃∇θ0 l(p̃, θ0 )

Therefore, on the basis of the parameters and the initial θ0 , we obtain synthetic data D̃∗
which minimizes the loss function:
                     D̃∗ = arg min l(p, θ1 ) = arg min(p, θ0 − η̃∇θ0 l(p̃, θ0 ))
                               D̃                       D̃

where we derive the new weights �1 as a function of distilled data D̃ and learning rate η̃
using Equation 2 and then evaluate the new weights over all the training data D. The loss
function l(p̃, θ0 ) is differentiable, and can thus be optimized using standard gradient-based
methods.
Afterwards, we can use {p˜s }Ss=1  1
                                      to make T˜0 more close to T˜S , then T˜S can be used as the
original data to train the neural network.

3.2   Active Learning


                              Figure 2: process of active learning


                                                    4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


As an effective method for reducing sizes of dataset, active learning is targeted to label the
most important data from the overall dataset, which means that it is kind of like choosing
the sample from true distribution and reconstructing a life-like sample rather than using
the part of original dataset.
As the figure2 illsutrates that the first step of active learning is gathering the data. After-
wards, some data are selected to train the model while at this time, the training model’s
accuracy is not good enough. Therefore, query functions determine data selection choices
of the model in the AL loop. They are used in manual labeling which means that human
experts apply the query functions to choose the corresponding label and choose more labeled
data to train the model. When the accuracy is as required, the model can be utilized in real
human tasks.
We considered multiple methods of active learning in text classification as follows (Jacobs
et al., 2021).
(1) Variation Ratio:
The variation ratio measures dispersion around the class. The below equation shows how
the variation ratio iscomputed, where fx denotes the mode count and F the number of
stochastic forward passes.

                                                           fx
                                          v[x] = 1 −
                                                           F
Actually, variation ratio is a form of predictive uncertainty rather than capturing the un-
certainty in the model.
(2) Predictive Entropy:
In mathematics, entropy can be used to measure the uncertainty of a system, with higher
entropy indicating greater uncertainty and lower entropy indicating less uncertainty. There-
fore, in a dichotomous or multiclassification scenario, those sample data with higher entropy
can be selected as the pending annotation data. Entropy H(x) has been defined as:
                                              ∑
                                              n
                                   H(x) = −         p(xi )log2 p(xi )
                                              i=1

where p(xi ) gives the probability of the i − th possible value for the symbol. Entropy is used
to quantify the information of data. We can compute the chance of the model classifying a
data point by averaging over the softmax probability distributions across the T stochastic
forward passes.

                                 ∑ 1 ∑                       1 ∑
           H[y|x, Dtrain ] = −     (   p(y = c|x, ω̂f ))log(     p(y = c|x, ωˆf ))
                                 c
                                     F                       F
                                          f                             f

where ωˆf denotes the stochastic forward pass f , and c the number associated to the class-
label.
(3)Bayesian Active Learning by Disagreement:
This is a form of conditional mutual information, the condition or the third variable being
the training data Dtrain . Houlsby et al. used this form of mutual information in an active
learning setting and dubbed it Bayesian active learning by disagreement (BALD) (Houlsby
et al., 2011).

                                   ∑ 1 ∑                       1 ∑
          I[y, ω|x, Dtrain ] = −     (   p(y = c|x, ω̂f ))log(     p(y = c|x, ωˆf ))
                                   c
                                       F                       F
                                          f                             f
                                                1 ∑
                                              −     p(y = c|x, ωˆf )logp(y = c|x, ωˆf )
                                                F
                                                     c,f


                                                5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


4     Experiment
4.1   Data

SST consists 11,850 sentences and 5 classes of data in the following way:


                       Table 1: An overview of SST in the experiment
      Datset             Classes            Train Samples                  Test Samples
       SST                  5                     10534                        1316

The reason why we choose SST as the experiment dataset is that its size is massive and
it can be a benchmark for language models. It allows for the evaluation of AL and data
distillation for a larger dataset and for comparison with results found in related work.
To show the eﬀiciency of the distilled data in text classification, we compare the accuracy
between the original data and the distilled data on the same test set. Here, we choose 0.1%
of the dataset size applying in the distilled data and random samples.
As is known to us all, the most important factor in active learning is to choose an appropriate
query function to solve the task in a required accuracy. In this paper, we use various query
functions in active learning in text classification and compare the performance with random
sampling using 1% of the dataset size (Jacobs et al., 2021).

4.2   Experiment Results


                           Table 2: The result of data distillation
         Method                                     SST
      Original Data                                 0.9859
      Distilled Data                                0.8799
      Random Data                                   0.6290


                         Figure 3: learning rate of data distillation

In this paper, 0.1% of the original training data are the number of samples in the random
data and the distilled data. The result of data distillation in this experiment is shown as
table2 and learning rate is shown as figure3.


                                              6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


The distilled data achieve about 88% accuracy and random data only achieve 63% accuracy.
It is noticeable that although the distilled data cannot perform as well as the full data, the
size of distilled data is much smaller than the full data with only 0.1% of the original data.
From the figure3 above, it is observed that training neural network on the distilled data is
more easily than that on the random data. Looking at the red line which denotes epoch of
distilled data rises fast to reach its highest level, while the blue line denoting the random
data has a slowly increase. It means that data distillation is an effective way to train deep
neural network in text classification.
Jacobs has discussed about various query functions in active learning in SST and the result
is shown below (Jacobs et al., 2021). It is clear that on this dataset, active learning does not
perform much better than random sampling. During 15 epochs, the gap between random
sampling and active learning is really small. Therefore, active learning does not seem to
have a significant performance in text classification.


                                  Figure 4: Active Learning


4.3   Data Analysis

It is noticeable that data distillation outperforms active learning in text classification with
88% accuracy of the original data. Here, we demonstrate the differences between active
learning and data distillation.
(1)Algorithms:
The basic algorithm of data distillation is similar with knowledge distillation which is more
like data compression using gradient descent. Thus, data distillation is able to maintain all
information and knowledge from the original data. In addition, backpropagated gradient is
the most effective method on data distillation. When training neural networks on a small
number of data among a large number of data can achieve the optimal result, it is effective
to use backpropagated gradient.
For active learning, it is necessary to compare various performances from different query
functions. One of the most noticeable defects which compare with data distillation is that
manual label leads to human disturb. Human labeled dataset in active learning is from
true dataset distribution but not maintaining all information and knowledge from the true
dataset. In addition, noise and outliers in large amounts of data will always be picked as
the labeled dataset, which is bad for model training
(2)Hard to transfer:


                                               7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


As for active learning which is a data selecting strategy has diﬀiculties in generality. It is not
able to be generic among different tasks with various dataset distribution and labels, and
in many occasions people need to spend more time in designing the specific active learning
strategies for various human tasks.
Speaking of data distillation, it is a general method to reduce the dataset size. Among
various industries, applying data distillation bases on a general way including selecting
the distilled size of data and gradient descent. Therefore, when facing different dataset
distribution and labels, data distillation play a significant role in generality.
(3)Unstable performance:
Data distillation focuses on transferring all knowledge and information from the original
dataset to the distilled data using gradient descent to update parameters and find the most
optimal distilled dataset which aims to minimize the loss function. Although the distilled
data performs worse than the full original data, it does outdo the performance of active
learning and shows the stable performance.
Compared with data distillation, active learning is used by its specified selection strategy,
thus query function and the nature of the dataset are two main factors during the process.
In practice, people need to first select and label data based on active learning, and if the
strategy is not as good as random sampling at this point, they are not able to change or
stop in time because the data has already been labeled and the sunk costs have already
been incurred.
Active learning shows unstable performance among different datasets which own different
distribution and labels, therefore when people want to solve human tasks in an eﬀicient way,
active learning is not as steady as data distillation.


5   Conclusion

In this paper, we explore data distillation which aims to distill all information and knowl-
edge from the original data to a small number of synthetic dataset. We compare different
performances between data distillation and active learning in text classification and discuss
about discrepancies between two algorithms. The result is that the distilled data with only
0.1% of the original data achieve 88% accuracy, while active learning only performs 52%
accuracy of the original data.
In conclusion, although data distillation has not been used in many industries, many surveys
show the eﬀiciency of data distillation in machine learning. We believe data distillation will
play a significant role in machine learning and deep neural network in the future.


References
Mélanie Bernhardt, Daniel C. Castro, Ryutaro Tanno, Anton Schwaighofer, Kerem C.
 Tezcan, Miguel Monteiro, Shruthi Bannur, Matthew P. Lungren, Aditya Nori, Ben
 Glocker, Javier Alvarez-Valle, and Ozan Oktay. Active label cleaning for improved
 dataset quality under resource constraints. Nature Communications, 13(1), mar 2022.
 doi: 10.1038/s41467-022-28818-3. URL https://doi.org/10.1038%2Fs41467-022-28818-3.

Tian Dong, Bo Zhao, and Lingjuan Lyu. Privacy for free: How does dataset condensation
  help privacy?, 2022. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2206.00240.

Salvador Garcia, Joaquin Derrac, Jose Cano, and Francisco Herrera. Prototype selection
  for nearest neighbor classification: Taxonomy and empirical study. IEEE Transactions on
  Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence, 34(3):417–435, 2012. doi: 10.1109/TPAMI.
  2011.142.

Geoffrey Hinton, Oriol Vinyals, and Jeff Dean. Distilling the knowledge in a neural network,
 2015. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/1503.02531.


                                                8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Neil Houlsby, Ferenc Huszár, Zoubin Ghahramani, and Máté Lengyel. Bayesian active
  learning for classification and preference learning, 2011. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/
  1112.5745.
Shengyuan Hu, Jack Goetz, Kshitiz Malik, Hongyuan Zhan, Zhe Liu, and Yue Liu. Fedsynth:
  Gradient compression via synthetic data in federated learning, 2022. URL https://arxiv.
  org/abs/2204.01273.
Pieter Floris Jacobs, Gideon Maillette de Buy Wenniger, Marco Wiering, and Lambert
  Schomaker. Active learning for reducing labeling effort in text classification tasks, 2021.
  URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2109.04847.
Wei Jin, Lingxiao Zhao, Shichang Zhang, Yozen Liu, Jiliang Tang, and Neil Shah. Graph
 condensation for graph neural networks, 2021. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2110.07580.
Yongqi Li and Wenjie Li, 2021. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2104.08448.
Wojciech Masarczyk and Ivona Tautkute. Reducing catastrophic forgetting with learning
 on synthetic data, 2020. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2004.14046.
Amin Parvaneh, Ehsan Abbasnejad, Damien Teney, Reza Haffari, Anton van den Hengel,
 and Javen Qinfeng Shi. Active learning by feature mixing, 2022. URL https://arxiv.org/
 abs/2203.07034.
Christopher Schröder and Andreas Niekler. A survey of active learning for text classification
  using deep neural networks, 2020. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2008.07267.
Tongzhou Wang, Jun-Yan Zhu, Antonio Torralba, and Alexei A. Efros. Dataset distillation,
  2018. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/1811.10959.
Zhengxuan Wu, Atticus Geiger, Josh Rozner, Elisa Kreiss, Hanson Lu, Thomas Icard,
  Christopher Potts, and Noah D. Goodman. Causal distillation for language models. 2021.
  doi: 10.48550/ARXIV.2112.02505. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2112.02505.
Sukmin Yun, Jongjin Park, Kimin Lee, and Jinwoo Shin. Regularizing class-wise predictions
  via self-knowledge distillation, 2020. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2003.13964.
Linfeng Zhang, Jiebo Song, Anni Gao, Jingwei Chen, Chenglong Bao, and Kaisheng Ma.
  Be your own teacher: Improve the performance of convolutional neural networks via self
  distillation, 2019. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/1905.08094.
Yuhang Zhang, Xiaopeng Zhang, Lingxi Xie, Jie Li, Robert C. Qiu, Hengtong Hu, and
  Qi Tian. One-bit active query with contrastive pairs. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF
  Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), pp. 9697–9705, June
  2022.


                                             9
