Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


G ENERATIVE AUGMENTED F LOW N ETWORKS
 Ling Pan1,2 , Dinghuai Zhang1,2 , Aaron Courville1,2,4 , Longbo Huang3 , Yoshua Bengio1,2,4
 1
   Mila - Québec AI Institute 2 Université de Montréal 3 Tsinghua University
 4
   CIFAR AI Chair
 {penny.ling.pan}@gmail.com



                                            A BSTRACT
         The Generative Flow Network (Bengio et al., 2021b, GFlowNet) is a probabilis-
         tic framework where an agent learns a stochastic policy for object generation,
         such that the probability of generating an object is proportional to a given re-
         ward function. Its effectiveness has been shown in discovering high-quality and
         diverse solutions, compared to reward-maximizing reinforcement learning-based
         methods. Nonetheless, GFlowNets only learn from rewards of the terminal states,
         which can limit its applicability. Indeed, intermediate rewards play a critical role
         in learning, for example from intrinsic motivation to provide intermediate feed-
         back even in particularly challenging sparse reward tasks. Inspired by this, we
         propose Generative Augmented Flow Networks (GAFlowNets), a novel learning
         framework to incorporate intermediate rewards into GFlowNets. We specify inter-
         mediate rewards by intrinsic motivation to tackle the exploration problem in sparse
         reward environments. GAFlowNets can leverage edge-based and state-based in-
         trinsic rewards in a joint way to improve exploration. Based on extensive exper-
         iments on the GridWorld task, we demonstrate the effectiveness and efficiency
         of GAFlowNet in terms of convergence, performance, and diversity of solutions.
         We further show that GAFlowNet is scalable to a more complex and large-scale
         molecule generation domain, where it achieves consistent and significant perfor-
         mance improvement.


1    I NTRODUCTION
Deep reinforcement learning (RL) has achieved significant progress in recent years with particular
success in games (Mnih et al., 2015; Silver et al., 2016; Vinyals et al., 2019). RL methods applied to
the setting where a reward is only given at the end (i.e., terminal states) typically aim at maximizing
that reward function for learning the optimal policy. However, diversity of the generated states is
desirable in a wide range of practical scenarios including molecule generation (Bengio et al., 2021a),
biological sequence design (Jain et al., 2022b), recommender systems (Kunaver & Požrl, 2017),
dialogue systems (Zhang et al., 2020), etc. For example, in molecule generation, the reward function
used in in-silico simulations can be uncertain and imperfect itself (compared to the more expensive
in-vivo experiments). Therefore, it is not sufficient to only search the solution that maximizes the
return. Instead, it is desired that we sample many high-reward candidates, which can be achieved by
sampling them proportionally to the reward of each terminal state.
Interestingly, GFlowNets (Bengio et al., 2021a;b) learn a stochastic policy to sample composite ob-
jects x ∈ X with probability proportional to the return R(x). The learning paradigm of GFlowNets
is different from other RL methods, as it is explicitly aiming at modeling the diversity in the target
distribution, i.e., all the modes of the reward function. This makes it natural for practical applica-
tions where the model should discover objects that are both interesting and diverse, which is a focus
of previous GFlowNet works (Bengio et al., 2021a;b; Malkin et al., 2022; Jain et al., 2022b).
Yet, GFlowNets only learn from the reward of the terminal state, and do not consider intermediate
rewards, which can limit its applicability, especially in more general RL settings. Rewards play a
critical role in learning (Silver et al., 2021). The tremendous success of RL largely depends on the
reward signals that provide intermediate feedback. Even in environments with sparse rewards, RL
agents can motivate themselves for efficient exploration by intrinsic motivation, which augments the
sparse extrinsic learning signal with a dense intrinsic reward at each step. Our focus in this paper is


                                                  1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


precisely on introducing such intermediate intrinsic rewards in GFlowNets, since they can be applied
even in settings where the extrinsic reward is sparse (say non-zero only on a few terminal states).
Inspired by this missing element of GFlowNets, we propose a new GFlowNet learning framework
that takes intermediate feedback signals into account to provide an exploration incentive during
training. The notion of flow in GFlowNets (Bengio et al., 2021a;b) refers to a marginalized quantity
that sums rewards over all downstream terminal states following a given state, while sharing that
reward with other states leading to the same terminal states. Apart from the existing flows in the net-
work, we introduce augmented flows as intermediate rewards. Our new framework is well-suited for
sparse reward tasks by considering intrinsic motivation as intermediate rewards, where the training
of GFlowNet can get trapped in a few modes, since it may be difficult for it to discover new modes
based on those it visited (Bengio et al., 2021b).
We first propose an edge-based augmented flow, based on the incorporation of an intrinsic reward at
each transition. However, we find that although it improves learning efficiency, it only performs local
exploration and still lacks sufficient exploration ability to drive the agent to visit solutions with zero
rewards. On the other hand, we find that incorporating intermediate rewards in a state-based man-
ner (Bengio et al., 2021b) can result in slower convergence and large bias empirically, although it can
explore more broadly. Therefore, we propose a joint way to take both edge-based and state-based
augmented flows into account. Our method can improve the diversity of solutions and learning effi-
ciency by reaping the best from both worlds. Extensive experiments on the GridWorld and molecule
domains that are already used to benchmark GFlowNets corroborate the effectiveness of our pro-
posed framework. The code is publicly available at https://github.com/ling-pan/GAFN.
The main contributions of this paper are summarized as follows:

       • We propose a novel GFlowNet learning framework, dubbed Generative Augmented Flow
         Networks (GAFlowNet), to incorporate intermediate rewards, which are represented by
         augmented flows in the flow network.

       • We specify intermediate rewards by intrinsic motivation to deal with the exploration of state
         space for GFlowNets in sparse reward tasks. We theoretically prove that our augmented
         objective asymptotically yields an unbiased solution to the original formulation.

       • We conduct extensive experiments on the GridWorld domain, demonstrating the effective-
         ness of our method in terms of convergence, diversity, and performance. Our method is also
         general, being applicable to different types of GFlowNets. We further extend our method to
         the larger-scale and more challenging molecule generation task, where our method achieves
         consistent and substantial improvements over strong baselines.


2    BACKGROUND

Consider a directed acyclic graph (DAG) G = (S, A), where S denotes the state space, and A
represents the action space, which is a subset of S × S. We denote the vertex s0 ∈ S to be the
initial state with no incoming edges, while the vertex sf without outgoing edges is called the sink
state, and state-action pairs correspond to edges. The goal for GFlowNets is to learn a stochastic
policy π that can construct discrete objects x ∈ X with probability proportional to the reward
function R : X → R≥0 , i.e., π(x) ∝ R(x). GFlowNets construct objects sequentially, where
each step adds an element to the construction. We call the resulting sequence of state transitions
from the initial state to a terminal state τ = (s0 → · · · → sn ) a trajectory, where τ ∈ T with T
denoting P                                                                       P F : T → R≥0 . Let
           the set of trajectories. Bengio et al. (2021a) define a trajectory flow
F (s) = τ ∋s F (τ ) define a state flow for any state s, and F (s → s′ ) = τ ∋s→s′ F (τ ) defines
the edge flowP  for any edge s → s′ . The trajectory flow induces a probability measure P (τ ) = F Z(τ ) ,
where Z = τ ∈T F (τ ) denotes the total flow. We then define the corresponding forward policy
                   ′                                                 ′
PF (s′ |s) = F (s→s
               F (s)
                     )
                       and the backward policy PB (s|s′ ) = F F(s→s   )
                                                                 (s′ ) . The flows can be considered as
the amount of water flowing through edges (like pipes) or states (like tees connecting pipes) (Malkin
et al., 2022), with R(x) the amount of water through terminal state x, and PF (s′ |s) the relative
amount of water flowing in edges outgoing from s.


                                                    2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


2.1   GF LOW N ETS TRAINING CRITERION

We call a flow consistent if it satisfies the flow matching constraint for all internal states s, i.e.,
              ′′                                  ′
P                                P
   s′′ →s F (s → s) = F (s) =      s→s′ F (s → s ), which means that the incoming flows equal the
outgoing flows. Bengio et al. (2021a) prove that for a consistent flow F where the terminal flow is
set to be the reward, the forward policy can sample objects x with probability proportional to R(x).
Flow matching (FM). Bengio et al. (2021a) propose to approximate the edge flow by
a model     Fθ (s, s′ ) parameterized
                                   P by θ following the FM objective, i.e., LFM (s) =
(log (s′′ →s)∈A Fθ (s′′ , s) − log (s→s′ )∈A Fθ (s, s′ ))2 for non-terminal states. At terminal states,
     P

a similar objective encourages the incoming flow to match the corresponding reward. The objective
is optimized using trajectories sampled from a training policy π with full support such as a tempered
version of PFθ or a mixture of PFθ with a uniform policy U , i.e., πθ = (1 − ϵ)PFθ + ϵ · U , This is
similar to ϵ-greedy and entropy-regularized strategies in RL to improve exploration. Bengio et al.
(2021a) prove that if we reach a global minimum of the expected loss function and the training
policy πθ has full support, then GFlowNet samples from the target distribution.
Detailed balance (DB). Bengio et al. (2021b) propose the DB objective to avoid the computa-
tionally expensive summing operation over the parents or children of states. For learning based
on DB, we train a neural network with a state flow model Fθ , a forward policy model PFθ (·|s),
and a backward policy model PBθ (·|s) parameterized by θ. The optimization objective is to mini-
                                                                       2
mize LDB (s, s′ ) = (log(Fθ (s)PFθ (s′ |s)) − log(Fθ (s′ )PBθ (s|s′ ))) . It also samples from the target
distribution if a global minimum of the expected loss is reached and πθ has full support.
Trajectory balance (TB). Malkin et al. (2022) propose the TB objective for faster credit
assignment and learning over longer trajectories. The loss function for TB is LTB (τ ) =
        Qn−1                           Qn−1
(log(Zθ t=0 PFθ (st+1 |st )) − log(R(x) t=0 PBθ (st |st+1 )))2 , where Zθ is a learnable scalar.



3     R ELATED W ORK

GFlowNets. Since the proposal of GFlowNets (Bengio et al., 2021a), there has been an increasing
interest in improving (Bengio et al., 2021b; Malkin et al., 2022), understanding, and applying this
framework to practical scenarios. It is a general-purpose high-level probabilistic inference frame-
work, and induces fruitful applications (Zhang et al., 2022a;c; Deleu et al., 2022; Jain et al., 2022a).
Pan et al. (2023a) propose Forward-Looking GFlowNets by incorporating local credits, and makes
it possible to be trained with incomplete trajectories (which is a requirement for previous GFlowNet
methods). Pan et al. (2023b) and Zhang et al. (2023) recently generalize GFlowNets to the more
general stochastic environments with stochastic transition dynamics or rewards. However, previous
works only consider learning based on the terminal reward, which can make it difficult to provide a
good training signal for intermediate states, especially when the reward is sparse (i.e., significantly
non-zero in only a tiny fraction of the terminal states).
Reinforcement learning (RL). Different from GFlowNets that aim to sample proportionally to the
reward function, RL learns a reward-maximization policy. Entropy-regularized RL (Attias, 2003;
Ziebart, 2010; Haarnoja et al., 2017; 2018; Zhang et al., 2022b) introduces entropy regularization
in the learning objectives, which learns with the Boltzmann softmax policy and the log-sum-exp
operator in value function updates (Schulman et al., 2017a; Asadi & Littman, 2017; Pan et al.,
2020). Although it can improve diversity, this is limited to tree-structured DAGs. This is because it
could only sample a terminal state x in proportion to the sum of rewards over all trajectories leading
to x. It can fail on general (non-tree) DAGs (Bengio et al., 2021a) for which the same terminal state
x can be obtained with a potentially large number of trajectories (and a very different number of
trajectories for different x’s).
Intrinsic motivation. There has been a line of research to incorporate intrinsic motivation (Pathak
et al., 2017; Burda et al., 2018; Zhang et al., 2021) for improving exploration in RL. Yet, such ideas
have not been explored with GFlowNets because the current mathematical framework of GFlowNets
only allows for terminal rewards, unlike the standard RL frameworks. This deficiency as well as the
potential of introducing intrinsic intermediate rewards motivates this paper.


                                                   3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


4     G ENERATIVE AUGMENTED F LOW N ETWORKS
The potential difficulty in learning only from the terminal reward is related to the challenge of
sparse rewards in RL, where most states do not provide an informative reward. We demonstrate
the sparse reward problem for GFlowNets and reveal interesting findings based on the GridWorld
task (as shown in Figure 4) with sparse rewards. Specifically, the agent only receives a reward of
+1 only when it reaches one of the 3 goals located around the corners of the world (except the
starting state corner) with size H × H (with H ∈ {64, 128}), and the reward is 0 otherwise. A
more detailed description of the task can be found in Section 5.1. We evaluate the number of modes
discovered by the GFlowNet trained with TB, following Bengio et al. (2021a). As summarized
in Figure 1, GFlowNet training can get trapped in a subset of the modes. Therefore, it remains
a critical challenge for GFlowNets to efficiently learn when the reward         GFlowNet   GAFlowNet
signal is sparse and non-informative.                                       3.0

                                                                                                 2.5


                                                                              # of modes found
On the other hand, there has been recent progress with intrinsic moti-
                                                                                                 2.0
vation methods (Pathak et al., 2017; Burda et al., 2018) to improve ex-
                                                                                                 1.5
ploration of RL algorithms, where the agent learns from both a sparse
extrinsic reward and a dense intrinsic bonus at each step. Building on                           1.0

this, we aim to address the exploration challenge of GFlowNets by en-                            0.5

abling intermediate rewards in GFlowNets and thus intrinsic rewards.                             0.0
                                                                                                       64             128
                                                                                                            Horizon
We now propose our learning framework, which is dubbed Generative              Figure 1: Comparison
Augmented Flow Network (GAFlowNet), to take intermediate rewards               of GFlowNet and our
into consideration.                                                            augmented (GAFlowNet)
                                                                               method in Gridworld with
4.1   E DGE - BASED INTERMEDIATE REWARD AUGMENTATION                           sparse rewards .
We start our derivation from the flow matching consistency constraint, to take advantage of the
insights brought by the water flow metaphor as discussed in Section 2. By incorporating intermediate
rewards r(st → st+1 ) for transitions from states st to st+1 into the flow matching constraint, we
obtain          X                               X
                     F (st−1 → st ) = F (st ) =     [F (st → st+1 ) + r(st → st+1 )]             (1)
                st−1                              st+1

by considering an extra flow r(st → st+1 ) going out of the transition st → st+1 . Based on Eq. (1),
we define the corresponding forward and backward policies
                           F (st−1 → st ) + r(st−1 → st )                                    F (st−1 → st )
        PF (st |st−1 ) =                                  ,    PB (st−1 |st ) =                             .               (2)
                                     F (st−1 )                                                   F (st )
Combining these, we obtain the detailed balance objective with the incorporation of intermediate
rewards as
                       F (st−1 )PF (st |st−1 ) = PB (st−1 |st )F (st ) + r(st−1 → st ).                (3)
Finally, we have our resulting edge-based reward augmented learning objective for     P trajectory balance
as in Eq. (4) via a telescoping calculation upon Eq. (3), where x = sn , and Z = st−1 →st r(st−1 →
       P
st ) + x R(x) is the augmented total flow. Detailed derivation can be found in Appendix A.
                      n−1                         n−1
                                                  Y
                      Y                                                   r(st → st+1 )
                   Z       PF (st+1 |st ) = R(x)       PB (st |st+1 ) +                   .            (4)
                      t=0                         t=0
                                                                            F (st+1 )

We explain the semantics of Eq. (4) in Figure 2(a). For the transition from an internal state (yel-
low circles) st to the i-th next state sit+1 , we associate sit+1 with a special state ŝit+1 (red circle)
with pseudo-exit. Specifically, from the state st , we choose associated next states ŝt+1 with prob-
ability (F (st → st+1 ) + r(st → st+1 )) /F (st ) according to the forward policy in Eq. (2). At the
associated next state ŝt+1 , we “virtually” choose the sink state (purple circles) sf with probabil-
ity r(st → st+1 )/F (st ), or we choose the next state st+1 with probability F (st → st+1 )/F (st ).
Adding them together and multiplying these probabilities by the incoming flow F (st ), we have
F (st → st+1 ) + r(st → st+1 ). Therefore, considering all possible next states, we have the aug-
mented flow consistency equation (incoming flow = outgoing flow) as in Eq. (1). The intermediate
rewards r(st → st+1 ) are similar to transitions into a pseudo-exit that is never taken but still attracts


                                                    4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                       (a)                                                                                    (b)

Figure 2: (a) Edge-based reward augmentation can be seen as introducing an augmented flow of
amount r(st → st+1 ) towards a pseudo-exit to the sink state (that we never actually take) at every
transition step. (b) For tasks with sparse rewards, agents can easily get stuck at a few modes (e.g.,
x8 ). Our proposed method motivates the agent to discover unexplored states and trajectories to
find diverse sets of modes (i.e., x12 ) by increasing the probability of visiting alternative transitions
in proportion to all the transitions reachable from there. Note that we omit the sink state from
terminating edges for simplicity.


larger probabilities into its ancestors in the DAG. From the water analogy, it can be considered that
the flow from st to st+1 (and thus the probability of choosing that transition) is augmented by all
the intermediate rewards due to pseudo-exits in all the accessible downstream transitions.
In contrast to simply adding a constant uniform probability to every action (which is commonly
used for exploration with GFlowNets), the pseudo-exit intermediate rewards have an effect that is
not local. In addition, we can specify non-uniform intermediate rewards as intrinsic motivation
r(st → st+1 ) with novelty-based methods (Pathak et al., 2017; Burda et al., 2018) to better tackle
exploration in sparse reward tasks. Although how to accurately measure the novelty degree remains
an open problem, it has been shown that random network distillation (RND) (Burda et al., 2018)
is a simple yet effective method for encouraging the agent to visit states of interest. We use the
scaled difference between the predicted features by a trainable state encoder and a random fixed
state encoder as the intrinsic rewards based on RND, i.e., α||ϕ(s) − ϕ̄random (s)||2 , where α is a
reward scaling parameter that controls the degree of exploration. The random distillation network
is trained by minimizing such differences. Therefore, the novelty measure is generally smaller for
more often seen states or similar states. The overall training procedure is shown in Algorithm 1 by
substituting the augmented trajectory balance loss according to Eq. (4).
We now demonstrate the conceptual advantage of edge-based reward augmentation which specifies
intermediate rewards by intrinsic motivation in a sparse reward task for exploration in Figure 2(b). It
depicts a flow network Markov decision process (MDP) with sparse rewards, where only R(x8 ) and
R(x12 ) are 1 and other terminal rewards are all 0. Consider the case where the agent had already
discovered solution x8 with the red flow A. Since the rewards of most other solutions are 0, it
can easily get trapped in the mode of x8 , and thus fails to discover other solutions. Nonetheless, our
edge-based reward augmentation could motivate the agent to discover other paths (e.g., the blue flow
B) to x8 , which can be beneficial for the agent to discover other solutions (e.g., x12 ) subsequently.
Following the evaluation scheme in (Bengio                             3.0                                                       0.00012

                                                                       2.5
et al., 2021a), we summarize the number of dis-
                                                    # of modes found


                                                                                                                                 0.00010
                                                                       2.0
covered modes and the empirical L1 error for
                                                                                                                      L1 error


                                                                       1.5                                                       0.00008

GFlowNet and GAFlowNet with edge-based                                 1.0                     GFlowNet                                         GFlowNet
                                                                                               GAFlowNet (edge)                  0.00006        GAFlowNet (edge)
reward augmentation in Figure 3. The figure                            0.5                     GAFlowNet (state)                                GAFlowNet (state)
                                                                                               GAFlowNet (joint)                 0.00004        GAFlowNet (joint)
also includes the state-based and joint objec-                         0.0
                                                                             0   2000   4000   6000    8000   10000                        0   2000   4000   6000   8000   10000
                                                                                          Update                                                        Update
tives introduced in later sections (Sections 4.2
and 4.3) for completeness. The L1 error is                                              (a)                                                           (b)
defined as E [|p(x) − π(x)|], where p(x) =           Figure 3: Different reward augmentations pro-
R(x)/Z denotes the true reward distribution,         posed in Sections 4.1-4.3. (a) Diversity metric:
and we estimate π by repeated sampling and           the number of modes found. (b) Distribution fit-
summarizing frequencies for visitation of each       ness metric: empirical L1 error.

                                                   5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


possible state x. As shown, GAFlowNet (edge) is able to discover more modes as opposed to a stan-
dard GFlowNet and improves diversity. In addition, it learns more efficiently and leads to a smaller
level of L1 error.

4.2   S TATE - BASED INTERMEDIATE REWARD AUGMENTATION

Although the learning framework of edge-based reward augmentation is able to improve the diversity
of solutions found, it still fails to discover all of the modes as shown in Figure 3. We hypothesize that
this is due to its “local” exploration ability, where it is able to consider different paths to solution
xi with non-zero rewards. However, it fails to sufficiently motivate the agent to globally explore
solutions whose rewards may be zero. Therefore, it can still get trapped in a few modes, lacking
sufficient exploration ability to discover other modes.
Different from the edge-based reward augmentation, Bengio et al. (2021b) defines a trajectory
return as the sum of intermediate rewards in a state-based reward augmentation manner. Specifically,
state-based reward augmentation for trajectory balance yields the following criterion
                  n−1
                                       "         n−1
                                                                   # n−1
                  Y                              X                   Y
                Z      PF (st+1 |st ) = R(x) +        r(st → st+1 )      PB (st |st+1 ),        (5)
                  t=0                             t=0                 t=0

and we also use RND for intrinsic rewards. Such an objective directly motivates the agent to explore
different terminate states in a more global way (e.g., x2 , x5 , x7 , x9 in Figure 2(b), which are bene-
ficial for discovering x12 ). As shown in Figure 3(a), it is able to discover all the modes, exhibiting
great diversity. However, it explicitly changes the underlying target probability distribution, and is
directly and highly affected by the length of the trajectory. Therefore, this leads to much slower
convergence as demonstrated in Figure 3(b).

4.3   J OINT INTERMEDIATE REWARD AUGMENTATION

As discussed above, the state-based reward augmentation is effective in improving diversity but fails
to fit the target distribution efficiently. On the other hand, edge-based reward augmentation performs
more efficiently, but lacks sufficient exploration ability which cannot discover all the modes.
Therefore, we propose a joint method to take both state and edge-based intermediate reward aug-
mentation into account to reap the best from both worlds. Specifically, we redefine the trajectory
return as the sum of the terminal reward and the intrinsic reward for the terminal state only. This can
be considered as we augment the extrinsic terminal reward with its curiosity degree. On the other
hand, we include intrinsic rewards for internal states according to the edge-based reward augmenta-
tion. This integration inherits the merits of both state and edge-based reward augmentation, which
makes it possible to improve exploration in a more global way while learning more efficiently.
               n−1                                  n−1
                                                    Y
               Y                                                           r(st → st+1 )
             Z     PF (st+1 |st ) = [R(x) + r(sn )]       PB (st |st+1 ) +                 .        (6)
               t=0                                  t=0
                                                                             F (st+1 )
Our
P resultingP   flow consistency constraint is shown in Eq. (6) where Z is the augmented total flow
  x R(x) +       st−1 →st r(st−1 → st ). Our new optimization objective LGAFlowNet (τ ) is Eq. (7)
which is trained by Algorithm 1.
             n−1
                                !                       n−1
                                                        Y                                    !!2
             Y                                                                r(st → st+1 )
    log Z         PF (st+1 |st ) − log [R(x) + r(sn )]       PB (st |st+1 ) +
             t=0                                        t=0
                                                                                F (st+1 )
                                                                                                (7)
In Theorem 1, we theoretically justify that the resulting joint augmentation method leads to an
unbiased solution to the original formulation asymptotically. The proof can be found in Appendix B.
Note that we employ RND (Burda et al., 2018) for the intrinsic rewards, which decrease as the agent
has more knowledge about the state.
Theorem 1. Suppose that ∀τ, LGAFlowNet (τ ) = 0, and ∀x, R(x) + r(x) > 0. When edge-based
intrinsic rewards converge to 0, we have that (1) P (x) = P R(x)+r(x)      ; (2) If state-based intrinsic
                                                             x [R(x)+r(x)]
rewards converge to 0, then P (x) is an unbiased sample distribution.


                                                   6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Algorithm 1 Generative Augmented Flow Networks.
 1: Initialize the forward and backward policies PF , PB , learnable parameter Z, and state flow F
 2: Initialize the random fixed target network ϕ̄ and the predictor network ϕ
 3: for each training step t = 1 to T do
 4:    Collect a batch of B trajectories τ = {s0 → · · · → sn } based on the forward policy PF
 5:    Compute intrinsic rewards r for each sample in the batch of trajectories based on the random
            target network ϕ̄ and the predictor network ϕ
 6:         Update the GAFlowNet model according to the augmented trajectory balance loss in Eq. (7)
 7:         Update the predictor network ϕ by minimizing ||ϕ̄(s) − ϕ(s)||2


As shown in Figure 3, the joint method is able to discover all of the modes. In addition, it converges
to the smallest level of L1 error, and is more efficient than state-based and edge-based formulations,
which validates its effectiveness in practice.

5         E XPERIMENTS

We conduct comprehensive experiments to understand the effectiveness of our method and inves-
tigate the following key questions: i) How does GAFlowNet compare against previous baselines?
ii) What are the effects of state and edge-based flow augmentation, the form of the intrinsic reward
mechanism, and critical hyperparameters? iii) Can it scale to larger-scale and more complex tasks?

5.1        G RIDW ORLD

We first conduct a series of experiments based on GridWorld with sparse re-
wards (Figure 4). The task is the same as introduced in (Bengio et al., 2021a),
except that the reward function is sparse as described in Section 4, which makes
it much harder due to the challenge of exploration. With a larger value of the
size H, it requires the agent to plan in a longer horizon and learn from sparse re-
ward signals. Actions include operations to increase one coordinate as in (Ben-
gio et al., 2021a), and a stop operation indicating termination to guarantee that
the underlying MDP is a directed acyclic graph. We compare GAFlowNet
against strong baselines including Metropolis-Hastings-MCMC (Dai et al., Figure 4: The
2020), PPO (Schulman et al., 2017b), and a GFlowNet (Malkin et al., 2022). GridWorld task.
We also include a variant of PPO with intrinsic rewards based on the same intrinsic motivation
mechanism using RND (Burda et al., 2018). All baselines are implemented based on the open-
source code1 . Each algorithm is run for five random seeds, and we report their mean and standard
deviation. A detailed description of the hyperparameters and setup can be found in Appendix C.1.

5.1.1        P ERFORMANCE C OMPARISON
We conduct experiments on small, medium, and large GridWorlds with increasing sizes H. Full
results of other values of H can be found in Appendix C.3. To investigate the effectiveness of
GAFlowNet, we first compare it against baselines in terms of the empirical L1 error as computed
in Section 4. As shown in the first row in Figure 5, MCMC and PPO fail to converge due to
the particularly sparse rewards. Although PPO-RND has a smaller L1 error, it still underperforms
GFlowNets by a large margin. GAFlowNet converges fastest and to the smallest level of L1 error,
which shows that our method is effective to both explore efficiently and converge to sampling goals
with probability proportional to the extrinsic reward function even if the reward signals are sparse.
The number of modes that each method discovers during the course of training is shown in the
second row in Figure 5. Although incorporating PPO with intrinsic rewards improves the number
of discovered modes compared to that of PPO in larger-scale tasks, it still plateaus quickly. On
the other hand, GFlowNets can get trapped in a few modes, while GAFlowNet is able to discover
all of the modes efficiently. A detailed comparison in terms of performance can be found in Ap-
pendix C.4. Visualization of the learned structures can be found in Appendix C.2. Besides the
      1
          https://github.com/GFNOrg/gflownet


                                                    7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023



                                                                     Small          Medium                                                                                 Large


Figure 5: Comparison of GAFlowNets and baselines in GridWorld with increasing sizes correspond-
ing to each column (left: small, middle: medium, right: large). The first and second rows correspond
to empirical L1 error and the number of discovered modes, respectively.

particularly challenging sparse reward tasks, we show that GAFlowNets also provide consistent per-
formance improvement in tasks with dense reward functions as in (Bengio et al., 2021a; Malkin
et al., 2022). Results and discussions can be found in Appendix C.5 due to space limitations.

5.1.2                      A BLATION S TUDY
We now provide an in-depth ablation study on the important components and hyperparameters of
GAFlowNet in the large GridWorld task. We also study the effect of different mechanisms of intrin-
sic rewards besides RND, where results can be found in Appendix C.6.
The effect of state-based and edge-based flow augmentation. In Figure 6(a), we investigate the ef-
fect of edge-based, state-based, and joint intrinsic rewards. As discussed in Section 4, incorporating
intrinsic rewards for the trajectory in a state-based manner can result in slower convergence, which
has a large L1 error. On the other hand, augmenting the TB objective with intrinsic rewards in an
edge-based way still fails to motivate the agent to visit states with zero rewards. In contrast, the joint
augmentation mechanism is effective in both diversity and performance, achieving the smallest level
of L1 error in our experiments. It is also worth noting that only incorporating the intrinsic reward
for the terminal state using state-based augmentation is less efficient, which implies the importance
of both edge-based and terminal state-based intrinsic rewards.
The effect of the coefficient of intrinsic rewards. In practice, we scale intrinsic rewards by a
coefficient. Figure 6(b) illustrates the effect of the coefficient of the intrinsic rewards. A too small
coefficient does not improve the performance, while a too large coefficient converges slower. There
exists an intermediate value that provides the best trade off.
             0.00012                                                                                    0.008                                                                         0.008

             0.00010                                                                                    0.007                                                                         0.007
                                                                                                        0.006                                                                         0.006
             0.00008
  L1 error


                                                                                                        0.005
                                                                                             L1 error


                                                                                                                                                                           L1 error


                                                                                                                                                                                      0.005
             0.00006
                                                                                                        0.004
                                                                                                                                                                                      0.004
             0.00004                                                                                    0.003
                                                                                                                                                                                      0.003
                                                                                                        0.002
             0.00002                                                                                                       GFlowNet (DB)                                              0.002              GFlowNet (FM)
             0.00000
                                                                                                        0.001
                                                                                                                           GAFlowNet(DB)                                              0.001              GAFlowNet(FM)
                       GFlowNet GAFlowNet GAFlowNet GAFlowNet GAFlowNet                                 0.000
                                 (edge)    (state) (state-terminal) (joint)                                     0   2500    5000   7500    10000 12500 15000 17500 20000                      0   2500    5000   7500    10000 12500 15000 17500 20000
                                        Formulations                                                                                      Update                                                                        Update

                                        (a)                                   (b)                                                   (a)                                                                           (b)

Figure 6: Ablation study. (a) The effect of state- Figure 7: Empirical L1 error of GFlowNet and
and edge-based intrinsic rewards. (b) The effect GAFlowNet based on (a) DB and (b) FM.
of the coefficient of intrinsic rewards.
5.1.3                      V ERSATILITY
We now demonstrate that our proposed framework is versatile by building it upon the other two
GFlowNet objectives based on the detailed balance (DB) (Bengio et al., 2021b) and flow matching
(FM) (Bengio et al., 2021a) criteria. Comparison of empirical L1 error averaged over increasing


                                                                                    8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


sizes H are summarized in Figure 7. As demonstrated, GAFlowNet also significantly improves
training convergence of DB and FM, which provides consistent improvement gains.

5.2     M OLECULE G ENERATION

5.2.1    E XPERIMENTAL S ETUP
We now investigate the effectiveness of our method in larger-scale tasks, by evaluating it on the more
challenging molecule generation task (Bengio et al., 2021a) as depicted in Figure 8(a). A molecule
is represented by a graph, which consists of a vocabulary of building blocks. The agent sequentially
generates the molecule by choosing where to attach a block and also which block to attach at each
step considering chemical validity constraints. There is also an exit action indicating whether the
agent decides to stop the generation process. This problem is challenging with large state (about
1016 ) and action (around 100 to 2000) spaces. The agent aims to discover diverse molecules with
high rewards, i.e., low binding energy to the soluble epoxide hydrolase (sEH) protein. We use
a pretrained proxy model to compute this binding energy. We consider a sparse reward function
here, where the agent only obtains a non-zero reward if the corresponding molecule succeeds to
meet a target score, and the reward is 0 otherwise. A detailed description of the environment is in
Appendix C.1.1. We compare our method with previous GFlowNet results (Bengio et al., 2021a),
PPO (Schulman et al., 2017b), PPO with intrinsic rewards based on RND, and MARS (Xie et al.,
2020). All baselines are run with three random seeds as in (Bengio et al., 2021a). More details for
the setup can be found in Appendix C.1.2.

5.2.2    P ERFORMANCE C OMPARISON
We follow the evaluation metric in (Bengio et al., 2021a) and investigate our method in both perfor-
mance and diversity. Figure 8(b) demonstrates the average reward of the top-10 unique molecules
generated by each method. The number of modes discovered by each method with rewards above
7.5 is summarized in Figure 8(c). We compute the average pairwise Tanimoto similarities for the
top-10 samples in Figure 8(d). Additional comparison results can be found in Appendix C.7.
                                                                                                                                300
                                                                                                                                                                                                        0.55
                         Average R of unique top 10


                                                      8.0
                                                                                                      # of modes with R > 7.5


                                                                                                                                                                                Tanimoto similarities


                                                                                                                                250
                                                                                                                                                                                                        0.50
                                                      7.5                                                                       200
                                                                                                                                                                                                        0.45

                                                      7.0                             MARS                                      150
                                                                                                                                                                MARS                                    0.40                             MARS
                                                                                      PPO                                       100                             PPO                                                                      PPO
                                                                                      PPO-RND                                                                   PPO-RND                                 0.35
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         PPO-RND
                                                      6.5
                                                                                      GFlowNet                                  50                              GFlowNet                                0.30                             GFlowNet
                                                                                      GAFlowNet                                  0
                                                                                                                                                                GAFlowNet                                                                GAFlowNet
                                                      6.0                                                                                                                                               0.25
                                                            0   1        2        3         4     5                                   0   1        2        3         4     5                                  0   1        2        3         4     5
                                                                    States visited (×105)                                                     States visited (×105)                                                    States visited (×105)

           (a)                                                           (b)                                                                       (c)                                                                      (d)
Figure 8: Molecule generation task. (a) The environment. (b) Average reward of the top-10
molecules. (c) The number of modes with R > 7.5. (d) Tanimoto similarity (lower is better).
As shown, MARS fails to perform well given sparse rewards since most of the reward signals are
non-informative. On the other hand, PPO and its variant with intrinsic rewards are better at finding
higher-quality solutions than MARS, but suffer both from high similarities of the samples. The
unaugmented GFlowNet is better at discovering more diverse molecules, but does not perform well
in terms of solution quality. GAFlowNet significantly outperforms baseline methods in performance
and diversity. We also visualize the top-10 molecules generated by GFlowNet and GAFlowNet in a
run in Appendix C.8. As shown, GAFlowNet is able to generate diverse and high-quality molecules
efficiently, which demonstrates consistent and significant performance improvement.

6     C ONCLUSION
In this paper, we propose a new learning framework, GAFlowNet, for GFlowNet to incorporate
intermediate rewards. We specify intermediate rewards by intrinsic motivation to tackle the explo-
ration problem of GFlowNets in sparse reward tasks, where it can get trapped in a few modes. We
conduct extensive experiments to evaluate the effectiveness of GAFlowNets, which significantly
outperforms strong baselines in terms of diversity, convergence, and performance when the rewards
are very sparse. GAFlowNet is also scalable to complex tasks like molecular graph generation.


                                                                                                  9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


ACKNOWLEDGEMENT
The authors would like to thank Emmanuel Bengio, Qingpeng Cai, and anonymous reviewers for
their comments and insightful discussions. Aaron Courville thanks the support of CIFAR. Longbo
Huang is supported in part by the Technology and Innovation Major Project of the Ministry of
Science and Technology of China under Grant 2020AAA0108400 and 2020AAA0108403, the Ts-
inghua University Initiative Scientific Research Program, and Tsinghua Precision Medicine Foun-
dation 10001020109. Yoshua Bengio acknowledges the funding from CIFAR, Samsung, IBM and
Microsoft.

R EPRODUCIBILITY S TATEMENT
All details for our experiments are in Appendix C with a detailed description of the task, hyper-
parameters, network architectures for baselines, and setup. Our implementation for all baselines
and environments is based on open-source repositories. The proof of Theorem 1 can be found in
Appendix B. The code is publicly available at https://github.com/ling-pan/GAFN.

R EFERENCES
Kavosh Asadi and Michael L Littman. An alternative softmax operator for reinforcement learning.
  In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 243–252. PMLR, 2017.
Hagai Attias. Planning by probabilistic inference. In AISTATS, 2003.
Emmanuel Bengio, Moksh Jain, Maksym Korablyov, Doina Precup, and Yoshua Bengio. Flow
  network based generative models for non-iterative diverse candidate generation. Advances in
  Neural Information Processing Systems, 34:27381–27394, 2021a.
Yoshua Bengio, Tristan Deleu, Edward J Hu, Salem Lahlou, Mo Tiwari, and Emmanuel Bengio.
  Gflownet foundations. arXiv preprint arXiv:2111.09266, 2021b.
Yuri Burda, Harrison Edwards, Amos Storkey, and Oleg Klimov. Exploration by random network
  distillation. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2018.
Hanjun Dai, Rishabh Singh, Bo Dai, Charles Sutton, and Dale Schuurmans. Learning discrete
  energy-based models via auxiliary-variable local exploration. Advances in Neural Information
  Processing Systems, 33:10443–10455, 2020.
Tristan Deleu, Ant’onio G’ois, Chris C. Emezue, Mansi Rankawat, Simon Lacoste-Julien, Stefan
  Bauer, and Yoshua Bengio. Bayesian structure learning with generative flow networks. ArXiv,
  abs/2202.13903, 2022.
Justin Gilmer, Samuel S Schoenholz, Patrick F Riley, Oriol Vinyals, and George E Dahl. Neural
  message passing for quantum chemistry. In International conference on machine learning, pp.
  1263–1272. PMLR, 2017.
Tuomas Haarnoja, Haoran Tang, Pieter Abbeel, and Sergey Levine. Reinforcement learning with
  deep energy-based policies. In International conference on machine learning, pp. 1352–1361.
  PMLR, 2017.
Tuomas Haarnoja, Aurick Zhou, Pieter Abbeel, and Sergey Levine. Soft actor-critic: Off-policy
  maximum entropy deep reinforcement learning with a stochastic actor. In International confer-
  ence on machine learning, pp. 1861–1870. PMLR, 2018.
Moksh Jain, Emmanuel Bengio, Alex Garcı́a, Jarrid Rector-Brooks, Bonaventure F. P. Dossou,
 Chanakya Ajit Ekbote, Jie Fu, Tianyu Zhang, Micheal Kilgour, Dinghuai Zhang, Lena Simine,
 Payel Das, and Yoshua Bengio. Biological sequence design with gflownets. In ICML, 2022a.
Moksh Jain, Emmanuel Bengio, Alex Hernandez-Garcia, Jarrid Rector-Brooks, Bonaventure FP
 Dossou, Chanakya Ajit Ekbote, Jie Fu, Tianyu Zhang, Michael Kilgour, Dinghuai Zhang, et al.
 Biological sequence design with gflownets. In International Conference on Machine Learning,
 pp. 9786–9801. PMLR, 2022b.


                                               10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Diederik P Kingma and Jimmy Ba. Adam: A method for stochastic optimization. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:1412.6980, 2014.
Matevž Kunaver and Tomaž Požrl. Diversity in recommender systems–a survey. Knowledge-based
 systems, 123:154–162, 2017.
Nikolay Malkin, Moksh Jain, Emmanuel Bengio, Chen Sun, and Yoshua Bengio. Trajectory balance:
  Improved credit assignment in gflownets. arXiv preprint arXiv:2201.13259, 2022.
Volodymyr Mnih, Koray Kavukcuoglu, David Silver, Andrei A Rusu, Joel Veness, Marc G Belle-
  mare, Alex Graves, Martin Riedmiller, Andreas K Fidjeland, Georg Ostrovski, et al. Human-level
  control through deep reinforcement learning. Nature, 518(7540):529–533, 2015.
Ling Pan, Qingpeng Cai, and Longbo Huang. Softmax deep double deterministic policy gradients.
  Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 33:11767–11777, 2020.
Ling Pan, Nikolay Malkin, Dinghuai Zhang, and Yoshua Bengio. Better training of gflownets with
  local credit and incomplete trajectories. arXiv preprint arXiv:2302.01687, 2023a.
Ling Pan, Dinghuai Zhang, Moksh Jain, Longbo Huang, and Yoshua Bengio. Stochastic generative
  flow networks. arXiv preprint arXiv:2302.09465, 2023b.
Deepak Pathak, Pulkit Agrawal, Alexei A Efros, and Trevor Darrell. Curiosity-driven exploration
  by self-supervised prediction. In International conference on machine learning, pp. 2778–2787.
  PMLR, 2017.
John Schulman, Xi Chen, and Pieter Abbeel. Equivalence between policy gradients and soft q-
  learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:1704.06440, 2017a.
John Schulman, Filip Wolski, Prafulla Dhariwal, Alec Radford, and Oleg Klimov. Proximal policy
  optimization algorithms. arXiv preprint arXiv:1707.06347, 2017b.
David Silver, Aja Huang, Chris J Maddison, Arthur Guez, Laurent Sifre, George Van Den Driessche,
  Julian Schrittwieser, Ioannis Antonoglou, Veda Panneershelvam, Marc Lanctot, et al. Mastering
  the game of go with deep neural networks and tree search. Nature, 529(7587):484–489, 2016.
David Silver, Satinder Singh, Doina Precup, and Richard S Sutton. Reward is enough. Artificial
  Intelligence, 299:103535, 2021.
Oriol Vinyals, Igor Babuschkin, Wojciech M Czarnecki, Michaël Mathieu, Andrew Dudzik, Juny-
  oung Chung, David H Choi, Richard Powell, Timo Ewalds, Petko Georgiev, et al. Grandmaster
  level in starcraft ii using multi-agent reinforcement learning. Nature, 575(7782):350–354, 2019.
Yutong Xie, Chence Shi, Hao Zhou, Yuwei Yang, Weinan Zhang, Yong Yu, and Lei Li. Mars:
  Markov molecular sampling for multi-objective drug discovery. In International Conference on
  Learning Representations, 2020.
Dinghuai Zhang, Ricky T. Q. Chen, Nikolay Malkin, and Yoshua Bengio. Unifying generative
  models with gflownets and beyond. 2022a.
Dinghuai Zhang, Aaron C. Courville, Yoshua Bengio, Qinqing Zheng, Amy Zhang, and Ricky T. Q.
  Chen. Latent state marginalization as a low-cost approach for improving exploration. ArXiv,
  abs/2210.00999, 2022b.
Dinghuai Zhang, Nikolay Malkin, Z. Liu, Alexandra Volokhova, Aaron C. Courville, and Yoshua
  Bengio. Generative flow networks for discrete probabilistic modeling. In ICML, 2022c.
Dinghuai Zhang, Ling Pan, Ricky TQ Chen, Aaron Courville, and Yoshua Bengio. Distributional
  gflownets with quantile flows. arXiv preprint arXiv:2302.05793, 2023.
Tianjun Zhang, Huazhe Xu, Xiaolong Wang, Yi Wu, Kurt Keutzer, Joseph E Gonzalez, and Yuan-
  dong Tian. Noveld: A simple yet effective exploration criterion. Advances in Neural Information
  Processing Systems, 34:25217–25230, 2021.


                                               11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Yichi Zhang, Zhijian Ou, and Zhou Yu. Task-oriented dialog systems that consider multiple appro-
  priate responses under the same context. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial
  Intelligence, volume 34, pp. 9604–9611, 2020.
Brian D. Ziebart. Modeling purposeful adaptive behavior with the principle of maximum causal
  entropy. 2010.


                                               12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


A      D ERIVATION OF E DGE - BASED , S TATE - BASED , AND J OINT I NTERMEDIATE
       R EWARD AUGMENTATION
For the edge-based intermediate reward augmentation, we can obtain the detailed balance objective
with the incorporation of intermediate rewards as in Eq. (8) following Section 4.1.
                         F (st−1 )PF (st |st−1 ) = F (st )PB (st−1 |st ) + r(st−1 → st ).                               (8)

Therefore, we have that
            
            
             t=1         F (s0 )PF (s1 |s0 ) = F (s1 )PB (s0 |s1 ) + r(s0 → s1 )
            
              ..                            ..                                                                          (9)
              .                             .
            
               t = n F (sn−1 )PF (sn |sn−1 ) = F (sn )PB (sn |sn−1 ) + r(sn−1 → sn )
            

By accumulative multiplication on both sides, we get that
                              n−1                                            n−1
                                                                             Y
                              Y                                                                         r(st → st+1 )
    F (s0 ) · · · F (sn−1 )         PF (st+1 |st ) = F (s1 ) · · · F (sn )           PB (st |st+1 ) +                   .
                              t=0                                            t=0
                                                                                                          F (st+1 )
                                                                                                                       (10)
Therefore, we obtain the corresponding edge-based reward augmented formulation for trajectory
balance as
                      n−1                          n−1
                                                   Y
                      Y                                                 r(st → st+1 )
              F (s0 )     PF (st+1 |st ) = F (sn )     PB (st |st+1 ) +                 , (11)
                      t=0                          t=0
                                                                          F (st+1 )
                       P            P
where F (s0 ) = Z = x R(x) + st−1 →st r(st−1 → st ), and F (sn ) = R(x).
The state-based reward augmented formulation can be obtained similarly by following Appendix
D in (Bengio et al., 2021b). The joint reward augmented formulation is obtained by combining
edge-based and state-based reward augmentation.

B     P ROOF OF T HEOREM 1
Theorem 1. Suppose that ∀τ, LGAFlowNet (τ ) = 0, and ∀x, R(x) + r(x) > 0. When edge-based
intrinsic rewards converge to 0, we have that (1) P (x) = P R(x)+r(x)    ; (2) If state-based intrinsic
                                                           x [R(x)+r(x)]
rewards converge to 0, then P (x) is an unbiased sample distribution.

Proof. By definition, we have that
                                                            n−1
                                                            Y
                                              Fθ (τ ) = Z          PF (st+1 |st ).                                    (12)
                                                            t=0

Since ∀τ, LGAFlowNet (τ ) = 0, we have that
                   n−1                                          n−1
                                                                Y
                   Y                                                                     r(st → st+1 )
               Z         PF (st+1 |st ) = (R(x) + r(x))                 PB (st |st+1 ) +                              (13)
                   t=0                                            t=0
                                                                                           F (st+1 )

Therefore, we obtain that
                                                     n−1
                               Fθ (τ )   R(x) + r(x) Y                     r(st → st+1 )
                 Pθ (τ ) =             =                  PB (st |st+1 ) +                 .                          (14)
                                 Z           Z       t=0
                                                                             F (st+1 )

When edge-based intrinsic rewards converge to 0 and F does not vanish, we have that
                                                                                             n−1
                           X                          R(x) + r(x)              X             Y
      Pθ (x) =                            Pθ (τ ) =                                                PB (st |st+1 ).    (15)
                                                          Z
                   τ =(s0 →···→sn =x)                                   τ =(s0 →···→sn =x) t=0


                                                              13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Due to the law of total probability, we have that
                                      X          n−1
                                                 Y
                                                         PB (st |st+1 ) = 1.                       (16)
                               τ =(s0 →···→sn =x) t=0


Therefore, Pθ (x) = R(x)+r(x)
                                     P                                         P
                        Z     . As      x Pθ (x) = 1, we also get that Z =     x (R(x) + r(x)).

Therefore, we have Part (1) that
                                                    R(x) + r(x)
                                     Pθ (x) = P                                                    (17)
                                                    x [R(x) + r(x)]


Based on the above analysis, P (x) is an unbiased estimation when state-based intrinsic rewards
converge to 0, and we have Part (2).



C     E XPERIMENTAL D ETAILS

C.1     E XPERIMENTAL S ETUP

C.1.1    TASK
The molecule generation task We adopt a pretrained proxy model for the reward, which is trained
on a dataset of 300, 000 molecules that are randomly generated as provided in (Bengio et al., 2021a).
For the original dense reward function, the agent receives a reward based on the normalized score.
Here, we use a sparse reward function, where the agent only obtains the original non-zero reward
if the normalized score succeeds to meet a target score (7.0), and the reward is 0 otherwise. As
described in Section 5.2.1, the agent can choose one of the blocks to attach from the basic building
blocks vocabulary (with a size of 105).

C.1.2    BASELINE
All baseline methods are implemented based on the open-source implementation as described in the
main text, where we follow the default hyperparameters and setup as in (Bengio et al., 2021a). The
code will be released upon publication of the paper.

GridWorld Specifically, in GridWorld, the GFlowNet model is a feedforward network consisting
of two hidden layers with 256 hidden units per layer using LeakyReLU activation. We train all
models based on samples from a parallel of 16 rollouts in the environment. We leverage random
network distillation (RND) (Burda et al., 2018) as the intrinsic reward mechanism, where the random
target network and the predictor network are both feedforward networks consisting of two hidden
layers with 256 hidden units per layer using LeakyReLU activation. We train the GFlowNet model
and RND jointly based on the Adam (Kingma & Ba, 2014) optimizer with a learning rate of 0.001
for the policy models (PF and PB ) and 0.1 for Z.

Molecule generation For the molecule generation task, we use a reward proxy provided in (Ben-
gio et al., 2021a). As the molecule is represented as an atom graph, we use Message Passing Neural
Networks (MPNN) (Gilmer et al., 2017) as the network architecture for all models. Note that we
build our method upon GFlowNet based on the flow matching criterion in the molecule generation
task, since it is the most competitive version in this task in terms of finding high-quality and diverse
candidates.
For GAFlowNet, the only hyperparameter that requires tuning is the coefficient α of intrinsic re-
wards, where we use a same value for state-based and edge-based augmentation. We tune α in
{0.001, 0.005, 0.01, 0.05, 0.1, 0.5} with grid search. Specifically, α = 0.001 for GridWorld with all
values of horizon except for H ∈ {16, 64}, where we set α to be 0.005. For the molecule generation
task, α is set to be 0.1.


                                                    14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


C.2   V ISUALIZATION OF THE LEARNED STRUCTURES

In this section, we visualize the learned forward policies of GFlowNets and GAFlowNets. The
results are demonstrated in Figure 9 in the small GridWorld, and the borders (the last column and
the last row) of the grid are omitted in the figure for better readability. The length of the arrows is
proportional to the likelihood of the corresponding actions under the forward policy PF , while the
size of the gray circle is proportional to the probability of the termination action (stop). As shown,
GFlowNet can get trapped in a few modes, while GAFlowNets is able to discover all the modes.


                                     (a)                       (b)

Figure 9: Visualization of the learned forward policies of (a) GFlowNets and (b) GAFlowNets in
GridWorld (horizon H = 8).

The corresponding distribution of the samples collected by GFlowNets and GAFlowNets during
the course of training in the small GridWorld task is shown in Figure 10, where GAFlowNets
leads to more diverse solutions. Visualization of the top molecules discovered by GFlowNets and
GAFlowNets can be found in Appendix C.8.


                                     (a)                       (b)

Figure 10: Distribution of the samples during the course of training from (a) GFlowNets and (b)
GAFlowNets in GridWorld (horizon H = 8).


C.3   F ULL RESULTS IN G RIDW ORLD

We show in Figure 11 the full comparison results in GridWorld with increasing sizes
H{8, 16, 32, 64, 128}. As shown, GAFlowNet significantly outperforms baselines in empirical L1
error and the number of modes found.

C.4   P ERFORMANCE COMPARISON

Apart from evaluating our method based on the metrics (the number of modes discovered by each
method and empirical L1 error) as in (Bengio et al., 2021a), we are also interested in its perfor-
mance after each update. Here, we evaluate the performance of baselines after each update (instead
of throughout the training process) as in the evaluation scheme of RL algorithms. Figure 12 demon-
strates the performance for the top-5 solutions among a batch of 16 parallel rollouts of each method
after each update for GridWorld with sizes H ∈ {8, 16, 32, 64, 128}. As shown, although PPO is
more efficient than PPO, both of them underperform GFlowNet by a large margin (especially with


                                                  15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                                  H=8                                                                                                               H=8                                                                                                                    H = 16                                                                                            H = 16
                                                                                                                      3.0                                                                                                                       0.008                                                                                                               3.0
           0.030
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                0.007
                                                                                                                      2.5                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           2.5
           0.025


                                                                                                   # of modes found


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 # of modes found
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                0.006
           0.020                                                                                                      2.0                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           2.0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                0.005
L1 error


                                                                                                                                                                                                                            L1 error
           0.015                                                                MCMC                                  1.5                                                                            MCMC                                       0.004                                                                       MCMC                                    1.5                                     MCMC
                                                                                PPO                                   1.0
                                                                                                                                                                                                     PPO                                        0.003
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            PPO                                     1.0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            PPO
           0.010
                                                                                PPO-RND                                                                                                              PPO-RND                                                                                                                PPO-RND                                                                         PPO-RND
           0.005                                                                GFlowNet                              0.5                                                                            GFlowNet                                   0.002
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            GFlowNet                                0.5                                     GFlowNet
           0.000
                                                                                GAFlowNet                             0.0
                                                                                                                                                                                                     GAFlowNet                                  0.001                                                                       GAFlowNet                               0.0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            GAFlowNet
                   0       2500    5000    7500      10000 12500 15000 17500 20000                                           0                100             200                         300           400           500                                 0       2500     5000    7500       10000 12500 15000 17500 20000                                               0     100       200         300      400        500
                                                  Update                                                                                                           Update                                                                                                                 Update                                                                                             Update

                                             (a)                                                                                                               (b)                                                                                                                    (c)                                                                                                  (d)

                                                  H = 32                                                                                                           H = 32                                                                                                                  H = 64                                                                                            H = 64
           0.00200                                                                                                    3.0                                                                                                                       0.00050                                                                                                             3.0
           0.00175                                                                                                                                                                                                                              0.00045
                                                                                                                      2.5                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           2.5
                                                                                                   # of modes found


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 # of modes found
           0.00150                                                                                                                                                                                                                              0.00040
                                                                                                                      2.0                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           2.0
           0.00125                                                                                                                                                                                                                              0.00035
L1 error


                                                                                                                                                                                                                            L1 error
           0.00100                                                              MCMC                                  1.5                                                                            MCMC                                       0.00030                                                                     MCMC                                    1.5                                     MCMC
           0.00075                                                              PPO                                   1.0
                                                                                                                                                                                                     PPO                                        0.00025
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            PPO                                     1.0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            PPO
           0.00050
                                                                                PPO-RND                                                                                                              PPO-RND                                                                                                                PPO-RND                                                                         PPO-RND
                                                                                GFlowNet                              0.5                                                                            GFlowNet                                   0.00020
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            GFlowNet                                0.5                                     GFlowNet
           0.00025
                                                                                GAFlowNet                             0.0
                                                                                                                                                                                                     GAFlowNet                                  0.00015                                                                     GAFlowNet                               0.0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            GAFlowNet
           0.00000
                       0    2500    5000    7500 10000 12500 15000 17500 20000                                               0                200             400                         600           800          1000                                     0    2500     5000     7500 10000 12500 15000 17500 20000                                                   0     2000      4000    6000        8000      10000
                                                  Update                                                                                                           Update                                                                                                                  Update                                                                                           Update

                                             (e)                                                                                                                   (f)                                                                                                               (g)                                                                                                   (h)

                                                                                                                                                                    H = 128                                                                                                           H = 128
                                                                                                                       0.00012                                                                                                                 3.0

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               2.5
                                                                                                                       0.00010                                                                                              # of modes found
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               2.0
                                                                                                   L1 error


                                                                                                                       0.00008
                                                                                                                                                                                                     MCMC                                      1.5                                                                          MCMC
                                                                                                                       0.00006
                                                                                                                                                                                                     PPO                                       1.0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            PPO
                                                                                                                                                                                                     PPO-RND                                                                                                                PPO-RND
                                                                                                                       0.00004
                                                                                                                                                                                                     GFlowNet                                  0.5                                                                          GFlowNet
                                                                                                                                                                                                     GAFlowNet                                 0.0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            GAFlowNet
                                                                                                                                    0     2500        5000    7500 10000 12500 15000 17500 20000                                                      0             2000           4000                         6000            8000     10000
                                                                                                                                                                    Update                                                                                                            Update

                                                                                                                                                                   (i)                                                                                                                (j)

Figure 11: Comparison of GAFlowNets and baselines in GridWorld with increasing sizes H ∈
{8, 16, 32, 64, 128}. (a), (c), (e), (g), (i) correspond to the empirical L1 error. (b), (d), (f), (h), (j)
correspond to the number of modes discovered by each method.



a larger value of H). We find that GAFlowNet significantly outperforms baseline methods, and also
performs more efficiently than GFlowNet.


                                                                                                  H=8                                                                                                                   H = 16                                                                                                               H = 32
                                                                                                                                                                                        1.0                                                                                                                    1.0
                                                                      1.0
                                                  Top-K performance


                                                                                                                                                                    Top-K performance


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Top-K performance


                                                                                                                                                                                        0.8                                                                                                                    0.8
                                                                      0.8

                                                                      0.6                                                                                                               0.6                                                                                                                    0.6
                                                                                                                                        MCMC                                                                                                                      MCMC                                                                                                        MCMC
                                                                      0.4
                                                                                                                                        PPO                                             0.4                                                                       PPO                                          0.4                                                            PPO
                                                                      0.2                                                               PPO-RND                                                                                                                   PPO-RND                                                                                                     PPO-RND
                                                                                                                                        GFlowNet                                        0.2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  GFlowNet                                     0.2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              GFlowNet
                                                                      0.0                                                               GAFlowNet                                       0.0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  GAFlowNet                                    0.0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              GAFlowNet
                                                                            0   250   500   750       1000                   1250       1500        1750     2000                             0         100           200                         300                400             500                             0           200      400                         600       800       1000
                                                                                                  Update                                                                                                                Update                                                                                                               Update

                                                                                              (a)                                                                                                                     (b)                                                                                                                   (c)

                                                                                                                                                                   H = 64                                                                                                             H = 128
                                                                                                                       1.0                                                                                                                      1.0
                                                                                                   Top-K performance


                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Top-K performance


                                                                                                                       0.8                                                                                                                      0.8

                                                                                                                       0.6                                                                                                                      0.6
                                                                                                                                                                                                     MCMC                                                                                                                   MCMC
                                                                                                                       0.4                                                                           PPO                                        0.4                                                                         PPO
                                                                                                                                                                                                     PPO-RND                                                                                                                PPO-RND
                                                                                                                       0.2
                                                                                                                                                                                                     GFlowNet                                   0.2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            GFlowNet
                                                                                                                       0.0
                                                                                                                                                                                                     GAFlowNet                                  0.0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            GAFlowNet
                                                                                                                             0          250         500      750      1000                    1250   1500     1750   2000                             0            500        1000           1500                        2000     2500   3000
                                                                                                                                                                   Update                                                                                                              Update

                                                                                                                                                               (d)                                                                                                                    (e)

Figure 12: Top-K performance of baselines after each update for horizon H ∈ {8, 16, 32, 64, 128}.



                                                                                                                                                                                                                       16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


C.5     A DDITIONAL R ESULTS ON G RIDW ORLDS WITH D ENSE R EWARDS

In this section, we evaluate the performance of GAFlowNets in a variant of GridWorld with dense
reward functions. We employ the same reward function (Eq. (18)) as in (Bengio et al., 2021a;
Malkin et al., 2022) with R0 = 1e − 3 (the hardest variant of the grid considered in (Bengio et al.,
2021a; Malkin et al., 2022)), which is shown in Figure 13(a). Note that when R0 is closer to 0,
the problem becomes more difficult as it results in a region of the state space that is undesirable to
explore (Bengio et al., 2021a).

                                                 1Y                               Y
       R(x) = R0 +                                   I (0.25 < |xi /H − 0.5|) + 2   I (0.3 < |xi /H − 0.5| < 0.4)                                                                                                                                                  (18)
                                                 2 i                              i

Comparison results of GAFlowNets and GFlowNets in empirical L1 error in GridWorlds with differ-
ent sizes H ∈ {8, 16, 32, 64, 128} are shown in Figures 13(b)-(f). As demonstrated, GAFlowNets
also greatly improve the learning efficiency of GFlowNets. This is because GAFlowNets exhibit
greater exploration ability, and are more efficient in choosing training trajectories that the agent is
not very familiar with yet and may have a high reward (Bengio et al., 2021b). Therefore, it achieves
consistent performance improvement.

                            0                                                       2.5                                                                                                  0.007

                                                                                                        0.025                                                                            0.006
                           10
                                                                                    2.0
                                                                                                        0.020                                                                            0.005
                           20
                                                                                             L1 error


                                                                                                                                                                              L1 error
                                                                                    1.5                                                                                                  0.004
                                                                                                        0.015
                           30
                                                                                                                                                                                         0.003
                                                                                    1.0                 0.010
                           40                                                                                                                                                            0.002

                           50                                                       0.5
                                                                                                        0.005                                            GFlowNet                        0.001                                                GFlowNet
                                                                                                        0.000
                                                                                                                                                         GAFlowNet                                                                            GAFlowNet
                                                                                                                                                                                         0.000
                           60                                                                                   0       2500   5000   7500    10000 12500 15000 17500 20000                      0       2500     5000     7500    10000 12500 15000 17500 20000
                                0       10      20      30    40      50    60                                                               Update                                                                               Update

                                                         (a)                                                                            (b)                                                                                  (c)

                                                                                                        0.0005
                                                                                                                                                                                         0.00012
                          0.00175

                          0.00150                                                                       0.0004                                                                           0.00010

                          0.00125
                                                                                                        0.0003                                                                           0.00008
               L1 error


                                                                                                                                                                              L1 error
                                                                                             L1 error


                          0.00100
                                                                                                                                                                                         0.00006
                          0.00075                                                                       0.0002

                          0.00050                                                                                                                                                        0.00004

                          0.00025                                          GFlowNet                     0.0001                                           GFlowNet                        0.00002
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              GFlowNet
                                                                           GAFlowNet                                                                     GAFlowNet                                                                            GAFlowNet
                          0.00000                                                                       0.0000
                                    0    2500    5000   7500 10000 12500 15000 17500 20000                          0   2500   5000   7500    10000 12500 15000 17500 20000                          0    2500      5000    7500 10000 12500 15000 17500 20000
                                                             Update                                                                          Update                                                                               Update

                                                         (d)                                                                            (e)                                                                                  (f)

Figure 13: (a) The dense reward function. (b)-(f) Empirical L1 error of GAFlowNets and GFlowNets
in GridWorld with dense reward functions for horizon H ∈ {8, 16, 32, 64, 128}.


C.6     A DDITIONAL A BLATION S TUDY OF GAF LOW N ET

We investigate the effect of different types of intrinsic rewards in-  0.00008
                                                                       0.00007
cluding Intrinsic Curiosity Module (ICM) (Pathak et al., 2017),        0.00006
Novelty Difference (NovelD) (Zhang et al., 2021), and Random           0.00005
                                                                                                                                                                                                                L1 error


Network Distillation (RND) (Burda et al., 2018) in Figure 14, with     0.00004
                                                                       0.00003
fine-tuned coefficients for intrinsic rewards. We also include a base- 0.00002
line with constant intrinsic rewards in GAFlowNet, which mimics        0.00001

the behavior of ϵ-greedy exploration typically used in reinforcement   0.00000
                                                                               GFlowNet GAFlowNet GAFlowNet GAFlowNet GAFlowNet
                                                                                        (Constant) (NovelD)   (ICM)     (RND)
learning algorithms. As demonstrated, GAFlowNet is not sensi-                          Types of intrinsic rewards
tive to the forms of intrinsic rewards, but RND enables the fastest
convergence in our simulations. It also validates the effectiveness Figure 14: Ablation study on
of the novelty-based methods from the comparison of GAFlowNet different types of intrinsic re-
and GAFlowNet with constant intrinsic rewards. This is because wards.
novelty-based methods are more efficient than blindly wandering in
the maze.



                                                                                                                                        17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


C.7     A DDITIONAL P ERFORMANCE C OMPARISON ON THE M OLECULE G ENERATION TASK

Following the evaluation metrics in (Bengio et al., 2021a), besides the results in Figure 8 in the
main text, we also evaluate the average reward of the top-100 molecules and the number of modes
with R > 8.0 discovered by each method. As demonstrated in Figure 15, GAFlowNet achieves
consistent and significant performance improvement over previous baselines.


                                                  8



                    Average R of unique top 100
                                                  7                                                                      20


                                                                                                 # of modes with R > 8
                                                  6
                                                  5                                                                      15

                                                  4
                                                                                 MARS                                    10                             MARS
                                                  3                              PPO                                                                    PPO
                                                  2                              PPO-RND                                 5                              PPO-RND
                                                  1                              GFlowNet                                                               GFlowNet
                                                  0
                                                                                 GAFlowNet                               0
                                                                                                                                                        GAFlowNet
                                                      0   1        2         3        4      5                                0   1        2        3         4     5
                                                              States visited (×105)                                                   States visited (×105)
                                                                       (a)                                                                  (b)

Figure 15: Molecule generation task. (a) The average reward of the top-100 molecules. (b) The
number of modes with R > 8.0.


C.8     F ULL VISUALIZATION OF TOP -10 MOLECULES

Figure 16 demonstrates the top-10 molecules generated by GFlowNet and GAFlowNet, where
GAFlowNet discovers more diverse and higher-quality solutions.


                (a) GFlowNet. Tanimoto similarity is 0.410 and the average reward is 7.747.


               (b) GAFlowNet. Tanimoto similarity is 0.356 and the average reward is 8.120.

      Figure 16: Full visualization of top-10 molecules generated by GFlowNet and GAFlowNet.


                                                                                             18
