Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


R EPLAY B UFFER W ITH L OCAL F ORGETTING FOR
A DAPTIVE D EEP M ODEL -BASED R EINFORCEMENT
L EARNING
 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                             A BSTRACT

         One of the key behavioral characteristics used in neuroscience to determine
         whether the subject of study—be it a rodent or a human—exhibits model-based
         learning is effective adaptation to local changes in the environment. In reinforce-
         ment learning, however, recent work has shown that modern deep model-based
         reinforcement-learning (MBRL) methods adapt poorly to such changes. An ex-
         planation for this mismatch is that MBRL methods are typically designed with
         sample-efficiency on a single task in mind and the requirements for effective adap-
         tation are substantially higher, both in terms of the learned world model and the
         planning routine. One particularly challenging requirement is that the learned
         world model has to be sufficiently accurate throughout relevant parts of the state-
         space. This is challenging for deep-learning-based world models due to catas-
         trophic forgetting. And while a replay buffer can mitigate the effects of catas-
         trophic forgetting, the traditional first-in-first-out replay buffer precludes effective
         adaptation due to maintaining stale data. In this work, we show that a conceptually
         simple variation of this traditional replay buffer is able to overcome this limitation.
         By removing only samples from the buffer from the local neighbourhood of the
         newly observed samples, deep world models can be built that maintain their accu-
         racy across the state-space, while also being able to effectively adapt to changes
         in the reward function. We demonstrate this by applying our replay-buffer varia-
         tion to a deep version of the classical Dyna method, as well as to recent methods
         such as PlaNet and DreamerV2, demonstrating that deep model-based methods
         can adapt effectively as well to local changes in the environment.


1   I NTRODUCTION

Recent work has shown that modern deep MBRL methods adapt poorly to local changes in the
environment (Van Seijen et al., 2020; Wan et al., 2022), despite this being a key characteristic of
model-based learning in humans and animals (Daw et al., 2011). The analysis by Wan et al. (2022)
revealed that there are broadly two causes for this lack of adaptivity: an insufficient world model or
insufficient planning. And the former one is an especially challenging one to overcome when deep-
learning-based world models are considered. The core of this challenge lies in the fact that adaptivity
requires a world model that is accurate across the relevant state-space, as a small change in reward
or transition function can change the trajectory of the optimal policy entirely. By contrast, to achieve
high single-task sample-efficiency—a common metric used in MBRL research—it is sufficient that
the world model is accurate along the current behavior policy.
For deep world models, accuracy across the state-space is hard to achieve and maintain, even with
sufficient exploration. The reason is that collected samples are strongly correlated, and, at the fi-
nal stages of learning, mostly come from states along the trajectory of the optimal policy. Due to
catastrophic forgetting, the quality of the predictions further away from this trajectory quickly de-
grades. A common strategy to counter this is to use a replay buffer. By randomly sampling from
a large replay buffer and using these samples to update the world model, the effects of catastrophic
forgetting are greatly reduced. However, the traditional first-in-first-out (FIFO) replay buffer has the
disadvantage that it hinders effective adaptation, as out-of-date samples interfere with the new data.


                                                    1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


To address the challenge of catastrophic forgetting, while also avoiding interference from out-of-date
samples, we propose a variation of the traditional FIFO replay buffer. Instead of removing the oldest
sample from the replay buffer once the buffer is full, the oldest sample in the local neighbourhood
of the new sample is removed. This conceptually simple idea naturally leads to a replay buffer
whose samples are approximately spread out equally across the space space, while local changes are
accounted for quickly. Consequently, updating the deep world model with samples drawn randomly
from this replay buffer results in a world model that is approximately accurate across the state-space
at each moment in time. We call this replay buffer variation a L O F O (Local Forgetting) replay buffer.
One practical challenge to our proposed variation is that a locality-function needs to be learned that
determines whether or not a sample from the replay buffers falls within the local neighborhood of
a newly observed sample. We train this locality function using contrastive learning (Hadsell et al.,
2006; Dosovitskiy et al., 2014; Wu et al., 2018) during the initial stages of learning, after which it is
fixed and used as basis for the L O F O replay buffer.
We demonstrate the effectiveness of the L O F O replay buffer by combining it with a deep version
of the classical Dyna method and measuring its adaptivity on a variation of the MountainCar task
as well as a mini-grid domain, using the same Local Change Adaptation (LoCA) setup as used
by Wan et al. (2022). We then test the limits of our approach by applying the same idea to both
PlaNet (Hafner et al., 2019b) and DreamerV2 (Hafner et al., 2020), which use world models based
on recurrent networks and are intended for continuous-action domains. Experiments with these
modified methods on variations of the MuJoCo Reacher domain demonstrate that a L O F O replay
buffer can substantially improve adaptivity of more advanced deep MBRL methods as well.


2   BACKGROUND : L OCAL C HANGE A DAPTATION (L O CA) S ETUP

Inspired by work from neuroscience on detecting
model-based behavior in humans and animals (Daw
                                                                T1   Training          T2         Evaluation
et al., 2011), Van Seijen et al. (2020) proposed the
Local Change Adaptation (LoCA) regret as an ex-                                  2                         2
perimental setup and metric to evaluate model based      Phase 1
                                                                     4                              4
behavior of RL methods. LoCA regret measures             (Task A)

how quickly a method adapts its policy after observ-
ing a local environment change and tries to estimate
                                                         Phase 2
                                                                                 2                         2
how close a method is to ideal model-based behav-                    1                              1
                                                          (Task B)
ior. Wan et al. (2022) improved the LoCA setup by
making it simpler, less sensitive to hyperparameters                        : T1-Zone Boundary
and easily applicable to stochastic environments. It                        : Initial State Distribution
evaluates if an RL method can reach close to op-                            : Terminal State (T1, T2)
timal performance after observing a local environ-
ment change and makes a binary classification of         Figure 1: LoCA Setup: During training, in
methods that effectively adapt to local changes and      Phase 1, the agent is randomly initialized
those that cannot. In this work we use this improved     throughout the state-space and has to solve
LoCA setup (Figure 1) for all our evaluations. It con-   Task A which has a higher reward in T1 com-
sists of two main components, the task configuration     pared to T2. In Phase 2, the agent is initial-
and the experiment configuration.                        ized within the one-way T1-zone and the re-
The task configuration considers an environment          ward function changes to Task B with T1’s
with two tasks, namely A and B, which differ only        reward changing and having a lower reward
in their reward functions. A method’s adaptivity is      than T2, hence changing the optimal policy.
determined by analyzing how effectively it can adapt     During evaluation the agent is initialized ran-
from task A to task B. A learning environment suited     domly throughout the entire state-space in
for the LoCA setup is made up of two terminal states,    both the phases.
namely T1 and T2. The reward function for both
tasks is always zero except when transitioning to ei-
ther of the terminal states. For task A, the agent receives a reward of 4 upon transitioning to T1 and
2 upon transitioning to T2. For task B, however, a transition to T1 yields a reward of 1 (instead of 4
as in task A), and transitioning to T2 results in the same reward as in task A, which is 2. In addition,
both of these tasks share the same discount factor 0 < γ < 1. Finally, the transition dynamics for


                                                   2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


a local area around T1 is such that it is impossible for an agent to move out, once entered. This is
called the T1-zone.
The change between the two tasks is local and is only in their reward functions. Specifically, tasks
A and B share the same environment dynamics, except that a transition to T1 results in different
rewards between the two tasks. In cognitive neuroscience this is also known as reward transfer, or
retrospective reward revaluation (Momennejad et al., 2017). While the difference in tasks A and B
is only local, their optimal policies are completely different for most states, i.e., the optimal policy
for task A tries to reach T1, while for task B, it tries to reach T2 except when the agent is within the
T1-zone, where the optimal policy tries to reach T1.
The experiment configuration consists of two different training phases. These two phases differ in
the task and initial state distribution. Throughout Phase 1, the environment dynamics are set to that
of task A’s, and the initial state is drawn uniformly random from the entire state-space. When the
first phase finishes, the task changes to task B, and Phase 2 begins. The initial state for the second
phase is drawn uniformly random from only states within the T1-zone; hence, the agent’s presence
is limited to a local area around T1. During each phase, the agent is periodically evaluated for some
number of episodes, and the initial states for each evaluation episode is drawn uniformly random
over the entire state-space. The average overall return is reported for each evaluation and compared
to the average return of the corresponding optimal policy in that phase. Lastly, the agent does not
receive any signal when the task changes.
For a method to reach optimal performance in Phase 2, it has to adapt to the new reward function
corresponding to task B, i.e., it has to change its policy from pointing towards T1 to pointing towards
T2 for most of the state-space. The method has to perform this adaptation to the reward change while
only observing states within the local region around T1 where the reward change has occurred.
Given sufficient amount of time to train in Phase 1 followed by Phase 2, a method is classified
as adaptive if it is able to achieve close to optimal performance in both Phase 1 and Phase 2. If
a method achieves near-optimal performance in Phase 1 but not Phase 2, it is classified as a non-
adaptive method. And lastly, no assessment is made when a method fails to reach close to optimal
performance in Phase 1.


3    C HALLENGES IN A DAPTIVE D EEP MBRL

Using the LoCA setup, Wan et al. (2022) observed that current popular deep MBRL methods, such
as PlaNet (Hafner et al., 2019b) and DreamerV2 (Hafner et al., 2019a; 2020) fail to adapt to local
environment changes. Their analysis revealed that the key reason for their failure to adapt is their
inability to build and maintain correct world models when environment changes occur. A small
local change in reward or transition function can change the optimal policy entirely. For an MBRL
method to adapt to such environment changes and update its policy, it needs to maintain a world
model that is sufficiently accurate throughout the relevant parts of the state-space. It is not sufficient
to have a world model that is accurate only along the current behavior/optimal policy, as is the case
for current methods such as PlaNet and Dreamer, developed for single non-changing task settings.
Current deep MBRL methods that use deep neural networks as function approximators, such as
PlaNet and DreamerV2 store their recent experience to a large first-in-first-out (FIFO) replay buffer.
In a FIFO replay buffer, when the buffer gets full, as new transition samples are added to the buffer,
the oldest samples are removed. Transitions are then sampled from the replay buffer to train the
world model, which is then used for planning and updating the agent’s policy. Instead of training
the model directly from the stream of data that the agent is observing, having a replay buffer and
sampling transitions from it to train the deep neural network based model, helps break the strong
correlation between the stream of data that the agent is observing. This correlation is hurtful for the
i.i.d., assumptions made by the stochastic gradient-descent based optimizers typically used to update
the parameters of the neural networks. Replaying past experience also helps mitigate forgetting
predictions about states that the agent does not visit frequently.
When a change occurs in the environment, using a large replay buffer results in interference of
the old out-of-date data with the new data, resulting in an incorrect world model. For example, in
the LoCA setup, when the agent enters Phase 2 with task B, there is a local change in the reward
function, specifically the reward corresponding to T1 changes. The agent which is restricted to the


                                                    3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


T1-zone in Phase 2 is able to observe this local change. However, the replay buffer from which
transitions are sampled to update the model still has lots of transitions from Phase 1 with the stale
incorrect reward corresponding to T1 from task A. This interference from the old data results in an
incorrect world model, which affects planning and thereby renders the method not adaptive to the
local change in Phase 2.
In a FIFO replay buffer, the current samples in the replay buffer are determined by the current
behavior policy. Therefore, as time progresses, the old data will all be removed from the buffer.
This will happen faster if we make the replay buffer smaller. While it might avoid the interference
from old stale data after some time, it would result in catastrophic forgetting of model predictions
corresponding to states not recently visited. For example, in the LoCA setup, when the replay buffer
is small, after entering Phase 2, the stale transitions around T1 from phase 1 will be removed from
the replay buffer over time, stopping the interference problem. This, however, also removes other
still relevant and correct transitions from other parts of the state-space, which are now replaced
by transitions from just within the T1-zone. A model trained with such a replay buffer forgets
the learned model for states outside the T1-zone, which again affects the planning and renders the
method not adaptive to the changes in Phase 2.
Therefore, the core challenge in building adaptive deep MBRL methods is to address the
interference-forgetting dilemma and maintain world models that are sufficiently accurate throughout
the relevant state-space when tasks change, irrespective of the current behavior policy.

4   L OCAL F ORGETTING (L O F O ) R EPLAY B UFFER F OR A DAPTIVE D EEP
    MBRL
We propose L O F O (Local Forgetting) replay buffer, a conceptually simple variation of the traditional
FIFO replay buffer that is able to address the core challenges in building an adaptive deep MBRL
method. Instead of removing the oldest samples from the replay buffer once it is full as done in
the traditional FIFO replay buffer, in a L O F O replay buffer, the oldest samples in only the local
neighbourhood of the new samples are removed.
When a change occurs in the environment and the agent observes that change, adding the new
samples to the replay buffer and removing the oldest samples from only the local neighbourhood of
the new data instead of the oldest samples from the entire replay buffer facilitates removal of the
potentially incorrect and stale data sooner. This helps mitigate the interference of the old out-of-date
samples with the new samples when tasks change.
Since only the samples in a local neighbourhood of the new samples are removed, old samples
in other parts of the state-space including those that have not been visited recently remain in the
replay buffer. This leads to a replay buffer whose samples are approximately spread out equally
throughout the entire relevant state-space, irrespective of the current behavior policy. Updating the
world model with samples drawn from this L O F O replay buffer results in a world model that is
approximately accurate throughout the relevant state-space avoiding the problem of catastrophic
forgetting of predictions related to states not recently visited.
L O F O replay buffer can therefore address the interference-forgetting dilemma and result in learning
a world model that is sufficiently accurate throughout the relevant state-space even when there are
environment changes. The current deep MBRL methods can then utilise the correct world models
to update and adapt their policies, resulting in an adaptive deep MBRL method.

5   L O F O R EPLAY B UFFER W ITH C ONTRASTIVE S TATE L OCALITY
An instantiation of a L O F O replay buffer requires a definition of a local neighbourhood to an ob-
served new sample and a way to determine which samples in the replay buffer are within that local
neighbourhood. While there could be several ways to do this, in this work, we learn a state lo-
cality function using a contrastive learning technique which is then used to both define the local
neighbourhood and also identify samples within that local neighbourhood.
Using contrastive learning (Hadsell et al., 2006; Dosovitskiy et al., 2014; Wu et al., 2018) we learn
neural embedding representation of states such that states that are temporally closer, i.e., reachable


                                                   4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


with fewer actions are also closer in their neural embedding representation. Specifically, we learn
an embedding function v = fθ (s), where fθ is a deep neural network that maps state s to an
embedding vector v. This embedding function induces a distance metric in the state-space, such as
dθ (si , sj ) = ||fθ (si ) − fθ (sj )||2 for states si and sj . We train the embedding function such that
states that are temporally closer, have a smaller distance between the embeddings learnt and states
that are temporally farther, have a relatively larger distance between them in the embedding space.
Let s′ represent a state that is one action away from state s, and s̄ represent a set of states that are
not. Let D = {s, s′ , s̄} be a dataset of their collection. We train the embedding function to minimize
the following loss function:

                          X                                                                          2
              L(D) =                  ||fθ (s) − fθ (s′ )||22 + β − Σs̄∈s̄ ||fθ (s) − fθ (s̄)||22        ,
                       (s,s′ ,s̄)∈D


where β > 0 is a hyperparameter. This loss function trains the embedding of states s and s′ that are
temporally next to each other to be closer by minimising their distance towards zero, while pushing
the embedding of states s̄ that are not temporally next to s to be on average farther, with a cumulative
squared distance value close to β, a positive number.
In our experiments, we collect trajectories using a random behavior policy at the beginning of train-
ing and use samples from that trajectory to form the dataset D = {s, s′ , s̄} to train our embedding
function fθ . The learnt embedding function is then fixed and the distance between the state embed-
dings is used as a proxy for state locality. In complex environments with exploration challenges,
a random behavior policy might be insufficient to cover the relevant state-space needed to learn a
good state locality estimate. It is an important future work to figure out good ways to learn state
locality in such settings.
The samples stored in the replay buffer are generally of the form (s, a, r, s′ ), representing a transition
an agent experienced by taking an action a, from the state s and moving to a state s′ and obtaining
a reward r. In a L O F O replay buffer, upon taking an action in the environment, the generated
experience sample is used to first gather all the samples in the local neighbourhood of the new
sample. This is done by estimating the state locality using the distance dθ (s, si ) = ||fθ (s) −
fθ (si )||2 between state s in the new sample and states {si } corresponding to starting states in all of
the samples in the replay buffer. The samples in the replay buffer whose starting state’s distance to
s, dθ (s, si ) < Dlocal are selected. Dlocal is a scalar hyperparameter that determines the size of the
local neighbourhood around any given state.
If the number of samples within the local neighbourhood is equal to or above a threshold Nlocal , then
the oldest sample in that local neighbourhood is removed. Nlocal is a positive integer hyperparameter
that determines the maximum number of samples that are stored in the replay buffer within any local
neighbourhood of a given sample. The new sample is now added to the L O F O replay buffer.


6    A DAPTIVE D EEP DYNA -Q

Wan et al. (2022) successfully built an adaptive linear Dyna-Q MBRL method. However, they
showed that a deep-learning-based version of the same approach failed to achieve adaptivity. They
further identified inferior learned models resulting from catastrophic forgetting or interference from
stale data as the key reason for the failure. In this section we show that replacing the traditional FIFO
replay buffer used in Wan et al. (2022) with the L O F O replay buffer makes deep Dyna-Q adaptive.
We evaluate deep Dyna-Q with L O F O replay buffer on the LoCA setup of two domains. First, the
LoCA setup of the MountainCar domain (MountainCarLoCA) used in Wan et al. (2022). Second,
the LoCA setup of a variant of the simple Mini-grid domain (MiniGridLoCA). Our empirical re-
sults show that deep Dyna-Q with a L O F O replay buffer is successfully able to adapt to the local
environment changes in the LoCA setup in both the domains.
MountainCarLoCA setup (Figure 2a) consists of a variation of the classical MountainCar domain,
with an under-powered cart having to move up a hill. There are two terminal states, T1 at the top of
the hill and T2 corresponding to the cart being at the bottom of the hill with velocity close to zero.
Figure 3a shows the learning curves of different versions of deep Dyna-Q on MountainCarLoCA.


                                                          5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                            T1
                                       (Velocity > 0)               T1
                                                                                                                                                 T1
                                                                                                                       T1


                                                                                                                T2
                                                                                                                                                      T2
                                T2                                              T2
                           (Velocity ~ 0)

                               (a) MountainCar                       (b) MiniGrid                              (c) Reacher            (d) RandomReacher

Figure 2: Illustration of environments corresponding to the different domains used in our experi-
ments. The dashed white lines (not visible to the agent) show the boundary of T1-zone.

                          Phase 1                            Phase 2                                        Phase 1                        Phase 2
                                                                                                                                  FIFO (size=1.8e6)        FIFO (size=9e5)


                                                                                    Discounted Return
Discounted Return


                    1.5                                                                                 3                         FIFO (size=2.5e4)        LoFo
                                                                                                                                  FIFO (size=3e5)          optimal
                    1.0                                                                                 2
                           FIFO (size=3e6)         LoFo
                    0.5                            optimal
                                                                                                        1
                           FIFO (size=4.5e6)
                           Handcrafted-LoFo
                    0.0                                                                                 0
                                       1.5                    3.0             4.5                                0.3        0.6        0.9      1.2           1.5      1.8
                                               Total Steps                  ×106                                                    Total Steps                      ×106
                                 (a) MountainCarLoCA                                                                    (b) MiniGridLoCA

Figure 3: Plots showing the learning curves of deep Dyna-Q with a L O F O replay buffer (adaptive)
and FIFO replay buffers of different sizes (not adaptive) on (a) MountainCarLoCA and (b) Mini-
GridLoCA. Each learning curve is an average discounted return over ten runs, and the shaded area
represents the standard error. The maximum possible return in each Phase is represented by a solid
black line. (a) Note that the Handcrafted-L O F O refers to a variant of the L O F O replay buffer that,
instead of learning the state locality function, uses a handcrafted locality function (See Appendix
A.4).

The best replay buffer size for the baseline deep Dyna-Q with FIFO replay buffer is 4.5e6, the one
that stores all the samples seen so far. We observe that while all the methods reach close to optimal
performance in Phase 1, only the method with L O F O replay buffer is able to adapt to reward change
that happens in Phase 2 and reach close to optimal performance in Phase 2, making it an adaptive
MBRL method as per the LoCA evaluation.
The two-dimensional state-space of the MountainCar domain allows visualization of properties as-
sociated with states throughout the state-space on a 2D plot. Figure 4 shows the 2D histogram of
the states across the state-space whose transition samples are stored in the L O F O replay buffer and
the traditional FIFO replay buffer at the end of Phase 1 and Phase 2. We observe that in a FIFO
replay buffer, at the end of Phase 2, almost all of the samples in the buffer are just from a small
region in the state-space, that corresponds to the T1-zone. Samples of states from other parts of the
state-space that were present in Phase 1 have mostly been removed from the buffer. This leads to
catastrophic forgetting of model prediction for states in parts of the state-space outside the T1-zone.
In L O F O replay buffer however, even at the end of Phase 2, samples are maintained from across
the entire relevant state-space, enabling maintaining accurate world model for the entire relevant
state-space. Also, L O F O replay buffer stores only about 3e4 samples in total at the end of Phase 2,
compared to 4.5e6 samples stored in the FIFO replay buffer.
The MiniGridLoCA setup has an image based high-dimensional input. The environment (Figure 2b)
is an 8 × 8 RGB grid world with two green colored terminal states, T1 at the top left corner with a
2 × 2 T1-zone and T2 at the bottom-right corner. The agent is a red triangle which can choose to
go straight, turn left or turn right. We use a deep convolution neural network to encode the image
observations.
Figure 3b shows the learning curves of different versions of deep Dyna-Q on MiniGridLoCA. We
compare deep Dyna-Q using L O F O replay buffer with the variants that use FIFO replay buffers with
different buffer sizes, ranging from buffers that store all the samples seen (size = 1.8e6) to the buffer
that stores only as many samples as L O F O replay buffer uses (size = 2.56e4). We observe that only


                                                                                    6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                LoFo - Phase 1                                       LoFo - Phase 2                                          FIFO - Phase 1                                       FIFO - Phase 2
                                              1e+05                                                1e+05                                                    1e+05                                                1e+05
             0.05                                                 0.05                                                     0.05                                                 0.05
                                              1e+04                                                1e+04                                                    1e+04                                                1e+04

 velocity


                                                      velocity


                                                                                                               velocity


                                                                                                                                                                    velocity
                                              1e+03                                                1e+03                                                    1e+03                                                1e+03
             0.00                             1e+02               0.00                             1e+02                   0.00                             1e+02               0.00                             1e+02
                                              1e+01                                                1e+01                                                    1e+01                                                1e+01

            −0.05                             1e+00              −0.05                             1e+00                  −0.05                             1e+00              −0.05                             1e+00
                                              0e+00                                                0e+00                                                    0e+00                                                0e+00
                    −1.0   −0.5   0.0   0.5                              −1.0   −0.5   0.0   0.5                                  −1.0   −0.5   0.0   0.5                              −1.0   −0.5   0.0   0.5
                           position                                             position                                                 position                                             position


Figure 4: Histogram of the states across the state-space of MountainCarLoCA environment whose
transition samples are stored in the L O F O replay buffer and the traditional FIFO replay buffer (size
= 3e6) at the end of Phase 1 and Phase 2. While L O F O replay buffer maintains samples from states
throughout the relevant state-space in both Phase 1 and Phase 2, FIFO replay buffer removes almost
all samples from states other than the T1-zone by the end of Phase 2.


deep Dyna-Q with L O F O replay buffer is able to adapt to changes in Phase 2 and converge to close
to optimal performance. The method achieves adaptivity while storing only around 2.56e4 samples
in the replay buffer, two orders of magnitude less samples compared to the best performing FIFO
replay buffer based method which is of size 1.8e6. Note that among the methods that use FIFO
replay buffers, two methods with largest buffer sizes, one with a buffer of size 9e5 and the other that
stores all the samples with a size of 1.8e6 are initially able to reach close to optimal performance in
Phase 2, but their performance degrades over time afterwards. This is because, the total number of
distinct states in the MiniGridLoCA environment are less (256 to be precise) and therefore samples
from all over the state-space from Phase 1 stay longer in a large replay buffer. There is a sweet
spot when there are still samples from throughout the state-space from Phase 1, while the proportion
of samples from Phase 2 that capture the reward change in the T1-zone are much higher than the
stale rewards of T1 from Phase 1 avoiding any serious interference. This can lead to a performance
that is temporarily close to optimal performance but quickly degrades as samples from Phase 1 are
removed in the FIFO buffer and catastrophic forgetting happens. Additional details on all the deep
Dyna-Q experiments are provided in Appendix A and B.


7              A DAPTIVE P LANET AND D REAMERV2

To see if more complex methods can be made adaptive as well by using a LoFo replay buffer, we
applied it to the deep MBRL methods PlaNet (Hafner et al., 2019b) and DreamerV2 (Hafner et al.,
2020) and evaluated their performance. PlaNet and DreamerV2 use a recurrent model for reward
and transition predictions which require sample-sequences to make updates to rather than individual
samples. Therefore, we first need to extend the concept of the L O F O replay buffer to sample-
sequences. On a high level, what we aim to achieve is that updates made to the world model come
from states spread out more-or-less equally across the state-space. In the case of sample-sequences,
we try to approximate this by ensuring that the start-state of each sequence is drawn approximately
at random across the state-space.
Our approach to achieve good coverage of sequence start-states is to use two separate buffers: a
state-buffer which is curated similarly to the L O F O replay buffer, and a trajectory-buffer storing
observed trajectories. For now, assume that the trajectory-buffer stores all observed trajectories.
In the Appendix E, we show how the trajectory-buffer can be bounded to a maximum sample-size
of B · N , where B is the size of the state-buffer and N is the size of a sample-sequence used for
updates. When a new sample (st , at , rt , st+1 ) is observed, it is appended to the trajectory-buffer,
while state st is added to the state-buffer. Crucially, if the state-buffer contains more states from the
local neighborhood of state st than some threshold amount, the oldest state from this neighborhood
is removed from the state-buffer. Each state in the state-buffer points to a copy of itself in the
trajectory-buffer. When a state si is removed from the state-buffer, the corresponding reward ri in
the trajectory buffer is replaced by N one, indicating that these rewards should no longer be used for
training reward-predictions. The world model is updated by first sampling a random state su from
the state-buffer and then drawing a sample sequence of size N from the trajectory-buffer, starting
with state su . Whenever the reward is N one, the loss of the corresponding reward prediction is set
to 0.


                                                                                                           7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


We evaluate our modified versions of PlaNet and DreamerV2 on the LoCA setup applied to two
domains. First, a variation on the Reacher domain, called ReacherLoCA, introduced by Wan et al.
(2022). And second, a more complex extension of ReacherLoCA which we refer to as the Random-
izedReacherLoCA. For both domains, we observe that L O F O replay buffer results in adapting to the
local reward change in T1 and learning a sufficiently accurate reward model throughout the relevant
state-space in Phase 2, reaching close to optimal performance.
The ReacherLoCA setup consists of a variation of the Reacher domain Tassa et al. (2018). It is
a continuous-action domain with 64 x 64 RGB images as observations. The environment has two
targets corresponding to T1 and T2 fixed at the top right and the bottom left quadrants respectively
(Figure 2c). The agent controls the angular velocity of two connected bars to reach a target and
remain at the target till the episode ends (1000 time steps). The RandomizedReacherLoCA (Figure
2d) setup is an extension of the ReacherLoCA where the location of targets in the Reacher environ-
ment can vary each episode along a circle around the center, while still being opposite to each other.
The target T2 is colored differently from T1 for the agent to be able to differentiate between them.

                                       Phase 1               Phase 2                                                    Phase 1                  Phase 2                                                 Phase 1            Phase 2
                      4000                                                                                  4000                                                                              4000
Undiscounted Return


                                                                                                                                                                        Undiscounted Return
                                                                                      Undiscounted Return


                                                         DreamerV2                                                                                  PlaNet                                                                  DreamerV2
                                                         DreamerV2 + LoFo                                                                           PlaNet + LoFo                                                           DreamerV2 + LoFo
                      3000                                                                                  3000                                                                              3000
                                                         optimal                                                                                    optimal                                                                 optimal
                      2000                                                                                  2000                                                                              2000

                      1000                                                                                  1000                                                                              1000

                            0                                                                                     0                                                                              0
                                       0.5       1.0     1.5      2.0          2.5                                                3                                 8                                          1.5           3.0      4.0     5.0
                                                 Total Steps                 ×106                                                     Total Steps                ×105                                                Total Steps            ×106

                                       (a) ReacherLoCA                                                                  (b) ReacherLoCA                                                        (c) RandomizedReacherLoCA

Figure 5: Plots showing the learning curves of DreamerV2 and PlaNet with a L O F O replay buffer
(adaptive) and with FIFO replay buffers (not adaptive) on a, b) ReacherLoCA, and c) Randomize-
dReacherLoCA. Each learning curve is an average undiscounted return over ten runs, and the shaded
area represents the standard error. The maximum possible return in each phase is represented by a
solid black line.


                            Optimal - Phase 2            4
                                                                              LoFo - Phase 2                                 4
                                                                                                                                             Large FIFO - Phase 2 4                                            Small FIFO - Phase 2 4
                      0.1                                3             0.1                                                   3             0.1                                                       3       0.1                             3

                      0.0                                2             0.0                                                   2             0.0                                                       2       0.0                             2


         −0.1                                            1         −0.1                                                      1            −0.1                                                       1     −0.1                              1


                                −0.1     0.0     0.1     0                     −0.1                         0.0       0.1    0                     −0.1    0.0      0.1                              0               −0.1   0.0    0.1       0


Figure 6: Visualization of the estimated rewards from the DreamerV2 agent’s reward model at the
end of Phase 2. Each point on the heatmap represents the agent’s position in the Reacher environ-
ment.

Figure 5 shows the learning curves of DreamerV2 and PlaNet on ReacherLoCA, and DreamerV2 on
RandomizedReacherLoCA. We observe that in both the setups all the methods reach close to optimal
performance in Phase 1. However, in Phase 2 only DreamerV2 and PlaNet with a L O F O replay
buffer is able to adapt to the environment change, making them adaptive deep MBRL methods.
DreamerV2 and PlaNet with the traditional FIFO replay buffer fail to adapt in Phase 2.
In Figure 6 we visualize the reward predictions of the different DreamerV2 methods. We observe
that DreamerV2 that uses the L O F O replay buffer for learning its reward model has adapted its
reward predictions for target T1 (top right) correctly to around +1 in Phase 2. When we use a large
FIFO replay buffer, we observe that the reward for target T1 at the end of Phase 2 is overestimated
to around +2.5 because of the interference of stale samples from Phase 1. On the other hand when
we use a small FIFO replay buffer, DreamerV2’s reward prediction at the end of Phase 2 for T1
is accurate around +1, but the model has completely forgotten the reward for target T2, and other
parts of the state-space outside the T1-zone. Additional details on all the PlaNet and DreamerV2
experiments are provided in Appendix C and D.


                                                                                                                                      8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


8    R ELATED W ORK
Besides the relation to the work of Wan et al. (2022), discussed in Section 6, this work has con-
nections with several other lines of work. The method used for learning the state locality function
(Section 5) in this work is inspired by the work of Hartikainen et al. (2019). They propose a method
to learn a policy-specific distance-function that is a measure of the expected number of time steps to
reach the goal state from a given state. And they use this to shape the reward function.
Several works have proposed modifications to the traditional FIFO replay buffer to handle various
challenges. The work that is most related to ours is that of Purushwalkam et al. (2022). They
focused on the setting of self-supervised learning from a continual stream of unsupervised data.
And to address catastrophic forgetting they proposed to use a replay buffer that removes the most
correlated samples when the buffer is full. For the purpose of adaptation this is not a good strategy,
however, as incorrect, out-of-date data can remain in the buffer for a long time.
L O F O replay buffer provides a mechanism for adding and removing samples from a replay buffer.
This determines the distribution of samples that are stored in the replay buffer. Various works in
the past have developed different strategies for sampling or weighting samples in the replay buffer,
in order to make the training more efficient. These include prioritizing samples that 1) have high
temporal difference (TD) error (Schaul et al., 2015), 2) are closest to the current state the agent is
in (Sun et al., 2020), and 3) have low TD target uncertainty (Kumar et al., 2020; Lee et al., 2021).
These methods are complementary to our work and can be implemented on a L O F O replay buffer.

9    L IMITATIONS AND F UTURE W ORK
The general strategy behind the replay buffer variation we presented boils down to forgetting samples
that are spatially close, but temporally far from currently observed samples. We believe this to be
a good general strategy to achieve effective adaptation in a non-stationary world. However, the
specific implementation of this principle will differ depending on the problem type and the non-
stationarity considered. In this paper, we considered only reward non-stationarity and domains
where exploration is easy. In this scenario, learning a locality function during the initial learning
phase and keeping it fixed thereafter is sufficient. However, when the transition dynamics is non-
stationary as well, the locality function needs to be maintained and updated across time as well, as
the distances between individual states can change over time.
Now that we have shown that adaptive deep MBRL is possible in principle, a logical next step for
future work is scaling up these methods to larger and harder domains. Because, while DreamerV2
has shown to be able to achieve good single-task performance on such domains, it is not a given that
our replay buffer variation is sufficient for making it adaptive for such domains as well. For example,
the ReacherLoCA we considered has a fairly small decision horizon (i.e., how far an agent needs
to plan ahead to construct a good policy—for ReacherLoCA it takes on average about 25 actions to
reach a goal state). Achieving adaptivity for longer decision horizons puts higher demands on the
planning routine as well (see Wan et al. (2022) for planning-related pitfalls that impede adaptivity),
so it might be needed to make changes to DreamerV2’s planning routine as well.

10    C ONCLUSION
In this work, we considered one of the key features of model-based behavior: the ability to adapt
to local environmental changes. In previous work, it has shown that tabular and linear model-based
methods are able to achieve this form of adaptivity. However, deep model-based methods struggle
due to an interplay between catastrophic forgetting and interference. To address the challenges with
deep model-based methods, we proposed the L O F O replay buffer, whose samples are approximately
spread equally across the state-space. Furthermore, we conducted various experiments to show that
utilizing the L O F O replay buffer with deep MBRL methods can make them adapt effectively to local
changes in the reward function. This is the first time–to the best of our knowledge–that this type
of adaptivity has been shown for deep MBRL methods. This is an important step towards more
practical real-world application of RL, since the stationary assumption does not always apply there.


                                                  9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


R EFERENCES
Maxime Chevalier-Boisvert, Lucas Willems, and Suman Pal. Minimalistic gridworld environment
 for gymnasium. https://github.com/Farama-Foundation/MiniGrid, 2018.

Nathaniel D Daw, Samuel J Gershman, Ben Seymour, Peter Dayan, and Raymond J Dolan. Model-
  based influences on humans’ choices and striatal prediction errors. Neuron, 69(6):1204–1215,
  2011.

Alexey Dosovitskiy, Jost Tobias Springenberg, Martin Riedmiller, and Thomas Brox. Discrimi-
  native unsupervised feature learning with convolutional neural networks. Advances in neural
  information processing systems, 27, 2014.

Raia Hadsell, Sumit Chopra, and Yann LeCun. Dimensionality reduction by learning an invariant
  mapping. In 2006 IEEE Computer Society Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recogni-
  tion (CVPR’06), volume 2, pp. 1735–1742. IEEE, 2006.

Danijar Hafner, Timothy Lillicrap, Jimmy Ba, and Mohammad Norouzi. Dream to control: Learning
  behaviors by latent imagination. arXiv preprint arXiv:1912.01603, 2019a.

Danijar Hafner, Timothy Lillicrap, Ian Fischer, Ruben Villegas, David Ha, Honglak Lee, and James
  Davidson. Learning latent dynamics for planning from pixels. In International Conference on
  Machine Learning, pp. 2555–2565. PMLR, 2019b.

Danijar Hafner, Timothy Lillicrap, Mohammad Norouzi, and Jimmy Ba. Mastering atari with dis-
  crete world models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2010.02193, 2020.

Kristian Hartikainen, Xinyang Geng, Tuomas Haarnoja, and Sergey Levine. Dynamical distance
  learning for semi-supervised and unsupervised skill discovery. arXiv preprint arXiv:1907.08225,
  2019.

Aviral Kumar, Abhishek Gupta, and Sergey Levine.         Discor: Corrective feedback
  in reinforcement learning via distribution correction.  In Advances in Neural In-
  formation Processing Systems, volume 33, pp. 18560–18572. Curran Associates,
  Inc., 2020.      URL https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper/2020/file/
  d7f426ccbc6db7e235c57958c21c5dfa-Paper.pdf.

Kimin Lee, Michael Laskin, Aravind Srinivas, and Pieter Abbeel. Sunrise: A simple unified frame-
  work for ensemble learning in deep reinforcement learning. In Proceedings of the 38th Inter-
  national Conference on Machine Learning, volume 139 of Proceedings of Machine Learning
  Research, pp. 6131–6141. PMLR, 18–24 Jul 2021. URL https://proceedings.mlr.
  press/v139/lee21g.html.

I Momennejad, E M Russek, J H Cheong, M M Botvinick, N D Daw, and S J Gershman. The
  successor representation in human reinforcement learning. Nature Human Behaviour, 1(9):680–
  692, September 2017.

Senthil Purushwalkam, Pedro Morgado, and Abhinav Gupta. The challenges of continuous self-
  supervised learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2203.12710, 2022.

Tom Schaul, John Quan, Ioannis Antonoglou, and David Silver. Prioritized experience replay. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:1511.05952, 2015.

Peiquan Sun, Wengang Zhou, and Houqiang Li. Attentive experience replay. Proceedings
  of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, 34(04):5900–5907, Apr. 2020. doi: 10.
  1609/aaai.v34i04.6049. URL https://ojs.aaai.org/index.php/AAAI/article/
  view/6049.

Yuval Tassa, Yotam Doron, Alistair Muldal, Tom Erez, Yazhe Li, Diego de Las Casas, David Bud-
  den, Abbas Abdolmaleki, Josh Merel, Andrew Lefrancq, et al. Deepmind control suite. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:1801.00690, 2018.


                                               10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Harm Van Seijen, Hadi Nekoei, Evan Racah, and Sarath Chandar. The loca regret: A
  consistent metric to evaluate model-based behavior in reinforcement learning.    In Ad-
  vances in Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 33, pp. 6562–6572. Curran Asso-
  ciates, Inc., 2020. URL https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper/2020/file/
  48db71587df6c7c442e5b76cc723169a-Paper.pdf.
Yi Wan, Ali Rahimi-Kalahroudi, Janarthanan Rajendran, Ida Momennejad, Sarath Chandar, and
  Harm H Van Seijen. Towards evaluating adaptivity of model-based reinforcement learning meth-
  ods. In Proceedings of the 39th International Conference on Machine Learning, volume 162 of
  Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pp. 22536–22561. PMLR, 17–23 Jul 2022. URL
  https://proceedings.mlr.press/v162/wan22d.html.
Zhirong Wu, Yuanjun Xiong, Stella X Yu, and Dahua Lin. Unsupervised feature learning via non-
  parametric instance discrimination. In Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision
  and pattern recognition, pp. 3733–3742, 2018.


                                             11
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


A      A DDITIONAL D ETAILS FOR THE E XPERIMENTS ON M OUNTAIN C AR L O CA
       S ETUP
A.1     E XPERIMENT S ETUP

                                                                     Uniform distribution over
                                     Phase 1 training
                                                                      the entire state-space
                                                                     Uniform distribution over
                                   Phase 1 evaluation
         Initial                                                          a small region
         distributions                                               Uniform distribution over
                                     Phase 2 training
                                                                      states within T1-zone
                                                                     Uniform distribution over
                                   Phase 2 evaluation
                                                                          a small region
         Training                     Phase 1 steps                         1.5 × 106
         steps                        Phase 2 steps                          3 × 106
                               Maximum number of steps
                                                                                 500
                              before an episode terminates
         Other
                         Training steps between two evaluations                  104
         details
                                     Number of runs                              10
                             Number of evaluation episodes                       10

      Table 1: Experiment setup for testing the Deep Dyna-Q on the MountainCarLoCA domain.

The MountainCarLoCA was first introduced by Van Seijen et al. (2020), which is a variant of the
well-known MountainCar environment. T1 is located at the top of the mountain (position > 0.5, and
velocity > 0), and T2 is located at the valley ((position + 0.52)2 + 100 × velocity2 ≤ 0.072 ). The
T1-zone contains all the states within 0.4 ≤ position ≤ 0.5 and 0 ≤ velocity ≤ 0.07. The discount
factor for this environment is λ = 0.99. And lastly, for each evaluation, the agent is initialized
roughly at the middle of T1 and T2 (−0.2 ≤ position ≤ −0.1 and −0.01 ≤ velocity ≤ 0.01).
Table 1 shows the experiment setup we used to evaluate the deep Dyna-Q agent’s adaptivity under
the LoCA setup.

A.2     H YPERPARAMETERS

Table 2 shows the final values of the hyperparameters that were used in the L O F O replay buffer
for generating the results presented in Figure 3a. We searched over β ∈ {1, 10}, Dlocal ∈
{0.01, 0.005}, and Nlocal ∈ {1, 2, 5, 10}.
We used the same version of the deep Dyna-Q algorithm used in Wan et al. (2022). However, instead
of having separate neural networks for different actions in each part of the model (dynamics, reward,
and termination models), we use just one network and concatenate the action with the output of the
middle layer (the one that has 63 output units) and then feed it to the next layer. Table 3 summarizes
the important hyperparameters for the deep Dyna-Q method on the MountainCarLoCA. Both the
deep Dyna-Q agent that used the L O F O replay buffer and the baseline agents in Figure 3a used these
hyperparameters, and they only differ in the choice of the replay buffer. Wan et al. (2022) found that
using the same replay buffer size for learning the model and planning worked the best. Therefore,
we followed the same.

A.3     A DDITIONAL R ESULTS FOR T HE D EEP DYNA -Q

We compare the reward models of the Dyna-Q agents that use the L O F O replay buffer and the
traditional FIFO replay buffer by visualizing their prediction of rewards over all states in the Moun-
tainCarLoCA domain at the end of each phase in Figure 7. We observe that the reward model of the
agent that uses the L O F O replay buffer can estimate the rewards correctly in both phases. However,
this is not true for the agent that uses the traditional FIFO replay buffer since it fails to predict the
correct rewards associated with T2 due to catastrophic forgetting.


                                                   12
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                                  Embedding network                                                          MLP:[64 × 64 × 64 × 16],
                                                      architecture                                                           Activation Function: tanh
                                                       Optimizer                                                             Adam, learning rate: 10−4
                                                            β                                                                            10
                                              Number of negative samples                                                                128
                                                    Mini-batch size                                                                      32
                                             Total number of random steps
                                                                                                                                                   100000
                                                 for creating dataset D
                                              Number of training epochs                                                                              5
                                                         Dlocal                                                                                    0.005
                                                         Nlocal                                                                                      1

        Table 2: Hyperparameters used for the L O F O replay buffer on the MountainCarLoCA domain.


                                                                                                                                                    MLP with tanh,
                                                                             Dynamics model
                                                                                                                                              [64 × 64 × 63 × 64 × 64],
                                                                                                                                                    MLP with tanh,
                             Neural                                              Reward model
                                                                                                                                              [64 × 64 × 63 × 64 × 64],
                             networks
                                                                                                                                                    MLP with tanh,
                                                                           Termination model
                                                                                                                                              [64 × 64 × 63 × 64 × 64],
                                                                                                                                                    MLP with tanh,
                                                                      Action-value estimator
                                                                                                                                                 [64 × 64 × 64 × 64],
                                                                                                                                                        Adam,
                                                                                 Value optimizer
                                                                                                                                                learning rate: 5 × 10−6
                             Optimizer
                                                                                                                                                        Adam,
                                                                                 Model optimizer
                                                                                                                                                learning rate: 5 × 10−5
                                                                                                                                                    Epsilon greedy
                                                                          Exploration parameter
                                                                                                                                                        ϵ = 0.5
                                                          Number of random steps
                                                                                                                                                                   50000
                             Other                             before training
                             details                  Target network update frequency                                                                                  500
                                                      Number of model learning steps                                                                                     5
                                                         Number of planning steps                                                                                        5
                                                      Mini-batch size of model learning                                                                                 32
                                                        Mini-batch size of planning                                                                                     32

                    Table 3: Hyperparameters used for the deep Dyna-Q on the MountainCarLoCA domain.


                    LoFo - Phase 1                4
                                                                           LoFo - Phase 2                4
                                                                                                                                     FIFO - Phase 1                4
                                                                                                                                                                                            FIFO - Phase 2                4
             0.05                                                  0.05                                                       0.05                                                   0.05
                                                  3                                                      3                                                         3                                                      3
 velocity


                                                       velocity


                                                                                                                  velocity


                                                                                                                                                                         velocity


             0.00                                 2                0.00                                  2                    0.00                                 2                 0.00                                 2

                                                  1                                                      1                                                         1                                                      1
            −0.05                                                 −0.05                                                      −0.05                                                  −0.05
                                                  0                                                      0                                                         0                                                      0
                    −1.0   −0.5       0.0   0.5                           −1.0    −0.5       0.0   0.5                               −1.0   −0.5       0.0   0.5                            −1.0   −0.5       0.0   0.5
                           position                                               position                                                  position                                               position


Figure 7: Visualization of the estimated rewards from the deep Dyna-Q agent’s reward model at
the end of each phase. In each heatmap, the x axis represents the agent’s position, and the y axis
represents its velocity.


                                                                                                             13
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


A.4    H ANDCRAFTED S TATE L OCALITY F UNCTION

Additionally, we tested another variant of the L O F O replay buffer that uses a handcrafted state
locality function instead of using the learnt contrastive state locality function. Since the Mountain-
CarLoCA domain’s state-space is 2-dimensional, where the first dimension indicates the position
and the second one the velocity of the car (s : (x, v)), we can scale the range of the velocities to
match the scale of the positions and use the euclidean distance as the locality function:
                                                 q
                        dhandcrafted (si , sj ) = (xi − xj )2 + 150 × (vi − vj )2

The learning curves of the deep Dyna-Q agent that uses the L O F O replay buffer with the handcrafted
state locality function in the MountainCarLoCA domain is presented in Figure 3a. We observe that
the L O F O replay buffer with the learnt state locality function is able to match the performance of
the buffer with the handcrafted state locality function.

B     A DDITIONAL D ETAILS FOR THE E XPERIMENTS ON THE M INI G RID L O CA
      S ETUP

B.1   E XPERIMENT S ETUP

                                                                   Uniform distribution over
                                   Phase 1 training
                                                                    the entire state-space
                                                                   Uniform distribution over
                                  Phase 1 evaluation
                                                                    the entire state-space
        Initial
                                                                   Uniform distribution over
        distributions
                                   Phase 2 training                 states within T1-zone
                                                                       (2 × 2 subgrid)
                                                                   Uniform distribution over
                                  Phase 2 evaluation
                                                                    the entire state-space
        Training                     Phase 1 steps                         3 × 105
        steps                        Phase 2 steps                        1.5 × 106
                              Maximum number of steps
                                                                              100
                             before an episode terminates
        Other
                        Training steps between two evaluations                104
        details
                                    Number of runs                            10
                            Number of evaluation episodes                     10

 Table 4: Experiment setup for testing the Deep Dyna-Q method on the MiniGridLoCA domain.

The implementation of the MiniGridLoCA domain is done using the MiniGrid python package
(Chevalier-Boisvert et al., 2018) . Table 4 shows the experiment setup we used to evaluate the deep
Dyna-Q agent’s adaptivity under the LoCA setup.

B.2   H YPERPARAMETERS

Table 5 shows the final hyperparameters setting used in the L O F O replay buffer for generating the
results presented in Figure 3b. Furthermore, we only searched over Nlocal ∈ {50, 75, 100, 150}.
While we started with the same β and Dlocal as the MountainCarLoCA, we found that by decreasing
the Dlocal to 0.001, the learned state locality function can make a clear distinction between all
possible states (256).
The algorithmic design of the deep Dyna-Q agent we used for the MiniGridLoCA domain is the
same as that used for the MountainCarLoCA. We only changed the neural network architecture
for the model and the action-value estimator. Table 6 summarizes the architecture of the neural
networks. Note that we first encode a given state to a low-dimensional vector for the various parts of
the model (dynamics, reward, and termination model). Then, we concatenate the given action to the
resulting vector and feed it to the MLP layers. This is mainly due to the fact that we did not want to


                                                 14
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                                                   CNN:
                                                         (Channels:[32 × 64 × 64]
                       Embedding network                  Kernel Sizes:[8 × 3 × 3]
                          architecture                      Strides:[4 × 2 × 2]),
                                                       Followed by MLP:[512 × 16],
                                                         Activation Function: relu
                             Optimizer                  Adam, learning rate: 10−4
                                  β                                   10
                    Number of negative samples                       128
                          Mini-batch size                             32
                   Total number of random steps
                                                                 25000
                       for creating dataset D
                    Number of training epochs                      5
                               Dlocal                            0.001
                               Nlocal                              1

      Table 5: Hyperparameters used for the L O F O replay buffer on the MiniGridLoCA domain.

                                                                     CNN:
                                                           (Channels:[32 × 64 × 64]
                                                            Kernel Sizes:[8 × 3 × 3]
                                                              Strides:[4 × 2 × 2]),
                               Dynamics model            Followed by Transposed CNN:
                                                            (Channels:[64 × 32 × 3]
                                                            Kernel Sizes:[6 × 6 × 5]
                                                              Strides:[1 × 4 × 3]),
                                                           Activation Function: relu
                                                                     CNN:
                                                           (Channels:[32 × 64 × 64]
                                                            Kernel Sizes:[8 × 3 × 3]
                                Reward model
                                                              Strides:[4 × 2 × 2]),
               Neural                                       Followed by MLP:[512],
               networks                                    Activation Function: relu
                                                                     CNN:
                                                           (Channels:[32 × 64 × 64]
                                                            Kernel Sizes:[8 × 3 × 3]
                              Termination model
                                                              Strides:[4 × 2 × 2]),
                                                            Followed by MLP:[512],
                                                           Activation Function: relu
                                                                     CNN:
                                                           (Channels:[32 × 64 × 64]
                                                            Kernel Sizes:[8 × 3 × 3]
                            Action-value estimator
                                                              Strides:[4 × 2 × 2]),
                                                            Followed by MLP:[512],
                                                           Activation Function: relu

   Table 6: Neural networks’ architecture for the deep Dyna-Q on the MiniGridLoCA domain.


keep separate networks for each action as it was done in Wan et al. (2022). Finally, Table 7 shows
the final hyperparameters used to generate the learning curves in Figure 3b, when the agent used the
L O F O replay buffer and the traditional FIFO replay buffer.

B.3     A DDITIONAL R ESULTS FOR T HE D EEP DYNA -Q

Figure 8 shows the learning curves of our search over different values of Nlocal for the deep Dyna-Q
agent using the L O F O replay buffer. Since the locality function makes a clear distinction between
the states of the MiniGridLoCA, using a specific Nlocal means that the L O F O replay buffer stores


                                                  15
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                                                                                 Adam,
                                                    Value optimizer
                                                                                       learning rate: 6.25 × 10−5
           Optimizer
                                                                                                 Adam,
                                                   Model optimizer
                                                                                           learning rate: 10−4
                                                                                             Epsilon greedy
                                                 Exploration parameter
                                                                                                 ϵ = 0.5
                                             Number of random steps
                                                                                                 2000
           Other                                  before training
           details                       Target network update frequency                         5000
                                         Number of model learning steps                            1
                                            Number of planning steps                               1
                                         Mini-batch size of model learning                       128
                                           Mini-batch size of planning                           128

       Table 7: Final hyperparameters for the deep Dyna-Q on the MiniGridLoCA domain.

                                       Phase 1                          Phase 2
                                                                         Nlocal = 100            Nlocal = 75
               Discounted Return


                                   3                                     Nlocal = 150            optimal
                                                                         Nlocal = 50
                                   2

                                   1

                                   0
                                             0.3         0.6      0.9      1.2                  1.5       1.8
                                                               Total Steps                              ×106
Figure 8: Learning curves for the Dyna-Q agent that uses the L O F O replay buffer with different
Nlocal values (Dlocal = 0.001), each averaged over 10 random seeds.

                                       Phase 1                          Phase 2
                                                                      Dlocal = 0.001           Dlocal = 0.05
               Discounted Return


                                   3                                  Dlocal = 0.005           Dlocal = 0.1
                                                                      Dlocal = 0.01            optimal
                                   2

                                   1

                                   0
                                             0.3         0.6      0.9      1.2                  1.5       1.8
                                                               Total Steps                              ×106
Figure 9: Learning curves for the Dyna-Q agent that uses the L O F O replay buffer with different
Dlocal values ( Nlocal = 100), each averaged over 10 random seeds.


exactly Nlocal samples per each state. Hence, an interesting observation from Figure 8 is that higher
Nlocal results in higher performance in Phase 2.
Figure 9 shows the learning curves of our search over different values of Dlocal for the deep Dyna-Q
agent using the L O F O replay buffer when Nlocal = 100. We observe that small values Dlocal result
in successful adaptation in Phase 2.
Additionally, we visualized the estimated rewards from the deep Dyna-Q agent’s reward model
when using the L O F O replay buffer and the traditional FIFO replay buffer at the end of each phase
in Figure 10. To create each heatmap, we first generated the estimated rewards by placing the agent
in a given state (a specific cell and direction) and taking the going straight action. This gave us four


                                                                  16
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                         LoFo - Phase 1      4
                                                         LoFo - Phase 2     4

                                             3                              3

                                             2                              2

                                             1                              1

                                             0                              0


                         FIFO - Phase 1      4
                                                         FIFO - Phase 2     4

                                             3                              3

                                             2                              2

                                             1                              1

                                             0                              0


Figure 10: Visualization of the estimated rewards from the deep Dyna-Q agent’s reward model at
the end of each phase. Each point on the heatmap represents the agent’s position in 8 × 8 grid of the
MiniGridLoCA environment.


different 2D heatmaps, each representing a particular direction. Then, we summed the estimated
rewards over the four possible directions and created the final heatmap.
From Figure 10, we observe the deep Dyna-Q agent that uses the L O F O replay buffer can predict the
correct summation of the rewards during each phase. In contrast, the agent that uses the traditional
FIFO replay buffer can only make accurate predictions in Phase 1. The inability of this agent to
correctly predict the summation of the rewards is due to forgetting. Note that we used the agent with
the traditional FIFO replay buffer of size 3e5 in Figure 10.

C     A DDITIONAL D ETAILS FOR THE E XPERIMENTS ON THE R EACHER L O CA
      S ETUP
C.1     E XPERIMENT S ETUP

                                                                  Uniform distribution over
                                 Phase 1 training
                                                                     the entire state-space
                                                                  Uniform distribution over
                                Phase 1 evaluation
                                                               the entire states outside T1-zone
      Initial
                                                                  Uniform distribution over
      distributions              Phase 2 training
                                                                    states within T1-zone
                                                                  Uniform distribution over
                                Phase 2 evaluation
                                                               the entire states outside T1-zone
      Training                     Phase 1 steps                            3 × 105
      steps                        Phase 2 steps                            5 × 105
                                  Number of steps
                                                                                1000
                           before an episode terminates
      Other
                      Training steps between two evaluations                15000
      details
                                  Number of runs                              10
                          Number of evaluation episodes                       5

       Table 8: Experiment setup for testing the PlaNet method on the ReacherLoCA domain.


                                                    17
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                                                    Uniform distribution over
                                 Phase 1 training
                                                                       the entire state-space
                                                                    Uniform distribution over
                                Phase 1 evaluation
                                                                 the entire states outside T1-zone
      Initial
                                                                    Uniform distribution over
      distributions              Phase 2 training
                                                                      states within T1-zone
                                                                    Uniform distribution over
                                Phase 2 evaluation
                                                                 the entire states outside T1-zone
      Training                     Phase 1 steps                                 106
      steps                        Phase 2 steps                             1.5 × 106
                                  Number of steps
                                                                              1000
                           before an episode terminates
      Other
                      Training steps between two evaluations                  10000
      details
                                  Number of runs                                10
                          Number of evaluation episodes                         8

   Table 9: Experiment setup for testing the DreamerV2 method on the ReacherLoCA domain.


Tables 8 and 9 show the experiment setup we used to evaluate the PlaNet and the DreamerV2 agents’
adaptivity under the LoCA setup respectively. It is worth mentioning that Wan et al. (2022) stayed as
close as possible to the original Reacher domain (Tassa et al., 2018) when creating the ReacherLoCA
to facilitate reusing the best hyperparameters previously used as much as possible. A transition to
the targets in the ReacherLoCA domain does not terminate the episode and the agent keeps receiving
rewards until 1000 timesteps. Note that having targets instead of terminal states does not affect the
requirements of the LoCA setup.

C.2     H YPERPARAMETERS

                                                                    CNN:
                                                     (Channels:[32 × 64 × 128 × 256]
                      Embedding network                Kernel Sizes:[4 × 4 × 4 × 4]
                         architecture                     Strides:[2 × 2 × 2 × 2]),
                                                     Followed by MLP:[512 × 64, 32],
                                                         Activation Function: relu
                            Optimizer                   Adam, learning rate: 10−4
                                 β                                    50
                   Number of negative samples                        128
                         Mini-batch size                              32
                  Total number of random steps
                                                                  105
                      for creating dataset D
                   Number of training epochs                        5
                              Dlocal                              0.05
                              Nlocal                               10

   Table 10: Hyperparameters used for the L O F O replay buffer on the ReacherLoCA domains.


Table 10 shows the values of the hyperparameters used in the L O F O replay buffer for generating the
results presented in Figures 5a and 5b. Furthermore, we searched over different values of Nlocal ∈
{2, 5, 10, 20, 40, 80}. For both PlaNet and DreamerV2 agents the best setting in our experiments is
Nlocal = 10.
For the rest of the hyperparameters, we use the hyperparameter values used by Wan et al. (2022)
for the DreamerV2 agent for both when it uses the L O F O replay buffer and the traditional replay
buffer. Furthermore, instead of having an entropy regularizer for the exploration, we add noise to
actions (the default value used in the original Dreamer method (Hafner et al., 2019a)) since the
ReacherLoCA domain is a relatively simple environment.


                                                    18
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


For the PlaNet agent, we perform a hyperparameter search only for the learning rate (lr ∈ {3 ∗
10−4 , 10−4 }). The best learning rate for the agent that uses the L O F O replay buffer is 3 ∗ 10−4 .
Other hyperparameters are the same as the best setting in Wan et al. (2022).


C.3     A DDITIONAL R ESULTS FOR P LA N ET


              Optimal - Phase 2       4
                                                     LoFo - Phase 2      4
                                                                                    Large FIFO - Phase 2 4
        0.1                           3        0.1                       3        0.1                        3

        0.0                           2        0.0                       2        0.0                        2


       −0.1                           1       −0.1                       1       −0.1                        1


                −0.1   0.0     0.1    0              −0.1    0.0   0.1   0              −0.1     0.0   0.1   0



Figure 11: Visualization of the estimated rewards from the PlaNet agent’s reward model at the end
of Phase 2. Each heatmap’s x and y axes represent the agent’s position in the ReacherLoCA domain.


In Figure 11, we visualize the reward predictions of the PlaNet agents that use the L O F O replay
buffer and the traditional FIFO replay buffer. We also added the true reward visualization (as opti-
mal) for reference. The results are similar to those of DreamerV2’s (Figure 6).


D     A DDITIONAL D ETAILS FOR THE E XPERIMENTS ON THE
      R ANDOMIZED R EACHER L O CA S ETUP

D.1     E XPERIMENT S ETUP A ND H YPERPARAMETERS


                                                                                Uniform distribution over
                                          Phase 1 training
                                                                                   the entire state-space
                                                                                Uniform distribution over
                                       Phase 1 evaluation
                                                                             the entire states outside T1-zone
      Initial
                                                                                Uniform distribution over
      distributions                       Phase 2 training
                                                                                  states within T1-zone
                                                                                Uniform distribution over
                                       Phase 2 evaluation
                                                                             the entire states outside T1-zone
      Training                            Phase 1 steps                                  1.5 × 106
      steps                               Phase 2 steps                                  3.5 × 106
                                         Number of steps
                                                                                               1000
                                  before an episode terminates
      Other
                             Training steps between two evaluations                            10000
      details
                                         Number of runs                                          10
                                 Number of evaluation episodes                                   8

Table 11: Experiment setup for testing the DreamerV2 method on the RandomizedReacherLoCA
domain.


In the RandomizedReacherLoCA, the location of the red target (T1) is randomly taken from the
circle centered in the center of the state-space (the dotted black circle in Figure 2d). And then, the
green target (T2) is placed at the opposite end of the circle. Table 11 shows the experiment setup we
used to evaluate the DreamverV2 agent’s adaptivity under the LoCA setup.
The best hyperparameter setting for the L O F O replay buffer is exactly as what is mentioned in Table
10, except that Nlocal = 2 (we searched among Nlocal ∈ {1, 2, 5, 10}). Otherwise, we use the same
hyperparameters for the DreamerV2 agent as used in the ReacherLoCA setup.


                                                             19
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                                   Phase 1               Phase 2
                                            4000


                      Undiscounted Return
                                                                 Nlocal = 1         Nlocal = 5
                                                                 Nlocal = 10        optimal
                                            3000                 Nlocal = 2


                                            2000

                                            1000

                                               0
                                                        1.5           3.0          4.0     5.0
                                                              Total Steps                ×106
Figure 12: Learning curves for the DreamerV2 agent that uses the L O F O replay buffer with different
Nlocal values (Dlocal = 0.05), each averaged over 10 random seeds.

                                                   Phase 1               Phase 2
                                            4000
                      Undiscounted Return


                                                                Dlocal = 0.05       Dlocal = 0.1
                                                                Dlocal = 0.075      optimal
                                            3000

                                            2000

                                            1000

                                               0
                                                        1.5           3.0          4.0     5.0
                                                              Total Steps                ×106
Figure 13: Learning curves for the DreamerV2 agent that uses the L O F O replay buffer with different
Dlocal values (Nlocal = 2), each averaged over 5 random seeds.


D.2   A DDITIONAL R ESULTS FOR T HE D REAMER

Figure 12 and 13 shows the learning curves of our search over different values of Nlocal and Dlocal
for the DreamerV2 agent using the LOFO replay buffer. Similar to the MiniGridLoCA domain, we
observe that small values of Dlocal result in successful adaptation in Phase 2 for the Randomize-
dReacherLoCA.


                                                               20
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


E    L O F O R EPLAY B UFFER WITH R ECURRENT M ODELS
In this section, we show that trajectory-buffer can be bounded to a maximum sample-size of B × N
in practice, where B is the size of the state-buffer and N is the size of a sample-sequence used for
updates.
As mentioned in Section 7, upon removing si from the state-buffer, ri is set to N one in the
trajectory-buffer and the agent never uses a sample-sequence starting from si . Now, if we look
closely at the trajectory-buffer, only sample-sequences starting with states sk where k ∈ (i − N, i]
contains the (si , ai , ri = N one, si+1 ). Conceptually, we can remove (si , ai , ri , si+1 ) from the
trajectory-buffer if sk , ∀k ∈ (i − N, i] are removed from the state-buffer, because in this case there
remains no sample-sequence containing (si , ai , ri , si+1 ) for training the agent. By doing so, we
argue that no N consecutive N one rewards can be found in the trajectory buffer. Because in that
case, the last N one reward belongs to no valid sample-sequence, and therefore, it should have been
removed from the trajectory-buffer.
Given that for each state in the state-buffer, we know their corresponding reward in the trajectory-
buffer is not N one, in the worst-case scenario, there can be at most N − 1 N one rewards after such
samples in the trajectory-buffer. Hence, by counting them as well, each sequence in the trajectory-
buffer starting from a state in the state-buffer can be at most of the length N . Therefore, the total
number of samples stored in the trajectory-buffer would be at most B × N .


                                                  21
