Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


B LOCKWISE S ELF -S UPERVISED L EARNING
WITH BARLOW T WINS

 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                              A BSTRACT

         Current state-of-the-art deep networks are all powered by backpropagation. In
         this paper, we explore alternatives to full backpropagation in the form of block-
         wise learning rules, leveraging the latest developments in self-supervised learning.
         Notably, we show that a blockwise pretraining procedure consisting of training in-
         dependently the 4 main blocks of layers of a ResNet-50 with Barlow Twins loss
         function at each block performs almost as well as end-to-end backpropagation on
         ImageNet: a linear probe trained on top of our blockwise pretrained model ob-
         tains a top-1 classification accuracy of 70.48%, only 1.1% below the accuracy of
         an end-to-end pretrained network (71.57% accuracy). We perform extensive ex-
         periments to understand the impact of different components within our method
         and explore a variety of adaptations of self-supervised learning to the blockwise
         paradigm, building an exhaustive understanding of the critical avenues for scaling
         local learning rules to large networks, with implications ranging from hardware
         design to neuroscience.


1    I NTRODUCTION
One of the primary ingredients behind the success of deep learning is backpropagation. It remains
an open question whether comparable recognition performance can be achieved with local learning
rules. Previous attempts in the context of supervised learning and unsupervised learning have only
been successful on small datasets like MNIST (Salakhutdinov and Hinton, 2009; Löwe et al., 2019;
Ahmad et al., 2020; Ernoult et al., 2022; Lee et al., 2015) or large datasets but small networks like
VGG-11 (Belilovsky et al., 2019) (67.6% top-1 accuracy on ImageNet).
Being able to train models with local learning rules at scale is useful for a multitude of reasons. By
locally training different parts of the network, one could optimize learning of very large networks
while limiting the memory footprint during training. This approach was recently illustrated at scale
in the domain of video prediction, using a stack of VAEs trained sequentially in a greedy fashion
(Wu et al., 2021). From a neuroscientific standpoint, it is interesting to explore the viability of
alternative learning rules to backpropagation, as it is debated whether the brain performs backprop-
agation (mostly considered implausible) (Lillicrap et al., 2020), approximations of backpropagation
(Lillicrap et al., 2016), or relies instead on local learning rules (Halvagal and Zenke, 2022; Clark
et al., 2021; Illing et al., 2021). Finally, local learning rules could unlock the possibility for adaptive
computations as each part of the network is trained to solve a subtask in isolation, naturally tuning
different parts to solve different tasks (Yin et al., 2022; Baldock et al., 2021) offering interesting en-
ergy and speed trade-offs depending on the complexity of the input. There has been some evidence
that suggests that the brain also uses computational paths that depends on the complexity of the task
(e.g., Shepard and Metzler (1971)).
Self-supervised learning has proven very successful as an approach to pretrain deep networks. A
simple linear classifier trained on top of the last layer can yield an accuracy close to the best su-
pervised learning methods (Chen et al., 2020a;b; He et al., 2020; Chen et al., 2020c; Caron et al.,
2021a;b; Zbontar et al., 2021; Bardes et al., 2022; Dwibedi et al., 2021), and even exceeds perfor-
mance of supervised learning when finetuned (He et al., 2016). Self-supervised learning objectives
typically have two terms that reflect the desired properties of the learned representations: the first
term ensures invariance to distortions that do not affect the label of an image, and the second term
ensures that the representation is informative about its input (Zbontar et al., 2021). Such loss func-


                                                    1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


              Forward           Backpropagation         Dependence       No dependence     Biological         Demonstrated
                                                                                                           Large-Scale Dataset      Input   Label
          propagation path           path               within layer       within layer    Plausibility
                                                                                                              Performance
                                                                                                                                     x         y


          y                             y                                                       y                     y                         y

                         B4                       W4

                         B3                       W3
                                                         y
                         B2                       W2

                         B1                        W1

          x                             x                               x                       x                     x                         x
     End-to-end                                              [Nøkland 2016]                                         Ours
                             Feedback alignment                                           LoCo
  backpropagation                                          [Clark et al. 2021]                            [Halvagal & Zenke 2022]     [Illing et al. 2021]
                             [Lillicrap et al. 2016]                                [Xiong et al. 2020]
   [He et al. 2015]                                      [Belikovsky et al. 2019]                            [Löwe et al. 2019]


Figure 1: We rank blockwise/local learning methods of the literature according to their biological
plausibility, and indicate their best demonstrated performance on large-scale datasets i.e. ImageNet
(intensity of the blue rectangle below each model family). Our method is situated at a unique trade-
off between biological plausibility and performance on large-scale datasets, by being (1) on par
in performance with intertwined blockwise training (Xiong et al., 2020) and supervised broad-
casted learning (Nøkland, 2016; Clark et al., 2021; Belilovsky et al., 2019) while being (2) more
biologically plausible than these alternatives. Methods represented with magenta color used sim-
ilar methodology as ours (Halvagal and Zenke, 2022; Löwe et al., 2019), but only demonstrated
performance on small datasets.

tions may better reflect the goal of intermediate layers compared to supervised learning rules which
only try to extract labels, without any consideration of preserving input information for the next
layers.
In this paper, we revisit the possibility of using local learning rules as a replacement for backpropa-
gation using a recent self-supervised learning method, Barlow Twins. As a natural transition towards
purely local learning rules, we resort to blockwise training where we limit the length of the back-
propagation path to single blocks of the network1 . We applied a self-supervised learning loss locally
at different blocks of a ResNet-50 trained on ImageNet and made the following contributions:

          • We show that a network trained with a blockwise self-supervised learning rule can reach
            performance on par with the same network trained end-to-end, as long as the network is
            not broken into too many blocks.
          • We find that training blocks simultaneously (as opposed to sequentially) is essential to
            achieving this level of performance, suggesting that important learning interactions take
            place between blocks through the feedforward path.
          • We find that methods which increase downstream performance of lower blocks on the clas-
            sification task, such as supervised blockwise training, tend to decrease performance of
            the overall network, suggesting that building invariant representations prematurely in early
            blocks may be harmful for learning higher-level features in latter blocks.
          • We compare different spatial and feature pooling strategies for the intermediate block out-
            puts (which are fed to the intermediate loss functions via projector networks), and find that
            expanding the feature-dimensionality of the block’s output is key to the successful training
            of the network.
          • We evaluated a variety of strategies to customize the training procedure at the different
            blocks (e.g., tuning the trade-off parameter of the objective function as a function of the
            block, feeding different image distortions to different blocks, routing samples to different
            blocks depending on their difficulty) and found that none of these approaches added a
            substantial gain to performance. However, despite negative initial results, we consider these
            attempts to be promising avenues to be explored further in future work. We exhaustively
            describe these negative results in Appendix A.
   1
       We consider all layers with the same spatial resolution to belong to the same block.


                                                                              2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Sequential Blockwise             Trained                                                       Simultaneous
     Training                      and     Training   Backpropagation   Pool Proj Loss       Blockwise Training
                                 Frozen                    path
    Block 1                                                                                Block 1
                       Block 2
                                                      Block 3                                        Block 2
                                                                                                               Block 3
                                                                                 Block 4                                 Block 4


Figure 2: Overview of our blockwise local learning approach. Each of 4 blocks of layers of
a ResNet-50 is trained independently using a self-supervised learning rule and a local backpropa-
gation path. We apply this procedure in two main settings: (left) sequential training, where each
block, starting from the first block, is independently trained and frozen, before the next block is
trained; (right) simultaneous blockwise training, where all the blocks are trained simultaneously us-
ing a ’stop-grad’ operation to limit the backpropagation paths to a single block. The yellow gear
symbol refers to the combination of the pooling layer, projection head and loss function used in
self-supervised learning.

2       R ELATED W ORK

This section provides a comparison between existing local learning paradigms in the literature and
our method (Fig. 1). We compare these methods from two perspectives: biological plausibility and
performance on large-scale datasets, such as ImageNet (Deng et al., 2009).
End-to-end backpropagation (He et al., 2016) is the best performing paradigm on large-scale
datasets, but it is also considered the least biologically plausible (although not impossible, see (Lil-
licrap et al., 2020)), because it requires a long-range backpropagation path with symmetric weights
to the feed-forward path.
Feedback alignment (Lillicrap et al., 2016) alleviates the symmetry constraint by making the back-
propagation path to be random and independent from the feed-forward path. However, this method
is not explicitly focused on reducing the length of the backpropagation paths.
Nøkland (2016); Clark et al. (2021); Belilovsky et al. (2019) propose three different methods to
avoid long-range backpropagation paths by directly broadcasting the labels to all layers. Therefore,
these methods are more biologically plausible than the previously described methods. However all
these methods are supervised and thus rely on a large number of labeled inputs, which itself is not
biologically plausible.
LoCo (Xiong et al., 2020) applies backpropagation separately to different blocks of a ResNet-50.
This method does not rely on an abundance of labels as it uses a self-supervised objective, and
performs well on large-scale datasets (69.5% top-1 accuracy on ImageNet with a linear probe).
However, LoCo introduces a coupling between subsequent blocks by applying backpropagation to
intertwined pairs of successive blocks. Therefore, this method still conceptually relies on a full
backpropagation path.
Our method and the closely related works (Halvagal and Zenke, 2022; Löwe et al., 2019) remove
this coupling between subsequent blocks by training each block independently using some variant
of recently proposed self-supervised learning rules, namely SimCLR (Chen et al., 2020a), Barlow
Twins (Zbontar et al., 2021) and VicReg (Bardes et al., 2022). The main difference between our
method and (Halvagal and Zenke, 2022; Löwe et al., 2019) is that we demonstrate the effectiveness
of our method on a large-scale dataset i.e. ImageNet. In terms of biological plausibility, our method
still relies on backpropagation within blocks, and also relies on interactions between neurons within
layers due to the exact form of the loss function. These remaining dependencies make our method
only partially local, and thus not fully biologically plausible.
Finally, Illing et al. (2021) removes all learning dependencies within and across layers and proposes
a truly local learning rule, but this method has not been demonstrated to perform well on large-scale
datasets to date.


                                                                   3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Figure 3: Overview of the pooling strategies employed in this work. The first one (a) is the simple
Global Spatial Pooling (GSP) which just computes a global average activation over the entire feature
volume. The second one (b) is the Local Spatial Pooling (LSP) where we divide the feature volume
into small spatial bins, compute the averages in these small bins, and concatenate these outputs to
compute the final feature vector. The third one (c) is a (1x1) Conv-based Expansion (CbE), followed
by global spatial pooling. This last pooling strategy provides the best performance in our case.


3       M ETHODS

We consider a ResNet-50 backbone and mostly adapt the Barlow Twins (Zbontar et al., 2021) code-
base2 for our experiments. We implemented SimCLR loss function (Chen et al., 2020a) within
the Barlow Twins codebase, but tweaked the official VicReg implementation3 for VicReg experi-
ments (Bardes et al., 2022).

3.1     B LOCKWISE T RAINING

We consider a logical separation of the network into 4 blocks where we limit the length of the
backpropagation path to each block. The ResNet-50 architecture is comprised of 5 different feature
spatial resolutions, followed by global average pooling and a linear layer for final classification. The
first block of spatial resolution is only comprised of a single stride-2 layer. Therefore, we integrated
this layer within the first block. We then train each of these 4 blocks separately with a self-supervised
learning objective, using stop-gradient to ensure that the loss function from one block does not affect
the learned parameters of other blocks (see Fig. 2). We consider two different settings: (i) sequential
blockwise training where we train the blocks in a purely sequential way, i.e. one after the other, and
(ii) simultaneous blockwise training where we train all the blocks simultaneously. We always report
top-1 accuracy on ImageNet by training a linear classifier on top of the frozen representations at the
output of the different blocks.

3.2     BARLOW T WINS LOSS

Most of the experiments in the paper rely on the Barlow Twins objective function (Zbontar et al.,
2021), which we briefly describe here. The input image is first passed through the deep network,
and then passed to a two-layer projector network in order to obtain the representations to be fed
to the self-supervised learning loss4 . We compute these representations for two different image
views (each image being transformed by a distinct set of augmentations) ziA = Φ(Ψ(xA   i )) where

    2
      https://github.com/facebookresearch/barlowtwins
    3
      https://github.com/facebookresearch/vicreg
    4
      Using an additional projection head instead of learning directly on the backbone features has been found
to be more effective and useful (Chen et al., 2020a)


                                                      4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


           80                                                                                        [A] Barlow Twins (End-to-End Training - w/ GSP)
                                                                                                     [B] Simultaneous Blockwise Training (w/ 1x1 CbE + GSP + Noise)
                                                                                                     [C] Simultaneous Blockwise Training (w/ LSP)
           70                                                                                        [D] Sequential Blockwise Training (w/ LSP)
                                                                                                     [E] Sequential Blockwise Training (Supervised - w/ LSP)
                                                                                                     [F] Sequential Blockwise Training w/ Untrained Previous Blocks (w/ LSP)
           60
                                                                                           70
           50
Accuracy (%)


                        71.57%
                       70.48%
           40          68.84%                                                              60

                      67.12%
                      65.64%


                                                                            Accuracy (%)
                   51.79%
           30                                                                              50
           20
                                                                                           40
           10
                                                                                           30
               0     [A]   [B]     [C]     [D]     [E]           [F]                            1                        2                      3                        4
                            Model Prefix (see legend)                                                                        Number of blocks

Figure 4: Overview of our key results. (left) Top-1 accuracy of a linear probe trained on top of our
pretrained network on ImageNet for different pretraining procedures. Our best blockwise-trained
model [B] is almost on par with full backpropagation [A] (only 1.1% performance gap). (right)
Accuracy on ImageNet as a function of the depth of the network. Since our blockwise models are
trained for each block in isolation, we can include different number of blocks when computing the
linear probe accuracy. We visualize the accuracy as we include more blocks into the network.


Ψ represents the ResNet-50 encoder, and Φ represents the projection head. We then define a cross-
correlation matrix over these embeddings:
                                                             P A B
                                                                b zb,i zb,j
                                                  Cij , r         2 rP    2                                                                                        (1)
                                                             A                B
                                                         P
                                                          b zb,i           b zb,j


where b indexes batch samples and i, j index the vector dimension of the networks’ outputs.
The Barlow Twins objective function attempts to maximize the on-diagonal terms and minimize the
off-diagonal terms using the following loss function:
                                   X            2
                                                       XX
                                                                2
                          LBT ,       (1 − Cii ) + λ           Cij                          (2)
                                                             i                                               i   j6=i
                                                         |             {z             }                  |       {z     }
                                                             invariance term                        redundancy reduction term


where the invariance term (on-diagonal elements should be close to 1) ensures that the extracted fea-
tures are invariant to the applied augmentations, while the redundancy reduction term (off-diagonal
elements should be close to 0) ensures that the different units (i.e., neurons) forming the final image
representation capture distinct attributes of the input image. The redundancy reduction term thus
encourages the representation to be richly informative about the input.
Despite most of our investigation being restricted to Barlow Twins, our findings generalize to other
self-supervised learning (SSL) losses such as VicReg (Bardes et al., 2022) or SimCLR (Chen et al.,
2020a) as shown in the result section.

3.3                P OOLING S CHEMES

The original Barlow Twins projector receives an input representation of dimension 2048. However,
initial blocks of a ResNet-50 have a smaller number of channels. For example, the first block


                                                                                            5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


contains only 256 channels instead of 2048. Therefore, we explored different possible ways of
pooling these features spatially in order to construct the feature vector which is fed to the projector.
Fig. 3 illustrates the different pooling strategies evaluated in this study, including (1) the trivial
Global Spatial Pooling (GSP) strategy which requires changing the size of the projector’s input layer,
(2) a Local Spatial Pooling (LSP) strategy where we divide the grid into spatial bins, average pool
within those bins locally, and concatenate the outputs to ensure that the dimensionality of projector
is 2048, (3) a Conv-based Expansion (CbE) pooling strategy, which first expands the number of
features to 2048 using the defined convolutional filter size (defaults to 1 × 1 convolution), and then
performs global spatial pooling. Finally, we evaluate alternatives to the last variant, where we keep
an expansion layer, but instead of global spatial pooling, we apply L2 or square-root pooling.

3.4   T RAINING

We follow the ablation hyperparameter settings from Barlow Twins with 300 epochs of train-
ing Zbontar et al. (2021). All these results are computed for the model based on 300 epochs of
training on ResNet-50 using LARS optimizer. Batch size is set to be 2048. We use cosine learning
rate decay with an initial learning rate of 0.2. The projector is a three-layered MLP with 8192 hidden
as well as output units. For supervised training, we use the same training protocol as Barlow Twins,
but instead of using an output of size 8192 from the projector, and applying Barlow Twins loss on
top, we use the same 8192 hidden units for the projector, but 1000 output units corresponding to the
scores of the 1000 classes of ImageNet. We then apply a simple cross-entropy loss to the model for
classification. The difference in terms of architecture between a regular ResNet-50 and this model is
that the classification head is lightweight in ResNet-50, with a direct mapping to 1000 classes, while
we use the SSL projector for classification. We also use Barlow Twins augmentations for training,
which are more diverse as compared to regular transformations used to train supervised models.


4     M ATCHING BACKPROPAGATION WITH B LOCKWISE T RAINING

A blockwise training procedure with a self-                Barlow Twins (End-to-End Training - w/ GSP)
supervised objective leads to accuracies com-              Simultaneous Blockwise Barlow Twins (w/ 1x1 CbE + GSP)
parable with an end-to-end trained network.                SimCLR (End-to-End Training - w/ GSP)
                                                           Simultaneous Blockwise SimCLR (w/ 1x1 CbE + GSP)
We trained simultaneously the 4 blocks (see                VicReg (End-to-End Training - w/ GSP)
Section 3 for details) of a ResNet-50 on Ima-              Simultaneous Blockwise VicReg (w/ 1x1 CbE + GSP)
geNet, using the Barlow Twins loss function at
the end of each block. Before being sent to the       70
projectors, the outputs of each block is fed to an
expansion-based pooling layer (see Section 3.3        60
for description of these pooling layers). We also
                                                        Accuracy (%)


add noise to the feature maps of each module          50
with a standard deviation of σ = 0.25. Re-
markably, we find that despite each block being       40
trained independently (aside from the forward
propagation interactions), our model achieves         30
competitive performance against an end-to-end
trained model: we see a gap of only ∼ 1.1% in         20
performance (Fig. 4). This is surprising, as well         1                2                 3              4
                                                                            Number of blocks
as non-trivial since we usually expect a large
drop in performance when interactions between
blocks are restricted to only forward dynam- Figure 5: Impact of the SSL objective func-
ics on large-scale datasets (Illing et al., 2021; tion used. Our approach (simultaneous blockwise
Xiong et al., 2020).                               training with conv-based expansion pooling of the
                                                   block outputs) almost matches end-to-end training
                                                   performance for all SSL methods tested.
Robustness against natural image degrada-
tion (ImageNet-C). We evaluate the robust-
ness of our best model (simultaneous blockwise training w/ 1x1 CbE + GSP + Noise) against natural
image degradation using ImageNet-C (Hendrycks and Dietterich, 2019) benchmark. The results are
presented in Appendix C. In summary, our results show that our blockwise training protocol de-


                                                       6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


grades robustness in comparison to the end-to-end trained model. This reduction in robustness can
be in part attributed to the lower top-1 accuracy of our blockwise trained model.

Extending to other SSL methods: SimCLR / VicReg. We tested our blockwise paradigm using
alternative self-supervised learning rules i.e. VicReg and SimCLR. We visualize these results in
Fig. 5. The results we obtain on both VicReg and SimCLR are consistent with our results on Barlow
Twins: we only observe a slight loss in accuracy as we move from end-to-end trained networks
to expansion-based pooling with simultaneous blockwise training, indicating that our blockwise
learning paradigm is robust to the specific choice of the self-supervised learning rule used.

5    U NDERSTANDING THE C ONTRIBUTION OF D IFFERENT C OMPONENTS
We next analyze and discuss the contribution of the different components of our method to develop
a in-depth understanding of its success. For simplicity, we avoid noise addition to the layers unless
we analyze its impact explicitly. Furthermore, we fix the block output pooling strategy to be local
spatial pooling unless specified otherwise. We list some further ablations in Appendix B.

Importance of using a self-supervised learning rule as opposed to a supervised learning rule.
We first compare our blockwise model trained with a SSL loss against a supervised blockwise train-
ing procedure, where we train each of these blocks using supervised learning. For fair comparison,
we include the full projection head in the supervised case, but instead of applying the Barlow Twins
loss, we project to the 1000 classes of ImageNet, and use the class labels for supervising the model
at each of these intermediate blocks. We observe that the performance on the classification task of
the initial blocks is significantly higher in the supervised learning case than in the SSL case, mak-
ing the initial block very task-specific, while the latter blocks see a reverse trend. This observation
points to an potential advantage of SSL over supervised learning for successful blockwise learning,
as SSL rules preserves information about the input in initial blocks for further processing by latter
blocks, whereas supervised learning objectives already discard information in inital blocks which
could have been used by blocks stacked on top of them.

Importance of simultaneously training all                    Barlow Twins (End-to-End Training - w/ GSP)
the blocks. We compare the scheme where                      Simultaneous Blockwise Training (LSP)
we simultaneous optimize the blocks to a se-                 Simultaneous Blockwise Training (GSP)
                                                             Simultaneous Blockwise Training (1x1 CbE + GSP)
quential optimization scheme. In the sequen-                 Simultaneous Blockwise Training (1x1 CbE + L2)
tial optimization scheme, we trained each of the             Simultaneous Blockwise Training (1x1 CbE + Square-Root)
blocks in a sequential manner where we freeze
the parameters of the previous block (including          70
batch-norm statistics i.e. mean and standard de-
viation) before starting to train the next block.        60
We see from Fig. 4 that sequential training re-
                                                         Accuracy (%)


sults in a modest drop in performance with the
                                                         50
model accuracy dropping from 68.84% (simul-
taneous) to 67.12% (sequential). This decrease
in performance can be attributed to two pos-             40
sible reasons: (1) during simultaneous train-
ing, the learning trajectory in latter blocks is         30
affected by the learning trajectory co-occurring
in earlier blocks and this results in an overall            1                2                 3              4
                                                                              Number of blocks
better learning trajectory for the model, or (2)
the batch-norm statistics could be interacting in
                                                      Figure 6: Comparison of different pooling strate-
subtle ways during simultaneous training which
                                                      gies. Alternative pooling strategies show better
are beneficial. We tested the second hypothe-
                                                      performance on earlier blocks, but worse perfor-
sis by adapting the batch-norm means and vari-
                                                      mance at the final block.
ances in early blocks during the training of all
the subsequent blocks i.e. by keeping the batch-
norm parameters always in training mode. This change makes negligible impact to the end results,
indicating that the it is the optimization trajectory taken by these blocks together during training that
is beneficial for downstream performance.


                                                         7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Importance of our custom global average pooling strategy. Fig. 6 highlights the results that we
obtain when comparing the different pooling strategies presented in Fig. 3. We see that conv-based
expansion w/ global spatial pooling yields the best final accuracy. Local spatial pooling and global
spatial pooling obtains similar performance at the final block, which is slightly inferior to the per-
formance obtained by conv-based expansion w/ global spatial pooling. Conv-based expansion w/
L2-pooling significantly improves the performance of the initial blocks, but deteriorates the perfor-
mance of the final blocks accordingly (this trend is similar to the supervised blockwise training).
This could be attributed to the fact that L2-pooling normalizes the feature maps using the L2 norm,
which overly emphasizes the highest activations. Square-root pooling attempts the opposite, where
it tries to squeeze the large values, while amplifying small values. However, the overall trend for
Square-root pooling remains similar to the trend observed for L2-pooling despite being the opposite,
with significant degradation in performance at the final block in contrast to conv-based expansion
w/ global spatial pooling.

Impact of filter size on conv-based expansion pooling Our conv-based expansion pooling strat-
egy uses a filter size of 1 × 1. We explore the impact of expansion pooling layer size in Fig. 11. The
figure shows that increasing the filter size of the expansion pooling layer significantly harms the per-
formance of the system, suggesting that aggregating information over larger neighborhoods (higher
effective receptive field) increases the level of supervision provided at the initial layers, harming the
performance at the final blocks.

Comparison against a trivial baseline of un-                         Barlow Twins (End-to-End Training - w/ GSP)
trained previous blocks. We next exclude                             Simultaneous Blockwise Training (w/ LSP)
                                                                     Combined Simultaneous Blockwise Training (B1+B2 - w/ LSP)
the possibility that the overall accuracy of our                     Sequential Blockwise Training (B1 trained end-to-end - w/ LSP)
blockwise model could be trivially matched by
a network of equivalent depth with untrained
previous blocks (such random feature models                         70
have been used in the past with some suc-
cess when only training the final layers of the                     65
model (Huang et al., 2004)). In order to test
                                                     Accuracy (%)


this, we compare the accuracy of our model                          60
against a model where the previous blocks are
untrained, initialized randomly and frozen. We                      55
only train the top block in this case while keep-
ing the (untrained) blocks below fixed. We find                     50
that the gap in accuracy between our layer-wise
model and the random feature model widens as                        45
we stack more blocks without training the ini-                           1              2              3                 4
tial blocks as visualized in Fig. 4.                                                    Number of blocks


Impact of first block on performance Cor- Figure 7: Evaluating the impact of (1) training the
rectly supervising the first block is particularly first block separately using an end-to-end training
challenging as all subsequent blocks depend on procedure, and of (2) merging the first and sec-
it. We highlight the impact of training the first ond blocks during training. Both modifications
block in different settings in Fig. 7. We observe greatly reduce the performance gap with end-to-
that if the first block is trained in an end-to- end training, indicating that finding a correct train-
end setting, and then plugged into the block- ing procedure for the the first block would be crit-
wise training protocol, this largely bridges the ical to completely match end-to-end training per-
gap with end-to-end Barlow Twins (71.57% for formance.
the end-to-end variant vs. 70.07% for the vari-
ant where the first block is trained end-to-end, while the rest of the blocks are trained in a sequential
manner). Alternatively, if we combine the first two blocks (B1 and B2), and then train them using
the same simultaneous blockwise training protocol, this achieves performance on par with using
an end-to-end trained first block. This highlights that the main challenge of our blockwise train-
ing procedure resides in finding a way to correctly train the first block. We explore different ways
to customize the learning process for the first block in order to improve the performance of the
whole network in Appendix A. However, none of these strategies produced the expected gains in
performance.


                                                    8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Impact of noise addition Self-supervision in the early blocks may make the blocks too task-
specific, reducing overall performance. Therefore, we experiment with the use of noise injected in
the activations during training. We pick a particular σ and add Gaussian noise with zero mean and
the chosen standard deviation to the activations of the model before the beginning of every block.
Injecting independent Gaussian noise to each of the feature values with µ = 0 and σ = 0.25 gave a
boost in performance of ∼ 0.5%. Using σ = 0.5 results in lower gains due to high levels of noise
(70.22% with σ = 0.5 vs. 70.48% with σ = 0.25). We further experimented with different schemes
for noise injection such as injecting the same noise to all the features at a particular spatial location,
and found independent noise for each of the features to work the best. We present the results with
noise injection in Fig. 4. Without the addition of noise, our expansion pooling strategy achieves an
accuracy of 70.15%.



6    D ISCUSSION & C ONCLUSION

In this paper, we showed that by adapting recent self-supervised learning rules to a blockwise train-
ing paradigm, we were able to produce a blockwise training procedure that is comparable in per-
formance to full backpropagation on a large-scale dataset. Although there is no practical advantage
of our method at this point, we believe that our findings are promising from a neuroscientific stand-
point, as they propose a viable alternative to backpropagation for learning at scale. Moreover, such
blockwise training procedures combined with an adapted neuromorphic hardware could eventually
speed-up learning and make it more energy-efficient by eliminating the need for information trans-
portation through the usual backpropagation path.


Limitations and Future Work We are using blocks which do not interact through a backpropa-
gation path. However, each of these block from ResNet-50 (He et al., 2016) is composed of a large
number of layers as well as a two-layer projector network throughout which the backpropagation
algorithm is still used. In order to completely get rid of backpropagation, one would need to find
a learning rule functioning at a layerwise granularity. Unfortunately, our experiments in Fig. 7—
showing that merging the two first blocks into one increases the final accuracy of the network—
indicate that this gap in performance widens as we progressively subdivide the networks into more
blocks. Consequently, our current approach would not be successful in a purely local learning
paradigm.
Moreover, Barlow Twins’ loss function computes a cross-correlation matrix across all features of
a given layer, which implicitly adds a interaction term between all the neurons of this particular
layer. In a purely local learning setup, interactions should be limited to local neighborhoods. Illing
et al. (2021) proposed such a local learning rule, but they have not demonstrated them to scale to
large-scale datasets such as ImageNet.
We find that although there is no backpropagation of information from upper blocks to lower blocks,
the feed-forward path still conveys some information that couples the training of the blocks, and that
this coupling is important, as we show that simultaneous training is better than sequential training
from 1.72% points on ImageNet. This means that we cannot yet use our approach to reduce the
memory footprint of training by training the blocks sequentially. In future work, one could try to
emulate the training of previous blocks by adding specific noise to the previously frozen blocks in
the feed-forward path to the block being trained, effectively emulating simultaneous training.
Future work could also be directed towards finding ways to adapt the augmentations difficulty to
the layer being trained. But the parameter space to explore is large, and our attempts at sorting
sample difficulty and routing samples with simple distortions to early blocks has not worked so
far (see Appendix A for details). Masked Auto-Encoders (MAE) are an interesting recent class of
self-supervised methods based on Vision Transformer architecture (Dosovitskiy et al., 2020) where
the model learns via simple masking of tokens/patches (He et al., 2022). We postulate that our
blockwise training framework could be particular well-suited to such a masking scheme, given that
one can adapt the level of difficulty for the augmentations fed to different blocks very naturally via
the fraction of patches masked.


                                                    9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


R EFERENCES
Ahmad, N., van Gerven, M. A. J., and Ambrogioni, L. (2020). Gait-prop: A biologically plausible learning
  rule derived from backpropagation of error. NeurIPS. 1

Baldock, R., Maennel, H., and Neyshabur, B. (2021). Deep Learning Through the Lens of Example Difficulty.
  In Ranzato, M., Beygelzimer, A., Dauphin, Y., Liang, P. S., and Vaughan, J. W., editors, Advances in Neural
  Information Processing Systems, volume 34, pages 10876–10889. Curran Associates, Inc. 1

Bardes, A., Ponce, J., and LeCun, Y. (2022). VICReg: Variance-Invariance-Covariance Regularization for
  Self-Supervised Learning. Number: arXiv:2105.04906 arXiv:2105.04906 [cs]. 1, 3, 4, 5

Belilovsky, E., Eickenberg, M., and Oyallon, E. (2019). Greedy layerwise learning can scale to ImageNet. In
  ICML. 1, 2, 3

Caron, M., Misra, I., Mairal, J., Goyal, P., Bojanowski, P., and Joulin, A. (2021a). Unsupervised Learning of
  Visual Features by Contrasting Cluster Assignments. Number: arXiv:2006.09882 arXiv:2006.09882 [cs]. 1

Caron, M., Touvron, H., Misra, I., Jégou, H., Mairal, J., Bojanowski, P., and Joulin, A. (2021b). Emerging
  Properties in Self-Supervised Vision Transformers. Number: arXiv:2104.14294 arXiv:2104.14294 [cs]. 1

Chen, T., Kornblith, S., Norouzi, M., and Hinton, G. (2020a). A simple framework for contrastive learning of
  visual representations. In International conference on machine learning, pages 1597–1607. PMLR. 1, 3, 4,
  5

Chen, T., Kornblith, S., Swersky, K., Norouzi, M., and Hinton, G. (2020b). Big Self-Supervised Models are
  Strong Semi-Supervised Learners. Number: arXiv:2006.10029 arXiv:2006.10029 [cs, stat]. 1

Chen, X., Fan, H., Girshick, R., and He, K. (2020c). Improved Baselines with Momentum Contrastive Learning.
  Number: arXiv:2003.04297 arXiv:2003.04297 [cs]. 1

Clark, D., Abbott, L. F., and Chung, S. (2021). Credit Assignment Through Broadcasting a Global Error Vector.
  In Ranzato, M., Beygelzimer, A., Dauphin, Y., Liang, P. S., and Vaughan, J. W., editors, Advances in Neural
  Information Processing Systems, volume 34, pages 10053–10066. Curran Associates, Inc. 1, 2, 3

Deng, J., Dong, W., Socher, R., Li, L.-J., Li, K., and Fei-Fei, L. (2009). Imagenet: A large-scale hierarchical
  image database. In 2009 IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition, pages 248–255. Ieee.
  3

Dosovitskiy, A., Beyer, L., Kolesnikov, A., Weissenborn, D., Zhai, X., Unterthiner, T., Dehghani, M., Minderer,
  M., Heigold, G., Gelly, S., et al. (2020). An image is worth 16x16 words: Transformers for image recognition
  at scale. arXiv preprint arXiv:2010.11929. 9

Dwibedi, D., Aytar, Y., Tompson, J., Sermanet, P., and Zisserman, A. (2021). With a Little Help from My
  Friends: Nearest-Neighbor Contrastive Learning of Visual Representations. Number: arXiv:2104.14548
  arXiv:2104.14548 [cs]. 1

Ernoult, M., Normandin, F., Moudgil, A., Spinney, S., Belilovsky, E., Rish, I., Richards, B., and Bengio, Y.
  (2022). Towards scaling difference target propagation by learning backprop targets. arXiv. 1

Halvagal, M. S. and Zenke, F. (2022). The combination of Hebbian and predictive plasticity learns invariant
  object representations in deep sensory networks. Pages: 2022.03.17.484712 Section: New Results. 1, 2, 3

He, K., Chen, X., Xie, S., Li, Y., Dollár, P., and Girshick, R. (2022). Masked autoencoders are scalable vision
  learners. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pages
  16000–16009. 9

He, K., Fan, H., Wu, Y., Xie, S., and Girshick, R. (2020). Momentum Contrast for Unsupervised Visual
  Representation Learning. Number: arXiv:1911.05722 arXiv:1911.05722 [cs]. 1

He, K., Zhang, X., Ren, S., and Sun, J. (2016). Deep residual learning for image recognition. In Proceedings
  of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition, pages 770–778. 1, 3, 9

Hendrycks, D. and Dietterich, T. (2019). Benchmarking neural network robustness to common corruptions and
  perturbations. arXiv preprint arXiv:1903.12261. 6, 16

Huang, G.-B., Zhu, Q.-Y., and Siew, C.-K. (2004). Extreme learning machine: a new learning scheme of
  feedforward neural networks. In 2004 IEEE International Joint Conference on Neural Networks (IEEE Cat.
  No.04CH37541), volume 2, pages 985–990 vol.2. 8


                                                      10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Illing, B., Ventura, J., Bellec, G., and Gerstner, W. (2021). Local plasticity rules can learn deep representations
    using self-supervised contrastive predictions. In Ranzato, M., Beygelzimer, A., Dauphin, Y., Liang, P. S.,
    and Vaughan, J. W., editors, Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 34, pages 30365–
    30379. Curran Associates, Inc. 1, 3, 6, 9

Lee, D.-H., Zhang, S., Fischer, A., and Bengio, Y. (2015). Difference target propagation. ECML PKDD. 1

Lillicrap, T. P., Cownden, D., Tweed, D. B., and Akerman, C. J. (2016). Random synaptic feedback weights
   support error backpropagation for deep learning. Nature Communications, 7(1):13276. Number: 1 Publisher:
   Nature Publishing Group. 1, 3

Lillicrap, T. P., Santoro, A., Marris, L., Akerman, C. J., and Hinton, G. (2020). Backpropagation and the brain.
   Nature Reviews Neuroscience, 21(6):335–346. Number: 6 Publisher: Nature Publishing Group. 1, 3

Löwe, S., O’Connor, P., and Veeling, B. S. (2019). Putting an end to end-to-end: Gradient-isolated learning of
   representations. arXiv preprint arXiv:1905.11786. 1, 2, 3

Nøkland, A. (2016). Direct feedback alignment provides learning in deep neural networks. Advances in neural
  information processing systems, 29. 2, 3

Salakhutdinov, R. and Hinton, G. (2009). Deep boltzmann machines. In AISTATS. 1

Shepard, R. N. and Metzler, J. (1971). Mental rotation of three-dimensional objects. Science, 171(3972):701–
  703. Place: US Publisher: American Assn for the Advancement of Science. 1

Wu, B., Nair, S., Martin-Martin, R., Fei-Fei, L., and Finn, C. (2021). Greedy hierarchical variational autoen-
 coders for large-scale video prediction. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision
 and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), pages 2318–2328. 1

Xiong, Y., Ren, M., and Urtasun, R. (2020). Loco: Local contrastive representation learning. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2008.01342. 2, 3, 6

Yin, H., Vahdat, A., Alvarez, J., Mallya, A., Kautz, J., and Molchanov, P. (2022). A-ViT: Adaptive Tokens for
  Efficient Vision Transformer. Number: arXiv:2112.07658 arXiv:2112.07658 [cs]. 1

Zbontar, J., Jing, L., Misra, I., LeCun, Y., and Deny, S. (2021). Barlow twins: Self-supervised learning via
  redundancy reduction. arXiv preprint arXiv:2103.03230. 1, 3, 4, 6, 15, 16


                                                        11
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


A     C USTOMIZING THE B LOCKWISE T RAINING P ROCESS

We tried to customize the training procedure to our blockwise paradigm by progressively increasing
the complexity of the task for each block. Although none of these schemes improved accuracy of
the final model, we hope that laying out these schemes and discussing them will aid future research
by providing insights on directions worth exploring further.

A.1   B LOCKWISE A DAPTIVE L EARNING S TRATEGIES

Analyzing the limitations of the first block. We visualize the distribution of the on-diagonal and
off-diagonal terms from the Barlow Twins loss in the form of a violin plot in Fig. 8. Since the end-
to-end trained model has no projection head, we always plot these terms based on the features from
the ResNet-50 backbone, without any projection head and using global average pooling. We see
that supervised learning provides a steady increase in the correlation of the on-diagonal terms with
increasing number of blocks, while simultaneously reducing the off-diagonal correlation. However,
when looking at blockwise trained models, we see that the initial block is much better at modeling
the on-diagonal correlation, while is worse at modeling the on-diagonal correlations in the last block.
This again relates back to our observation that providing strong supervision at the initial blocks can
worsen the performance of the overall network. We further explore reasons for this mismatch and
how they can be catered in the subsequent sections via block combinations as well as tuning of the
learning rate or lambda values. It is apparent from Fig. 8 that the first block of block-wise trained
model is significantly different than the end-to-end trained model. Therefore, as a sanity check, we
combine the first-two blocks of the network. This ensures that the first block is not strictly super-
vised, and is mainly guided by the performance of the second block. We visualize these results in
Fig. 7. We find that this configuration helps in closing the gap between the supervised variant and
our block-wise variant where the simultaneous blockwise training achieves 68.84% while the com-
bination of the first two blocks achieves 70.14% top-1 linear probe accuracy. This provides evidence
for our initial hypothesis that strong supervision at the initial blocks is significantly detrimental to
the downstream performance.

Matching the Invariance Characteristics of End-to-End Model Looking at the difference in
distribution between end-to-end and blockwise trained models, it seems likely that minimizing this
shift will improve the performance of the model. For this purpose, we evaluate matching the invari-
ance term with that of the end-to-end trained model (redundancy reduction mismatch is already low).
One important detail to note is that the difference between the invariance and redundancy reduction
terms reported in Fig. 8 are computed based on the application of global spatial pooling to the fea-
tures of the network without the projection head (as there is no projection head for the end-to-end
trained model). Therefore, we use slightly higher values for the target invariance, changing it from
1.0 for all the blocks to 0.6, 0.75, 0.9, and 1.0 for block-1, block-2, block-3 and block-4 respectively.
However, we found that this fails to improve performance (results instead in an insignificant drop
in performance from 70.15% for our model with CbE + GSP to 69.90% with the new invariance
targets). [SAS-TODO: Add figure reference]. We also visualize the feature difference (similar to
Fig. 8, but for the model trained with adapted invariance targets). It shows that the chosen target was
higher than the one desired. Therefore, a different schedule for targets can potentially outperform
the current method in practice.

Lambda tuning does not help This experiment was based on blockwise training. In order to re-
duce the computational burden, we trained the rest of the blocks end-to-end by only adjusting the
Lambda value for the first block. One recurring theme that we observed throughout our previous ex-
periments was the inferior results when trying to closely supervise the initial layers of the model. We
find that supervising these initial layers makes them task specific, reducing their overall utility. In
order to circumvent this issue, we tune the lambda value which provides a trade-off between obtain-
ing invariance to the applied augmentations or minimizing correlations between different features.
We assume that enforcing invariance at these initial layers can be premature, however, enforcing
diversity in the extracted features by minimizing their correlation can still be beneficial. The Barlow
Twins implementation used a very small value of λ = 0.0051. Therefore, we experimented with
larger lambda values. These results are visualized in Fig. 9. We see negligible impact of chang-


                                                   12
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                          (a) Blockwise                                (b) Simultaneous Blockwise                                                       (c) Simultaneous Blockwise
                                            (w/ LSP)                                   (w/ LSP)                                                                         (w/ CbE + GSP)
                           1.0                                                                                    1.0                                                                              1.0


                           0.8                                                                                    0.8                                                                              0.8
ON-diagonal correlation


                                                                                       ON-diagonal correlation


                                                                                                                                                                        ON-diagonal correlation
                           0.6                                                                                    0.6                                                                              0.6


                           0.4                                                                                    0.4                                                                              0.4


                           0.2                                                                                    0.2                                                                              0.2
                                                                         Blockwise                                                    Simultaneous Blockwise (w/ LSP)                                             Simultaneous Blockwise (w/ 1x1 CbE + GSP)
                                                                         End-to-end                                                   End-to-end                                                                  End-to-end
                           0.0    1           2         3                  4                                      0.0      1        2         3              4                                     0.0    1              2         3               4
                                              Block Index                                                                           Block Index                                                                          Block Index


                            0.4                                                                                    0.4                                                                              0.4


                            0.2                                                                                    0.2                                                                              0.2
OFF-diagonal correlation


                                                                                       OFF-diagonal correlation


                                                                                                                                                                        OFF-diagonal correlation
                            0.0                                                                                    0.0                                                                              0.0


                            0.2                                                                                    0.2                                                                              0.2


                            0.4                                          Blockwise                                 0.4                Simultaneous Blockwise (w/ LSP)                               0.4           Simultaneous Blockwise (w/ 1x1 CbE + GSP)
                                                                         End-to-end                                                   End-to-end                                                                  End-to-end
                                      1        2         3                 4                                                   1     2         3             4                                                1           2         3              4
                                               Block Index                                                                           Block Index                                                                          Block Index


Figure 8: Comparison between ON-diagonal and OFF-diagonal terms of the cross-correlation ma-
trix between features (without projection head or expansion layers and using global average pooling)
in comparison with the end-to-end Barlow Twins model. Conv-based pooling improves the align-
ment on the OFF-diagonal terms, while only improving alignment of the ON-diagonal terms at the
last block.

                                                                    70

                                                                    68
                                                     Accuracy (%)


                                                                    66

                                                                    64

                                                                    62

                                                                    60
                                                                     0.00             0.02                               0.04      0.06 0.08                0.10                       0.12               0.14
                                                                                                                                      Lambda

Figure 9: Comparison of different Lambda values used to train the model. The default value of
Lambda for Barlow Twins is λ = 0.0051.


ing the lambda value. However, as the value of lambda gets significantly larger, this reduces the
performance of the model significantly.

Adaptive augmentations Considering that tuning the lambda value made a negligible contribu-
tion to the model performance, we tuned the model augmentations such that easier augmentations are
applied at the initial blocks and the difficulty of the augmentations increases gradually with higher


                                                                                                                                     13
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                               Barlow Twins (End-to-End Training - w/ GSP)
                                               Simultaneous Blockwise Training (w/ LSP)
                                               Adaptive Loss (Train all below - w/ LSP)
                                               Adaptive Loss (weight=0.5 - w/ LSP)
                                               Adaptive Loss (weight=0.75 - w/ LSP)
                                               Augmentation Tuning (w/ LSP)

                                   70

                    Accuracy (%)   60

                                   50

                                   40

                                   30
                                        1              2                      3              4
                                                           Number of blocks

                                   Figure 10: Impact of using adaptive augmentations.


blocks. This is beneficial as initial blocks can easily learn invariance against color jitters. How-
ever, learning invariance against large random crops can be very difficult due to limited receptive
field. Since the dataset is changing, we experiment with this protocol in a strictly sequential setting
(where we train the blocks sequentially instead of training them simultaneously). For this purpose,
we defined a successive augmentation list, where we only applied color jitter at the first block. We
additionally applied small random crops at the second block. For the third and fourth block, we ap-
plied the full-set of Barlow Twins augmentations. We visualize the results from this experiment in
Fig. 10. We see that adaptive augmentations makes the performance significantly worse. However,
it might be due to some missing component that we were unable to properly tune. We consider this
to be an interesting and open problem for further research, and can result in non-trivial gains.


Example difficulty-based routing The previous setting with adaptive augmentations can intro-
duce disparity due to differences in the patches seen during training of the initial blocks vs. training
of the later blocks. Therefore, is not truly ideal. We experimented with a more principled approach
of routing the examples to the correct block based on their difficulty by leveraging their training dy-
namics i.e. routing examples with the smallest loss to the initial blocks while routing examples with
the highest loss to the highest blocks. However, it is still important to train all the other blocks aside
from the primary block an example is routed towards. Therefore, we tested different schemes in this
regard. The first scheme is [Train all below] setting where an example when routed to a particular
block, also trains all the blocks below. All the other settings where we specify the weight refers
to the setting where we train all the other blocks (not only the blocks below), but with a reduced
weight specified using the weight mentioned in the legend. We visualize the results with this routing
mechanism in Fig. 10. Similarly to the adaptive augmentations, we found this routing to reduce
the performance of the model significantly. However, we also consider this to be a very interesting
avenue to be explored further in future work.


B    F URTHER A BLATIONS

We performed some trivial ablations by increasing the size of the projector, changing the learning
rate of the linear classifier, or even employing group convolutions .


                                                              14
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                             Barlow Twins (End-to-End Training - w/ LSP)
                                             Simultaneous Blockwise Training (1x1 CbE + GSP)
                                             Simultaneous Blockwise Training (7x7 CbE + GSP)

                                  70

                                  60

                   Accuracy (%)   50

                                  40

                                  30
                                       1                 2                      3             4
                                                             Number of blocks

          Figure 11: Evaluating of changing the filter size of our expansion pooling layer.


                                       Barlow Twins (End-to-End Training - w/ GSP)
                                       Simultaneous Blockwise Training (w/ LSP)
                                       Simultaneous Blockwise Training (Large Projector - w/ LSP)
                                       Simultaneous Blockwise Training (1x1 CbE + GSP)
                                       Simultaneous Blockwise Training (1x1 Group CbE + GSP)

                                  70

                                  60
                   Accuracy (%)


                                  50

                                  40

                                  30

                                       1               2               3                  4
                                                        Number of blocks

          Figure 12: Impact of large projector size or group convolution on performance.



Increasing projector size does not help In all prior experiments, we fixed the projector size to be
8192 in accordance with the original Barlow Twins implementation (Zbontar et al., 2021). However,
given that local learning is significantly different than end-to-end learning, we experimented with a
large projection head. We visualize the impact of large projector size in Fig. 12 where we double the
hidden dimensionality of the projection head to 16384. It is interesting to note that increasing the
size of the projector increases the performance of the initial blocks, but degrades performance at the
final block. These results are consistent with the observations made for end-to-end Barlow Twins
where they found negligible impact of increasing the size of the projection head beyond the limit of
8192 (Zbontar et al., 2021).


                                                                15
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                        Barlow Twins (End-to-End Training - w/ GSP)
                                        Simultaneous Blockwise Training (w/ LSP) [LR: 0.1]
                                        Simultaneous Blockwise Training (w/ LSP) [LR: 0.3]
                                        Simultaneous Blockwise Training (w/ LSP) [LR: 1.0]
                                        Combined Simultaneous Blockwise Training (M1+M2) (w/ LSP) [LR: 0.1]
                                        Combined Simultaneous Blockwise Training (M1+M2) (w/ LSP) [LR: 0.3]
                                        Combined Simultaneous Blockwise Training (M1+M2) (w/ LSP) [LR: 1.0]


                                   70

                    Accuracy (%)   65

                                   60

                                   55

                                   50

                                   45
                                          1                  2              3                    4
                                                             Number of blocks

Figure 13: Comparison of different learning rate settings. The default learning rate of Barlow Twins
is 0.3.


Tuning the learning rate for the linear classifier does not help. The default learning rate for
the linear classification head is set to be 0.3 in the original Barlow Twins evaluation (Zbontar et al.,
2021). This was discovered after a grid-search over three different values of learning rate. Therefore,
in order to identify if a different learning rate if more suitable in our case, we did a small search over
the same learning rate settings. These results are summarized in Fig. 13. We find minimal impact of
changing the learning rate, with only deteriorating performance.

Usage of group convolutions Since the expansion-based pooling with 1 × 1 convolution was the
most impressive in terms of results, we experimented with extending this to group convolution in
order to avoid performing this convolution operation over large spatial grid which is a memory
intensive operation. We visualize these results in Fig. 12. Unfortunately, using group convolutions
results in minor loss in performance in contrast to using the conventional 1×1 convolution. However,
this drop in performance is negligible considering real-world applications.

C    ROBUSTNESS ON I MAGE N ET-C
In order to probe our model’s robustness to out-of-distribution images, we use ImageNet-C bench-
mark Hendrycks and Dietterich (2019) which was constructed by injecting different kinds of syn-
thetic noise into the ImageNet test set. Each noise type is further segmented into five different levels
of noise, ranging from very mild level of noise to extreme level of noise. The noise types are selected
such as to cover noise models found in the real-world.
We compared the robustness of our best model (simultaneous blockwise training w/ 1x1 CbE + GSP
+ Noise) and the end-to-end trained Barlow Twins model on ImageNet-C. We report the error rate
as well as the standard deviation computed over all five corruption levels for each corruption type.
The results are visualized in Fig. 14. The mean error rate (averaged over all corruption types) for the
end-to-end trained model is 62.81%, while the mean error rate for our best model is 65.68%. This
reduction in robustness can be partly attributed to the lower clean accuracy (71.57% vs. 70.48%).
However, these results indicate that blockwise training as operationalized in our case is not particu-
larly useful for robustness against (natural) image degradations.


                                                                     16
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Figure 14: Comparison between error rates of our best model (simultaneous blockwise training w/
1x1 CbE + GSP + Noise) and the end-to-end trained Barlow Twins model. The figure shows that
blockwise trained model exhibits lower robustness on ImageNet-C distortions as compared to the
end-to-end trained model, with an average error rate of 65.68% vs. 62.81% of the end-to-end trained
model.


                                                17
