Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


FAST N ONLINEAR V ECTOR Q UANTILE R EGRESSION

    Aviv A. Rosenberg1,3,† , Sanketh Vedula1,3,† , Yaniv Romano1,2 , and Alex M. Bronstein1,3
                            1
                          Department of Computer Science, Technion
                  2
                  Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Technion
                                          3
                                            Sibylla, UK
                {avivr,sanketh,yromano,bron}@cs.technion.ac.il
                                      †
                                        Equal Contribution
                                            A BSTRACT

         Quantile regression (QR) is a powerful tool for estimating one or more conditional
         quantiles of a target variable Y given explanatory features X. A limitation of QR
         is that it is only defined for scalar target variables, due to the formulation of its
         objective function, and since the notion of quantiles has no standard definition
         for multivariate distributions. Recently, vector quantile regression (VQR) was
         proposed as an extension of QR for vector-valued target variables, thanks to a
         meaningful generalization of the notion of quantiles to multivariate distributions
         via optimal transport. Despite its elegance, VQR is arguably not applicable in
         practice due to several limitations: (i) it assumes a linear model for the quantiles
         of the target Y given the features X; (ii) its exact formulation is intractable even
         for modestly-sized problems in terms of target dimensions, number of regressed
         quantile levels, or number of features, and its relaxed dual formulation may violate
         the monotonicity of the estimated quantiles; (iii) no fast or scalable solvers for
         VQR currently exist. In this work we fully address these limitations, namely: (i)
         We extend VQR to the non-linear case, showing substantial improvement over
         linear VQR; (ii) We propose vector monotone rearrangement, a method which
         ensures the quantile functions estimated by VQR are monotone functions; (iii)
         We provide fast, GPU-accelerated solvers for linear and nonlinear VQR which
         maintain a fixed memory footprint, and demonstrate that they scale to millions
         of samples and thousands of quantile levels; (iv) We release an optimized python
         package of our solvers as to widespread the use of VQR in real-world applications.


1   I NTRODUCTION
Quantile regression (QR) (Koenker & Bassett, 1978) is a well-known method which estimates a
conditional quantile of a target variable Y, given covariates X. A major limitation of QR is that
it deals with a scalar-valued target variable, while many important applications require estimation
of vector-valued responses. A trivial approach is to estimate conditional quantiles separately for
each component of the vector-valued target. However this assumes statistical independence between
targets, a very strong assumption rarely held in practice. Extending QR to high dimensional responses
is not straightforward because (i) the notion of quantiles is not trivial to define for high dimensional
variables, and in fact multiple definitions of multivariate quantiles exist (Carlier et al., 2016); (ii)
quantile regression is performed by minimizing the pinball loss, which is not defined for high
dimensional responses.
Seminal works of Carlier et al. (2016) and Chernozhukov et al. (2017) introduced a notion of quantiles
for vector-valued random variables, termed vector quantiles. Key to their approach is extending the
notions of monotonicity and strong representation of scalar quantile functions to high dimensions, i.e.
               Co-monotonicity: (QY (u) − QY (u0 )) > (u − u0 ) ≥ 0, ∀ u, u0 ∈ [0, 1]d              (1)
                                                               d
          Strong representation: Y = QY (U), U ∼ U[0, 1]                                            (2)

where Y is a d-dimensional variable, and QY : [0, 1]d 7→ Rd is its vector quantile function (VQF).
Moreover, Carlier et al. (2016) extended QR to vector-valued targets, which leads to vector quantile
regression (VQR). VQR estimates the conditional vector quantile function (CVQF) QY|X from


                                                   1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                     (a)                                                   (b)
Figure 1: (a) Visualization of the vector quantile function (VQF) and its α-contours, a high-
dimensional generalization of α-confidence intervals. Data was drawn from a 2d star-shaped
distribution. Vector quantiles (colored dots) are overlaid on the data (middle). Different colors
correspond to α-contours, each containing 100 · (1 − 2α)2 percent of the data. The VQF QY (u) =
[Q1 (u), Q2 (u)]> is co-monotonic with u = (u1 , u2 ); Q1 , Q2 are depicted as surfaces (left, right)
with the corresponding vector quantiles overlaid. On Q1 , increasing u1 for a fixed u2 produces a
monotonically increasing curve, and vice versa for Q2 . (b) Visualization of conditional vector
quantile functions (CVQFs) via α-contours. Data was drawn from a joint distribution of (X, Y)
where Y|X = x has a star-shaped distribution rotated by x degrees. The true CVQF QY|X changes
non-linearly with the covariates X, while E [Y|X] remains the same. This demonstrates the challenge
of estimating CVQFs from samples of the joint distribution. Appendix C provides further intuitions
regarding VQFs and CVQFs, and details how the α-contours are constructed from them.

samples drawn from P(X,Y) , where Y is a d-dimensional target variable and X are k-dimensional
covariates. They show that a function QY|X which obeys co-monotonicity (1) and strong represen-
tation (2) exists and is unique, as a consequence of Brenier’s polar factorization theorem (Brenier,
1991). Figure 1 provides a visualization of these notions for a two-dimensional target variable.
Assuming a linear specification QY|X (u; x) = B(u)> x + a(u), VQR can be formulated as
an optimal transport problem between the measures of Y|X and U, with the additional mean-
independence constraint E [U|X] = E [X]. The primal formulation of this problem is a large-scale
linear program and is thus intractable for modestly-sized problems. A relaxed dual formulation which
is amenable to gradient-based solvers exists but leads to co-monotonicity violations.
The first goal of our work is to address the following limitations of Carlier et al. (2016; 2020): (i)
the linear specification assumption on the CVQF, and (ii) the violation of co-monotonicity when
solving the inexact formulation of the VQR problem. The second goal of this work is to make
VQR an accessible tool for off-the-shelf usage on large-scale high-dimensional datasets. Currently
there are no available software packages to estimate VQFs and CVQFs that can scale beyond toy
problems. We aim to provide accurate, fast and distribution-free estimation of these fundamental
statistical quantities. This is relevant for innumerable applications requiring statistical inference,
such as distribution-free uncertainty estimation for vector-valued variables (Feldman et al., 2021),
hypothesis testing with a vector-valued test statistic (Shi et al., 2022), causal inference with multiple
interventions (Williams & Crespi, 2020), outlier detection (Zhao et al., 2019) and others. Below we
list our contributions.
Scalable VQR. We introduce a highly-scalable solver for VQR in Section 3. Our approach, inspired
by Genevay et al. (2016) and Carlier et al. (2020), relies on solving a new relaxed dual formulation of
the VQR problem. We propose custom stochastic-gradient-based solvers which maintain a constant
memory footprint regardless of problem size. We demonstrate that our approach scales to millions of
samples and thousands of quantile levels and allows for GPU-acceleration.
Nonlinear VQR. To address the limitation of linear specification, in Section 4 we propose nonlinear
vector quantile regression (NL-VQR). The key idea is fit a nonlinear embedding function of the input
features jointly with the regression coefficients. This is made possible by leveraging the relaxed dual
formulation and solver introduced in Section 3. We demonstrate, through synthetic and real-data
experiments, that nonlinear VQR can model complex conditional quantile functions substantially
better than linear VQR and separable QR approaches.
Vector monotone rearrangement (VMR). In Section 5 we propose VMR, which resolves the
co-monotonicity violations in estimated CVQFs. We solve an optimal transport problem to rearrange


                                                   2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


the vector quantiles such that they satisfy co-monotonicity. We show that VMR strictly improves the
estimation quality of CVQFs while ensuring zero co-monotonicity violations.
Open-source software package. We release a feature-rich, well-tested python package vqr1 ,
implementing estimation of vector quantiles, vector ranks, vector quantile contours, linear and
nonlinear VQR, and VMR. To the best of our knowledge, this would be the first publicly available
tool for estimating conditional vector quantile functions at scale.
2   BACKGROUND
Below we introduce quantile regression, its optimal-transport-based formulation and the extension to
vector-valued targets. We aim to provide a brief and self-contained introduction to the key building
blocks of VQR. For simplicity, we present the discretized versions of the problems.
Notation. Throughout, Y, X denote random variables and vectors, respectively; deterministic scalars,
vectors and matrices are denoted as y, x, and X. P(X,Y) denotes the joint distribution of the X
and Y. 1N denotes an N -dimensional vector of ones, denotes the elementwise product, and I {·}
is an indicator. We denote by N the number of samples, d the dimension of the target variable, k
the dimension of the covariates, and T the number of vector quantile levels per target dimension.
QY|X (u; x) is the CVQF of the variable Y|X evaluated at the vector quantile level u for X = x.
Quantile Regression. The goal of QR is to estimate the quantile of a variable Y|X. Assum-
ing a linear model  of the latter, and  given u ∈ (0, 1), QR amounts to solving (bu , au ) =
arg minb,a E(X,Y) ρu (Y − b> X − a) , where bu > x + au is the u-th quantile of Y|X = x, and
ρu (z), known as the pinball loss, is given by ρu (z) = max{0, z} + (u − 1)z. Solving this problem
produces an estimate of QY|X for a single quantile level u. In order to estimate the full conditional
quantile function (CQF) QY|X (u), the problem must be solved at all levels of u with additional
monotonicity constraints, since the quantile function is non-decreasing in u. The CQF discretized at
                                                             N
T quantile levels can be estimated from N samples {xi , yi }i=1 ∼ P(X,Y) by solving
                               N
                              XX
                        min              ρu (yi − bu > xi − au )
                        B,a
                               u   i=1
                                                                                                  (3)
                                   0                 >              >
                        s.t. ∀i, u ≥ u =⇒ bu0 xi + au0 ≥ bu xi + au ,
where B and a aggregate all the bu and au , respectively. We refer to eq. (3) as simultaneous linear
quantile regression (SLQR). This problem is undefined for a vector-valued Y, due to the inherently
1d formulation of the monotonicity constraints and the pinball loss ρu (z).
Optimal Transport Formulation. Carlier et al. (2016) showed that SLQR (3) can be equivalently
written as an optimal transport (OT) problem between the target variable and the quantile levels, with
                                                                                             N
an additional constraint of mean independence.  Given N  data samples arranged as y ∈ R , X ∈
RN ×k , and T quantile levels denoted by u = T1 , T2 , ..., 1 > we can write,
                                          max u> Πy
                                          Π≥0

                                           s.t. Π> 1T = ν                                         (4)
                                                Π1N = µ       [ϕ]
                                                ΠX = X̄       [β]
where Π is the transport plan between quantile levels u and samples (x, y), with marginal constraints
ν = N1 1N , µ = T1 1T and mean-independence constraint X̄ = T1 1T N1 1N > X. The dual variables
are ϕ = D −> a and β = D −> B, where D > is a first-order finite differences matrix, and a ∈ RT ,
B ∈ RT ×k contain the regression coefficients for all quantile levels. Refer to appendices A.1 and A.2
for a full derivation of the connection between SLQR (3) and OT (4).
Vector Quantile Regression. Although the OT formulation for SLQR (4) is specified between 1d
measures, this formulation is immediately extensible to higher dimensions. Given vector-valued
targets yi ∈ Rd arranged in Y ∈ RN ×d , their vector quantiles are also in Rd . The vector quantile
  1
    can be installed with pip install vqr;               source available at https://github.com/
vistalab-technion/vqr


                                                     3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


levels are sampled on a uniform grid on [0, 1]d with T evenly spaced points in each dimension,
                                                                         d
resulting in T d d-dimensional vector quantile levels, arranged as U ∈ RT ×d . The OT objective
                   PT PN
can be written as i=1 j=1 Πi,j ui yj = Π S, where S ∈ RT ×N , and thus can be naturally
                                                                                     d
extended to d > 1 by defining the pairwise inner-product matrix S = U Y > ∈ RT ×N . The result is
a d-dimensional discrete linear estimate of the CVQF, Qb Y|X (u; x) which is co-monotonic (1) with
u for each x. Appendix A.6 details how the estimated CVQF is obtained from the dual variables in
the high-dimensional case.
3    S CALABLE VQR
To motivate our proposed scalable approach to VQR, we first present the exact formulations of VQR
and discuss their limitations. The OT-based primal and dual problems are presented below.
                  d
                T X
                X N
                          ui > yj Πi,j                   min ψ > ν + ϕ> µ + tr β > X̄

         max
          Π≥0                                           ψ,ϕ,β
                i=1 j=1
                  >                              (5)    s.t. ∀i, j :                                 (6)
           s.t. Π 1T d = ν               [ψ]
                Π1N = µ                  [ϕ]            ϕi + βi > xj + ψj ≥ ui > yj            [Π]
               ΠX = X̄               [β]
                         d             d
Here ψ ∈ RN , ϕ ∈ RT , and β ∈ RT ×k are the dual variables, µ = T1d 1T d , ν = N1 1N are the
marginals and X̄ = T d1N 1T d 1N > X is the mean-independence constraint. The solution of these
linear programs results in the convex potentials ψ(x, y) and β(u)> x + ϕ(u), where the former is
discretized over data samples and the latter over quantile levels. The estimated CVQF is then the
transport map between
                      the>measures of the quantile levels and the data samples, and is given by
QY|X (u; x) = ∇u β(u) x + ϕ(u) (see also Appendix A.6). Notably, co-monotonicity of the
 b
CVQF arises due to it being the gradient of a convex function.
Limitations of existing methods.         The primal VQR problem (5) has T d · N variables and
T d · (k + 1) + N constraints. Solving the above linear programs with general-purpose solvers
has cubic complexity in the number of variables and constraints and is thus intractable even for
modestly-sized VQR problems (see fig. A9). Numerous works proposed fast solvers for variants
of OT problems. A commonP approach for scaling OT to large samples is to introduce an entropic
regularization term −ε i,j Πi,j log Πi,j to the primal objective. As shown by Cuturi (2013), this
regularized formulation allows using the Sinkhorn algorithm which provides significant speedup.
Other solvers have been proposed for OT variants with application-specific regularization terms on
Π (Ferradans et al., 2013; Solomon et al., 2015; Benamou et al., 2015). However, the addition of the
mean-independence constraint on Π renders these solvers inapplicable for VQR. For example, the
Sinkhorn algorithm would require three projections per iteration: one for each marginal, and one for
the mean-independence constraint. Crucially, for the latter constraint the projection onto the feasible
set has no closed-form solution and thus solving VQR via Sinkhorn is very slow in practice.
Relaxed dual formulation. Another approach for scaling OT is by solving its dual formulation.
Genevay et al. (2016) showed that the relaxed dual version of the standard OT problem is amenable
to stochastic optimization and can thus scale to large samples. The relaxed dual formulation of VQR
is obtained from eq. (6) (see appendix A.4), and can we written as
                                                                                         
                                       Td            N
                                     X              X         1
        min ψ > ν + tr β > X̄ + ε                                ui > yj − βi > xj − ψj  ,

                                          µi log       exp                                      (7)
         ψ,β
                                      i=1           j=1
                                                              ε
where ε controls the exactness of the the objective; as ε decreases, the relaxed dual more closely
approximates the exact dual. Of note are some important properties of this formulation: (i) it encodes
the mean-independence constraint in the objective; (ii) it is equivalent to an entropic-regularized
version of the VQR OT primal (5) (see appendix A.5); (iii) it is an unconstrained convex objective
amenable to stochastic-gradient based optimization. The key drawbacks of this approach are the
linear specification of the resulting CVQF in x, and the potential violation of co-monotonicity due to
relaxation of the constraints. We address the former limitation in Section 4 and the latter in Section 5.
SGD-based solver. The relaxed dual formulation of VQR (7) involves only T d · k + N optimization
variables and the objective is amenable to GPU-based acceleration, as it involves only dense-matrix


                                                   4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Figure 2: Proposed VQR solver scales to large N and T with improving accuracy. Computed
on MVN dataset with d = 2 and k = 10. Blue curve shows KDE-L1 distance, defined in section 6.
Left: Sweeping N ; T = 50 and BN = 50k. Right: Sweeping T ; N = 100k, and BT = 2500.

multiplications and pointwise operations. However, calculating this objective requires materializing
two T d × N inner-product matrices, causing the memory footprint to grow exponentially with d.
This problem is exacerbated when X is high-dimensional, as it must also be kept in memory. These
memory requirements severely limit the problem size which can be feasibly solved on general-
purpose GPUs. Thus, naive stochastic gradient descent (SGD) with mini-batches of samples to (7) is
insufficient for obtaining a scalable solver.
                                                                                                   N
To attain a constant memory footprint w.r.t. T and N , we sample data points from {(xj , yj )}j=1
                                               Td
together with vector quantile levels from {ui }i=1 and evaluate eq. (7) on these samples. Contrary to
standard SGD, when sampling quantile levels, we select the corresponding entries from β and µ;
likewise, when sampling data points, we select the corresponding entries from ψ. Thus, by setting
a fixed batch size for both data points and levels, we solve VQR with a constant memory footprint
irrespective of problem size (fig. 2). Moreover, we observe that in practice, using SGD adds only
negligible optimization error to the solution, with smaller batches producing more error as expected
(Appendix fig. A10a). Refer to Appendix B for a convergence analysis of this approach and to
Appendix G for implementation details.
4   N ONLINEAR VQR
In this section we propose an extension to VQR which allows the estimated model to be non-linear in
the covariates. Carlier et al. (2016) proved the existence and uniqueness of a CVQF which satisfies
strong representation, i.e., Y|(X = x) = QY|X (U; x), and is co-monotonic w.r.t. U. In order to
estimate this function from finite samples, they further assumed a linear specification in both u and x,
given by the model Q b L (u; x) = B(u)> x + a(u). This results in the OT problem with the mean-
                       Y|X
independence constraint (5). However, in practice and with real-world datasets, there is no reason to
assume that such a specification is valid. In cases where the true CVQF is a non-linear function of x
this model is mis-specified and the estimated CVQF does not satisfy strong representation.
Extension to nonlinear specification. We address the aforementioned limitation by modelling
the CVQF as a non-linear function of the covariates parametrized by θ, i.e., Q          b N L (u; x) =
                                                                                          Y|X
B(u)> gθ (x) + a(u). We fit θ jointly with the regression coefficients B, a. The rationale is
to parametrize an embedding gθ (x) such that the model is QN   L                              L
                                                              Y|X is better specified than QY|X in the
sense of strong representation. Encoding this nonlinear CVQF model into the exact formulations of
VQR (eqs. (5) and (6)) will no longer result in a linear program. However, the proposed relaxed dual
formulation of VQR (7) can naturally incorporate the aforementioned non-linear transformation of
the covariates, as follows
                                                                                               
                                     Td             N
                                    X              X         1
  min ψ > ν + tr β > Ḡθ (X) + ε                                ui > yj − βi > gθ (xj ) − ψj  , (8)

                                        µi log        exp
 ψ,β,θ
                                    i=1            j=1
                                                             ε

where Ḡθ (X) = 1T d 1N > gθ (X)/(T d N ) is the empirical mean after applying gθ to each sample.
We optimize the above objective with the modified SGD approach described       in section 3. The
                                                     b N L (u; x) = ∇u β(u)> gθ (x) + ϕ(u) .

estimated non-linear CVQF can then be recovered by Q   Y|X

A crucial advantage of our nonlinear CVQF model is that gθ may embed x ∈ Rk into a different
dimension, k 0 6= k. This means that VQR can be performed, e.g., on a lower-dimensional projection


                                                    5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                                                 Figure 3: NL-VQR quantitatively
                                                                 and qualitatively outperforms other
                                                                 methods in conditional distribution
                                                                 estimation. Comparison of kernel-
                                                                 density estimates of samples drawn
                                                                 from VQR, CVAE, and NL-VQR, on
                                                                 the conditional-banana dataset. Mod-
                                                                 els were trained with N = 20k sam-
                                                                 ples; for VQR T = 50 was used. Num-
                                                                 bers depict the KDE-L1 metric. Lower
                                                                 is better.



of x or on a “lifted” higher-dimensional representation. For a low-dimensional X which has a highly-
nonlinear relationship with the target Y, lifting it into a higher dimension could result in the linear
regression model (with coefficients B and a) to be well-specified. Conversely, for high-dimensional
X which has intrinsic low-dimensionality (e.g., an image), gθ may encode a projection operator
which has inductive bias, and thus exploits the intrinsic structure of the feature space. This allows
one to choose a gθ suitable for the problem at hand, for example, a convolutional neural network in
case of an image or a graph neural network if x lives on a graph. In all our experiments, we indeed
find that a learned non-linear feature transformation substantially improves the representation power
of the estimated CVQF (see fig. 3; Appendix figs. A13 and A14).
Simultaneous Quantile Regression (SQR). SQR is the task of simultaneously resolving multiple
conditional quantiles of a scalar variable, i.e. a possibly non-linear version of eq. (3). Nonlinear SQR
has been well-studied, and multiple approaches have been proposed (Brando et al., 2022; Tagasovska
& Lopez-Paz, 2019). We highlight that SQR can be performed as a special case of NL-VQR (8)
when d = 1. See Appendix fig. A12 for an example. Other SQR approaches enforce monotonicity of
the CQF via different ad-hoc techniques, while with NL-VQR the monotonicity naturally emerges
from the OT formulation as explained in section 3; thus it is arguably a preferable approach. To our
knowledge, OT-based SQR has not been demonstrated before.
Prior attempts at nonlinear high-dimensional quantiles. Feldman et al. (2021) proposed an
approach for constructing high-dimensional confidence regions, based on a conditional variational
autoencoder (CVAE). A crucial limitation of this work is that it does not infer the CVQF; their
resulting confidence regions are therefore not guaranteed to be quantile contours (see fig. 1a), because
they do not satisfy the defining properties of vector quantiles (eqs. (1) and (2)).
5     V ECTOR M ONOTONE R EARRANGEMENT
Solving the relaxed dual(7) may lead to violation of co-monotonicity in QY|X , since the exact
constraints in eq. (6) are not enforced. This is analogous to the quantile crossing problem in the scalar
case, which can also manifest when QR is performed separately for each quantile level (Chernozhukov
et al., 2010) (Appendix fig. A12d). In what follows, we propose a way to overcome this limitation.
Consider the case of scalar quantiles, i.e., d = 1. Denote Q
                                                           b Y|X (u; x) as an estimated CQF, which
may be non-monotonic in u due to estimation error and thus may not be a valid CQF. One may convert
Q
b Y|X (u; x) into a monotonic Qe Y|X (u; x) through rearrangement as follows. Consider a random
variable defined as Y|Xn:= QY|X (U; x) where
                    b        b
                                             o     U ∼ U[0, 1]. Its CDF andn inverse CDF are given
                                                                                                o
                    R1
by F b (y; x) =
      Y|X             0
                       I QY|X (u; x) ≤ y du, and Q b (u; x) = inf y : F b (y; x) ≥ u .
                          b
                                                           Y|X                        Y|X
QY|X
  b (u; x) is the true CQF of Y|X and is thus necessarily monotonic. It can be shown that
                                b
Q b (u; x) is no worse an estimator for the true CQF QY|X (u; x) than Q
    Y|X
                                                                      b Y|X (u; x) in the Lp -norm
sense (Chernozhukov et al., 2010). In practice, this rearrangement is performed in the scalar case by
sorting the discrete estimated CQF. Rearrangement has no effect if Q
                                                                   b Y|X (u; x) is already monotonic.

Here, we extend the notion of rearrangement to the case of d > 1. As before, define Y|X b     :=
                              d
QY|X (U; x) where U ∼ U[0, 1] , and QY|X (u; x) is the estimated CVQF. If it is not co-monotonic,
b                                    b


                                                   6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Figure 4: VMR improves strong representation (QFD; left), and completely eliminates mono-
tonicity violations (MV; right). VMR allows for smaller ε values, thus improving accuracy (lower
QFD) without compromising monotonicity (zero MV). Without VMR, MV increases (right, red) as
the problem becomes more exact (smaller ε). MVN dataset; N = 20k, T = 50, d = 2, k = 1.

as defined by eq. (1), we can compute a co-monotonic QY|X
                                                       b    (u; x) by calculating the vector quantiles
of Y|X = x, separately for each x. We emphasize that this amounts to solving the simpler vector
   b
quantile estimation problem for a specific x, as opposed to the vector quantile regression problem.
    b = [qbj ] ∈ RT d ×d be the estimated CVQF Q
Let Q                                          b Y|X (u; x) sampled at T d levels U = [b
                                                                                       ui ]i ∈
              j
    d
RT ×d by solving VQR. To obtain QY|X
                                 b   (u; x) sampled at U we solve
                                   d
                                 T
                                 X                                            1
                        max              πi,j ui > qbj   s.t.   Π> 1 = Π1 =      1,                (9)
                       πi,j ≥0
                                 i,j=1
                                                                              Td

and then compute Q   e = T d · ΠQ.  b We define this procedure as vector monotone rearrangement
(VMR). The existence and uniqueness of a co-monotonic function, mapping between the measures of
U and Q  b Y|X (U; x) is due to the Brenier’s theorem as explained in section 1 (Brenier, 1991; McCann,
1995; Villani, 2021). VMR can be interpreted as “vector sorting” of the discrete CVQF estimated
with VQR, since it effectively permutes the entries of Q   b such that the resulting Q
                                                                                     e is co-monotonic
with U . Note that eq. (9) is an OT problem with the inner-product matrix as the ground cost, and
simple constraints on the marginals of the transport plan Π. Thus, VMR (9) is significantly simpler to
solve exactly than VQR (5). We leverage fast, off-the-shelf OT solvers from the POT library (Flamary
et al., 2021; Bonneel et al., 2011) and apply VMR as a post-processing step, performed after the
estimated CVQF Q   b Y|X (u; x) is evaluated for a specific x.
In the 1d case, quantile crossings before and after VMR correction can be readily visualized (Appendix
figs. A12d and A12e). For d > 1, monotonicity violations manifest as (ui −uj )> (Q(ui )−Q(uj )) <
0 (Appendix fig. A11). Figure 4 demonstrates that co-monotonicity violations are completely
eliminated and that strong representation strictly improves by applying VMR.

6       E XPERIMENTS
We use four synthetic and four real datasets which are detailed in Appendices D.1 and D.2. Except
for the MVN dataset, which was used for the scale and optimization experiments, the remaining three
synthetic datasets were carefully selected to be challenging since they exhibit complex nonlinear
relationships between X and Y (see e.g. fig. 1b). We evaluate using the following metrics (detailed
in Appendix E): (i) KDE-L1, an estimate of distance between distributions; (ii) QFD, a distance
measured between an estimated CVQF and its ground truth; (iii) Inverse CVQF entropy; (iv)
Monotonicity violations; (v) Marginal coverage; (vi) Size of α-confidence set. The first three metrics
serve as a measure of strong representation (2), and can only be used for the synthetic experiments
since they require access to the data generating process. The last two metrics are used for real data
experiments, as they only require samples from the joint distribution. Implementation details for all
experiments can be found in Appendix G.
6.1     S CALE AND O PTIMIZATION
To demonstrate the scalability of our VQR solver and its applicability to large problems, we solved
VQR under multiple increasing values of N and T , while keeping all other data and training settings
fixed, and measured both wall time and KDE-L1. We used up to N = 2 · 106 data points, d = 2
dimensions, and T = 100 levels per dimension (T d = 1002 levels in total), while sampling both data
points and quantile levels stochastically, thus keeping the memory requirement fixed throughout. This


                                                         7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


enabled us to run the experiment on a commodity 2080Ti GPU with 11GB of memory. Optimization
experiments, showing the effects of ε and batch sizes on convergence, are presented in Appendix F.
Figure 2 presents these results. Runtime increases linearly with N and quadratically with T , as can be
expected for d = 2. KDE-L1 consistently improves when increasing N and T , showcasing improved
accuracy in distribution estimation, especially as more quantile levels are estimated. To the best of
our knowledge, this is the first time that large-scale VQR has been demonstrated.
6.2   S YNTHETIC DATA E XPERIMENTS
Here our goal is to evaluate the estimation error (w.r.t the ground-truth CVQF) and sampling quality
(when sampling from the CVQF) of nonlinear VQR. We use the conditional-banana, rotating stars
and synthetic glasses datasets, where the assumption of a linear CVQF is violated.
Baselines. We use both linear VQR and conditional variational autoencoders (CVAE) (Feldman
et al., 2021) as strong baselines for estimating the conditional distribution of Y|X. We emphasize
that CVAE only allows sampling from the estimated conditional distribution; it does not estimate
quantiles, while VQR allows both. Thus, we could compare VQR with CVAE only on the KDE-L1
metric, which is computed on samples. To the best of our knowledge, besides VQR there is no other
generative model capable of estimating CVQFs.
Conditional Banana. The results of the conditional-banana experiment, comparing VQR, NL-VQR
and CVAE, are presented in fig. 3, Appendix table A2 and fig. A13. Two-dimensional KDEs of
conditional distributions for three values of x are depicted per method (fig. 3). Qualitatively, sampling
from either NL-VQR or CVAE produces accurate estimations of the ground truth distribution, when
compared to linear VQR. This indicates that the linear VQR model is mis-specified for this data,
which is further corroborated by the entropy metric (table A2). The entropy of the inverse CVQF is
lower for linear VQR, indicating non-uniformity and therefore mis-specification. Quantitatively in
terms of the KDE-L1 metric, NL-VQR outperforms CVAE by 23%, and in terms of QFD, nonlinear
VQR results in 70% lower error than linear VQR.
Rotating Stars. The results of the rotating stars experiment with the same baselines as above,
are presented in Appendix fig. A14 and table A3. As illustrated in fig. 1b, this dataset is highly
challenging due to the non-trivial dependence between X and the tails of Y|X. We observe that
NL-VQR qualitatively and quantitatively outperforms both CVAE and linear VQR by a large margin.
It is therefore the only evaluated method that was able to faithfully model the data distribution.
These results highlight that NL-VQR is significantly better at estimating CVQFs compared to VQR.
Another point of note is that the CVAE model required 35 minutes to train, while VQR and NL-VQR
were trained within less than 4 minutes. NL-VQR therefore outperforms CVAE with almost an
order of magnitude speedup in training time, and outperforms VQR while requiring similar runtime.
Additional synthetic experiments, showcasing OT-based SQR and VMR are presented in Appendix F.
6.3   R EAL DATA E XPERIMENTS
VQR has numerous potential applications, as detailed in section 1. Here we showcase one immediate
and highly useful application, namely distribution-free uncertainty estimation for vector-valued
targets. Given P(X,Y) and a confidence level α ∈ (0, 1), the goal is to construct a conditional α-
confidence set Cα (x) such that it has marginal coverage of 1 − α, defined as P [Y ∈ Cα (X)] = 1 − α.
A key requirement from an uncertainty estimation method is to produce a small Cα (x) which satisfies
marginal coverage, without any distributional assumptions (Romano et al., 2019).
Baselines. We compare nonlinear VQR against (i) Separable linear QR (Sep-QR); (ii) Separable
nonlinear QR (Sep-NLQR); (iii) linear VQR. For Sep-QR and Sep-NLQR the estimated CVQF is
                                     h                                   i
                    b Sep (u; x) = Q
                    Q                  b QR (u1 ; x), . . . Q
                                                            b QR (ud ; x) > ,           (10)
                      Y|X                Y1 |X                Yd |X

where Qb QR (ui ; x) is obtained via 1d linear or nonlinear quantile regression of the variable Yi .
         Yi |X
These separable baselines represent the basic approaches for distribution-free uncertainty estimation
with vector-valued variables. They work well in practice and the size of the α-confidence sets they
produce serves an upper bound, due to their inherent independence assumption.
Evaluation procedure. The key idea for comparing distribution-free uncertainty estimation ap-
proaches is as follows. First, a nominal coverage rate 1 − α∗ is chosen. An α-confidence set is then


                                                   8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


constructed for each estimation method, such that it obtains the nominal coverage (in expectation).
This is similar to calibration in conformal prediction (Sesia & Romano, 2021) since α is calibrated to
control the size of the α-confidence set. Finally, the size of the α-confidence set is measured as the
evaluation criterion. Appendix G contains experimental details and calibrated α values.
Results. Across the four datasets, NL-VQR acheives
34-60% smaller α-confidence set size compared to the
second-best performing method (section 6.3 and fig. A15;
table A4). The reason for the superior performance of
NL-VQR is its ability to accurately capture the shape of
the conditional distribution, leading to small confidence
sets with the same coverage (section 6.3 and fig. A16).
7    S OFTWARE
We provide our VQR solvers as part of a robust, well-tested
python package, vqr (available in the supplementary ma-
terials). Our package implements fast solvers with support
for GPU-acceleration and has a familiar sklearn-style
API. It supports any number of dimensions for both in-
put features (k) and target variables (d), and allows for
arbitrary neural networks to be used as the learned non-
linear feature transformations, gθ . The package provides
tools for estimating vector quantiles, vector ranks, vector
quantile contours, and performing VMR as a refinement
step after fitting VQR. To the best of our knowledge, this
would be the first publicly available tool for estimating
conditional vector quantile functions at scale. See Ap-
pendix H for further details.
                                                             Figure 5: NL-VQR produces sub-
8    C ONCLUSION                                             stantially smaller confidence sets than
In this work, we proposed NL-VQR, and a scalable ap- other methods at a given confidence
proach for performing VQR in general. NL-VQR over- level. Top: Mean Cα size; Bottom: Ex-
comes a key limitation of VQR, namely the assumption ample Cα (x) for a specific x. Calculated
that the CVQF is linear in X. Our approach allows mod- on house prices test-set. Full details in
elling conditional quantiles by embedding X into a space figs. A15 and A16.
where VQR is better specified and further to exploit the
structure of the domain of X (via a domain-specific models like CNNs). We proposed a new relaxed
dual formulation and custom solver for the VQR problem and demonstrated that we can perform
VQR with millions of samples. As far as we know, large scale estimation of CVQFs or even VQFs has
not been previously shown. Moreover, we resolved the issue of high-dimensional quantile crossings
by proposing VMR, a refinement step for estimated CVQFs. We demonstrated, through exhaustive
synthetic and real data experiments, that NL-VQR with VMR is by far the most accurate way to
model CVQFs. Finally, based on the real data results, we argue that NL-VQR should be the primary
approach for distribution-free uncertainty estimation, instead of separable approaches which assume
independence.
Limitations. As with any multivariate density estimation task which does not make distributional
assumptions, our approach suffers from the curse of dimensionality, especially in the target dimension.
Overcoming this limitation requires future work, and might entail, e.g., exploiting the structure of
the domain of Y. This could be achieved by leveraging recent advances in high-dimensional neural
OT (Korotin et al., 2021). Another potential limitation is that the nonlinear transformation gθ (x)
is shared across quantile levels (it is not a function of u), though evaluating whether this is truly a
limiting assumption in practice requires further investigation.
In conclusion, although quantile regression is a very popular tool, vector quantile regression is
arguably far less known, accessible, and usable in practice due to lack of adequate tools. This is
despite that fact that it is a natural extension of QR, which can be used for general statistical inference
tasks. We present the community with an off-the-shelf method for performing VQR in the real
world. We believe this will contribute to many existing applications, and inspire a wide-range of new
applications, for which it is currently prohibitive or impossible to estimate CVQFs.


                                                    9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
Y.R. was supported by the Israel Science Foundation (grant No. 729/21). Y.R. thanks Shai Feldman
and Stephen Bates for discussions about vector quantile regression, and the Career Advancement
Fellowship, Technion, for providing research support. A.A.R., S.V., and A.M.B. were partially
supported by the European Research Council (ERC) under the European Unions Horizon 2020
research and innovation programme (grant agreement No. 863839), by the Council For Higher
Education - Planning & Budgeting Committee, and by the Israeli Smart Transportation Research
Center (ISTRC).

R EFERENCES
C. Bradford Barber, David P. Dobkin, and Hannu Huhdanpaa. The quickhull algorithm for convex
  hulls. ACM Trans. Math. Softw., 22(4):469483, dec 1996. ISSN 0098-3500. doi: 10.1145/235815.
  235821. URL https://doi.org/10.1145/235815.235821.

Jean-David Benamou, Guillaume Carlier, Marco Cuturi, Luca Nenna, and Gabriel Peyré. Itera-
  tive bregman projections for regularized transportation problems. SIAM Journal on Scientific
  Computing, 37(2):A1111–A1138, 2015.

Nicolas Bonneel, Michiel Van De Panne, Sylvain Paris, and Wolfgang Heidrich. Displacement inter-
  polation using Lagrangian mass transport. ACM Transactions on Graphics, 30(6):Article n°158,
  2011. doi: 10.1145/2070781.2024192. URL https://hal.inria.fr/hal-00763270.

Axel Brando, Joan Gimeno, Jose A Rodríguez-Serrano, and Jordi Vitrià. Deep non-crossing quantiles
  through the partial derivative. arXiv preprint arXiv:2201.12848, 2022.

Yann Brenier. Polar factorization and monotone rearrangement of vector-valued functions. Commu-
  nications on pure and applied mathematics, 44(4):375–417, 1991.

Guillaume Carlier, Victor Chernozhukov, and Alfred Galichon. Vector quantile regression: An
  optimal transport approach. Annals of Statistics, 44(3):1165–1192, 2016. ISSN 00905364. doi:
 10.1214/15-AOS1401.

Guillaume Carlier, Victor Chernozhukov, and Alfred Galichon. Vector quantile regression beyond
  the specified case. Journal of Multivariate Analysis, 161:96–102, 2017. ISSN 10957243. doi:
 10.1016/j.jmva.2017.07.003.

Guillaume Carlier, Victor Chernozhukov, Gwendoline De Bie, and Alfred Galichon. Vector quantile
  regression and optimal transport, from theory to numerics. Empirical Economics, 2020. ISSN
 14358921. doi: 10.1007/s00181-020-01919-y.

Benjamin Charlier, Jean Feydy, Joan Alexis Glaunès, François-David Collin, and Ghislain Durif.
  Kernel operations on the gpu, with autodiff, without memory overflows. Journal of Machine
  Learning Research, 22(74):1–6, 2021. URL http://jmlr.org/papers/v22/20-275.
  html.

Victor Chernozhukov, Iván Fernández-Val, and Alfred Galichon. Quantile and probability curves
  without crossing. Econometrica, 78(3):1093–1125, 2010.

Victor Chernozhukov, Alfred Galichon, Marc Hallin, and Marc Henry. MongeKantorovich depth,
  quantiles, ranks and signs. The Annals of Statistics, 45(1):223 – 256, 2017. doi: 10.1214/
  16-AOS1450. URL https://doi.org/10.1214/16-AOS1450.

Marco Cuturi. Sinkhorn distances: Lightspeed computation of optimal transport. Advances in neural
 information processing systems, 26, 2013.

Steven Diamond and Stephen Boyd. CVXPY: A Python-embedded modeling language for convex
  optimization. Journal of Machine Learning Research, 17(83):1–5, 2016.

Shai Feldman, Stephen Bates, and Yaniv Romano. Calibrated multiple-output quantile regression
  with representation learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2110.00816, 2021.


                                               10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Sira Ferradans, Nicolas Papadakis, Julien Rabin, Gabriel Peyré, and Jean-François Aujol. Regularized
   discrete optimal transport. In International Conference on Scale Space and Variational Methods in
  Computer Vision, pp. 428–439. Springer, 2013.
Rémi Flamary, Nicolas Courty, Alexandre Gramfort, Mokhtar Z. Alaya, Aurélie Boisbunon, Stanislas
  Chambon, Laetitia Chapel, Adrien Corenflos, Kilian Fatras, Nemo Fournier, Léo Gautheron,
  Nathalie T.H. Gayraud, Hicham Janati, Alain Rakotomamonjy, Ievgen Redko, Antoine Rolet,
  Antony Schutz, Vivien Seguy, Danica J. Sutherland, Romain Tavenard, Alexander Tong, and
  Titouan Vayer. Pot: Python optimal transport. Journal of Machine Learning Research, 22(78):1–8,
  2021. URL http://jmlr.org/papers/v22/20-451.html.
Aude Genevay, Marco Cuturi, Gabriel Peyré, and Francis Bach. Stochastic optimization for large-
  scale optimal transport. Advances in neural information processing systems, 29, 2016.
Saeed Ghadimi and Guanghui Lan. Stochastic first-and zeroth-order methods for nonconvex stochastic
  programming. SIAM Journal on Optimization, 23(4):2341–2368, 2013.
Elad Hazan. Lecture notes: Optimization for machine learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:1909.03550,
  2019.
Roger Koenker and Gilbert Bassett. Regression Quantiles. Econometrica, 46(1):33, 1978. ISSN
  00129682. doi: 10.2307/1913643.
Alexander Korotin, Lingxiao Li, Aude Genevay, Justin M Solomon, Alexander Filippov, and Evgeny
  Burnaev. Do neural optimal transport solvers work? a continuous wasserstein-2 benchmark.
  Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 34:14593–14605, 2021.
Robert J McCann. Existence and uniqueness of monotone measure-preserving maps. Duke Mathe-
  matical Journal, 80(2):309–323, 1995.
Gabriel Peyré and Marco Cuturi. Computational optimal transport. Foundations and Trends in
 Machine Learning, 11(5-6):355–607, 2019.
R Tyrrell Rockafellar. Conjugate duality and optimization. SIAM, 1974.
Yaniv Romano, Evan Patterson, and Emmanuel Candes. Conformalized Quantile Regression. In
  H Wallach, H Larochelle, A Beygelzimer, F d\textquotesingle Alché-Buc, E Fox, and R Garnett
  (eds.), Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 32. Curran Associates, Inc.,
  2019.
Matteo Sesia and Yaniv Romano. Conformal prediction using conditional histograms. Advances in
 Neural Information Processing Systems, 34:6304–6315, 2021.
Hongjian Shi, Mathias Drton, and Fang Han. Distribution-free consistent independence tests via
  center-outward ranks and signs. Journal of the American Statistical Association, 117(537):
  395–410, 2022. doi: 10.1080/01621459.2020.1782223. URL https://doi.org/10.1080/
  01621459.2020.1782223.
Justin Solomon, Fernando De Goes, Gabriel Peyré, Marco Cuturi, Adrian Butscher, Andy Nguyen,
  Tao Du, and Leonidas Guibas. Convolutional wasserstein distances: Efficient optimal transportation
  on geometric domains. ACM Transactions on Graphics (ToG), 34(4):1–11, 2015.
Natasa Tagasovska and David Lopez-Paz. Single-model uncertainties for deep learning. Advances in
  Neural Information Processing Systems, 32, 2019.
Cédric Villani. Topics in optimal transportation, volume 58. American Mathematical Soc., 2021.
Pauli Virtanen, Ralf Gommers, Travis E. Oliphant, Matt Haberland, Tyler Reddy, David Cournapeau,
  Evgeni Burovski, Pearu Peterson, Warren Weckesser, Jonathan Bright, Stéfan J. van der Walt,
  Matthew Brett, Joshua Wilson, K. Jarrod Millman, Nikolay Mayorov, Andrew R. J. Nelson, Eric
  Jones, Robert Kern, Eric Larson, C J Carey, İlhan Polat, Yu Feng, Eric W. Moore, Jake VanderPlas,
  Denis Laxalde, Josef Perktold, Robert Cimrman, Ian Henriksen, E. A. Quintero, Charles R. Harris,
  Anne M. Archibald, Antônio H. Ribeiro, Fabian Pedregosa, Paul van Mulbregt, and SciPy 1.0
  Contributors. SciPy 1.0: Fundamental Algorithms for Scientific Computing in Python. Nature
  Methods, 17:261–272, 2020. doi: 10.1038/s41592-019-0686-2.


                                                11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Justin R. Williams and Catherine M. Crespi. Causal inference for multiple continuous exposures via
  the multivariate generalized propensity score, 2020. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2008.
  13767.
Yue Zhao, Zain Nasrullah, and Zheng Li. Pyod: A python toolbox for scalable outlier detection.
  Journal of Machine Learning Research, 20(96):1–7, 2019. URL http://jmlr.org/papers/
  v20/19-011.html.


                                               12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


A     D ERIVATIONS
In this section, we present the following derivations:

       • Formulating one-dimensional QR as a correlation-maximization problem (Appendix A.1).
       • Rephrasing correlation maximization as one-dimensional optimal transport (Appendix A.2).
       • Extension of the OT-based formulation for QR to the multi-dimensional targets (Ap-
         pendix A.3).
       • Relaxing the dual formulation of the OT-based VQR problem (Appendix A.4).
       • The equivalence between the entropic-regularized version of the OT-based primal and the
         relaxed dual formulation (Appendix A.5).
       • Calculating the conditional (vector) quantile functions from the dual variables (Ap-
         pendix A.6).

The derivations in this section are not rigorous mathematical proofs; instead they are meant to show an
easy-to-follow way to obtain the high-dimensional VQR relaxed dual objective (which we eventually
solve), by starting from the well-known one-dimensional QR based on the pinball loss.
A.1   Q UANTILE R EGRESSION AS C ORRELATION M AXIMIZATION
The pinball loss defined above can be written as,

                                             uz,        z>0
                                 ρu (z) =
                                             (u − 1)z, z ≤ 0

                                             uz − z + z, z > 0
                                        =
                                             (u − 1)z,   z≤0
                                              = z + + (u − 1)z

where z + , max{0, z}. Note that we also define z − , max{0, −z} which we use later. Given the
continuous joint distribution PX,Y , and assuming a linear model relates the u-th quantile of Y to X,
then performing quantile regression involves minimizing
                             h                  +                                 i
                 min EX,Y Y − bu > X − au − (1 − u) Y − bu > X − au .                            (11)
                 au ,bu


Define Z(au , bu ) , Y − bu > X − au , the above problem can be written as

                         min EX,Y Z(au , bu )+ − (1 − u)Z(au , bu ) .

                                                                                                  (12)
                              au ,bu

Define Pu , Z(au , bu )+ and Nu , Z(au , bu )− as the positive and negative deviations from the
true u-th quantile, then notice that (i) Pu ≥ 0 and Nu ≥ 0; (ii) Pu − Nu = Z(au , bu ). Introducing
Pu and Nu as slack variables, we can rewrite the above optimization problem as
                            min        EX,Y [Pu − (1 − u)Z(au , bu )]
                      au ,bu ,Pu ,Nu

                                       s.t.,
                                        Pu ≥ 0, Nu ≥ 0
                                        Pu − Nu = Z(au , bu ), with multiplier [Vu ].


Solving the above problem is equivalent to solving the Lagrangian formulation
              min         max EX,Y [Pu − (1 − u)Z(au , bu ) − Vu (Pu − Nu − Z(au , bu ))]
          Pu ,Nu ,au ,bu Vu

                               s.t.,
                               Pu ≥ 0, Nu ≥ 0.


                                                      13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Substituting Zu (au , bu ) = Y − bu > X − a, we get

              max EX,Y Pu − (1 − u) Y − bu > X − au − Vu Pu − Nu − Y + bu > X + au

    min
Pu ,Nu ,au ,bu    Vu

                 s.t.,
                 Pu ≥ 0, Nu ≥ 0.
In the first term, Y can be omitted because it is independent of the optimization variables, and in the
second term, Y can be separated, this yields

                                  EX,Y Pu − (u − 1) bu > X + au − Vu Pu − Nu + bu > X + au

max EX,Y [Vu Y] +         min
 Vu                     Pu ,Nu ,au ,bu

      s.t.,
      Pu ≥ 0, Nu ≥ 0.
Rewriting the terms by separating au , bu , Pu , Nu yields

                                EX,Y Pu (1 − Vu ) + Nu Vu − au (Vu − (1 − u)) − bu > (Vu X − (1 − u)X)

max EX,Y [Vu Y] +       min
 Vu                     Pu ,Nu ,au ,bu

      s.t.,
      Pu ≥ 0, Nu ≥ 0.

By treating Pu , Nu , au , bu as Lagrange multipliers we can obtain the dual formulation. Since
Pu , Nu ≥ 0, they must participate in inequality constraints, and since au , bu are unconstrained, they
participate in equality constraints. Thus,
                       max EX,Y [Vu Yu ]
                        Vu
                        s.t. Vu ≥ 0                                          [Nu ]
                             Vu ≤ 1                                           [Pu ]
                             EX,Y [Vu ] = (1 − u)                             [au ]
                             EX,Y [Vu X] = (1 − u)E [X]                      [bu ].
Note that (i) complementary slackness dictates that we always have Pu , Nu ≥ 0, and that (ii)
the last two constraints can be seen together as implying the mean independence condition of
E [X|V ] = E [X].
Solving for multiple quantiles simultaneously can be achieved by minimizing the sum of above
optimization problem ∀u ∈ [0, 1]. In addition we demand monotonicity of the estimated quantiles,
such that u ≥ u0 =⇒ bu > X + au ≥ bu0 > X + au0 . According to the KKT conditions, the solution
to the above problem must satisfy complementary slackness, which in this case means
                                           (1 − Vu )Pu = 0
                                                Vu Nu = 0.
Following the definitions of Pu , Nu , we have the following relation between the estimate quantile
bu > X + au and Vu :
                             >
                  
                  Y > bu X + au =⇒ Pu > 0                     =⇒ Vu = 1
                     Y < bu > X + au =⇒ Nu > 0                 =⇒ Vu = 0
                     Y = bu > X + au =⇒ Pu = Nu = 0 =⇒ 0 ≤ Vu ≤ 1
                  

Since PX,Y is a continuous distribution, then for any au , bu , we have P Y = bu > X + au = 0.

Thus in practice we can ignore this case and write

                                   Vu = I Y ≥ bu > X + au .

                                                                                              (13)
Therefore the monotonicity constraint translates to Vu as

                       u ≥ u0 =⇒ bu > X + au ≥ bu0 > X + au0 ⇐⇒ Vu ≤ Vu0 .


                                                  14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Adding the monotonicity constraint on Vu to the gives rise to a new dual problem:
                        Z 1
                  max       EX,Y [Vu Yu ] du
                       Vu      0
                      s.t. Vu ≥ 0                                               [Nu ]
                           Vu ≤ 1                                                [Pu ]
                           EX,Y [Vu ] = (1 − u)                                  [au ]
                           EX,Y [Vu X] = (1 − u)E [X]                            [bu ]
                            u ≥ u0 =⇒ Vu ≤ Vu0 .

                                                  N
Let us now consider a dataset {(xi , yi )}i=1 of i.i.d. samples from PX,Y where xi ∈ Rk and yi ∈ R.
We are interested in calculating T quantiles for levels u1 = 0 < u2 < · · · < uT ≤ 1. Furthermore,
                                                PN
denote the sample mean x̄ ∈ Rk where x̄k = i=1 xi,k /N . By discretizing the above problem, we
arrive at
                             T X
                             X N
                     max                Vτ,i yi
                     Vτ,i
                             τ =1 i=1
                      s.t. Vτ,i ≥ 0                                            [Nτ,i ]
                           Vτ,i ≤ 1                                             [Pτ,i ]
                                   N
                            1 X
                                  Vτ,i = (1 − uτ )                                [aτ ]
                            N i=1
                                   N
                            1 X
                                  Vτ,i xi,k = (1 − uτ )x̄k                      [bτ,k ]
                            N i=1
                            VT,i ≤ VT −1,i , ≤ . . . V1,i .

Now we can vectorize the above formulation by defining the matrix V ∈ RT ×N containing elements
Vτ,i , the first-order finite differences matrix
                                          1     0 ···    0
                                                           
                                      −1       1        0
                                                         ..
                                       0 −1               .
                                                           
                                D=                          ∈ RT ×T ,
                                       0       0           
                                       .        ..         
                                       ..        .    1 0
                                          0 ···       −1 1

and the vector of desired quantile levels, u = [u1 , . . . , uT ] > . The monotonicity constraint therefore
becomes vi > D ≥ 0 ∀i = 1, . . . , N where vi is the i-th column of V . We also denote the covariates
matrix X ∈ RN ×k and response vector y ∈ RN . Thus, the problem vectorizes as,

                       max 1T > V y
                        V
                        s.t. Vτ,i ≥ 0                                        [Nτ,i ]
                             Vτ,i ≤ 1                                         [Pτ,i ]
                              1
                                V 1N = (1T − u)                                 [a]
                             N
                              1
                                V X = (1T − u)x̄>                               [B]
                             N
                             V > D ≥ 0.

where a ∈ RT and B ∈ RT ×k are the dual variables which contain the regression coefficients per
quantile level. We can observe the following for the above problem:


                                                        15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


      1. For any random variable, its zeroth quantile is smaller than or equal to any values the
         variable takes. In particular, for τ = 0 we have V0,i = 1 ∀i because from eq. (13) we know
         that V0,i is the indicator that yi is greater that the zeroth quantile of Y .
      2. The last constraint V > D ≥ 0, which enforces non-increasing monotonicity along the
         quantile level, i.e., Vτ,i ≤ Vτ 0 ,i ∀τ ≥ τ 0 , also enforces that VT,i ≥ 0.

Therefore, we can observe that the first (Vτ,i ≥ 0), second (Vτ,i ≤ 1) and last (V > D ≥ 0) constraints
are partially-redundant and can be condensed into only two vectorized constraints: (1) V > D ≥ 0
which ensures monotonicity and non-negativity of all elements in V ; (2) V > D1T ≤ 1N which
enforces that V0,i ≤ 1 ∀i. Notice that condensing the constraints in this manner comes with the
inability to interpret the meaning of the Lagrange multipliers Pτ,i , Nτ,i . However, the advantage is
that we have less constraints in total and the interpretability of the multipliers a, B is maintained.
Thus, we arrive at the following vectorized problem,
                       max 1T > V y
                         V
                               1
                        s.t.     V 1N = (1T − u)                               [a]
                               N
                               1
                                 V X = (1T − u)x̄>                             [B]
                               N
                               V >D ≥ 0
                               V > D1T ≤ 1N .

A.2   C ORRELATION M AXIMIZATION AS O PTIMAL T RANSPORT
Following Carlier et al. (2016), the above problem can be re-formulated as an Optimal Transport
problem, i.e. the problem of finding a mapping between two probability distributions.
Assume we are now       interested  in estimating the quantiles of Y at T uniformly-sampled levels,
[u1 , . . . , uT ] > = T1 , T2 , . . . , TT > . In the above problem, one can decompose the objective as
                      1T > V y = 1T > D −> D > V y = D −1 1T > D > V y.


If we then denote
                                  1 >
                               Π=   D V ∈ RT ×N
                                  N
                                  1            1 2      T >
                               u = D −1 1T =    , ,...,     ∈ RT ,
                                  T            T T      T
then we can write the objective as N T · u> Πy. In addition, denote
                                                            1
                                     µ = D > (1T − u) =       1T ∈ RT
                                                            T
                                        1
                                     ν=   1N ∈ RN ,
                                       N
which represent (respectively) the empirical probability measure of the quantile levels u and the data
points (X, y) (we choose both measures to be uniform). Now, by using the decomposed objective,
and by multiplying the first two constraints by D > on either side, we obtain the following equivalent
problem:
                             max u> Πy
                               Π≥0
                                                1
                               s.t. Π1N = µ =     1T                [D −> a]
                                                T
                                                         1                                         (14)
                                     ΠX = µν > X =         1T x̄>   [D −> B]
                                                         T
                                               1
                                     1T > Π ≤ ν =1N > .
                                              N
Note that (i) we ignore the normalization constants where they do not affect the solution; (ii) the
Lagrange multipliers are scaled by D −> since the constraints are scaled by D > .


                                                    16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


The interpretation of this formulation is that we seek a transport plan Π between the measures of
the quantile levels U and the target Y|X, subject to constraints on the plan which ensure that its
marginals are the empirical measures µ and ν, and that mean independence E [X|U] = E [X] holds.
Each individual entry Πi,j in this discrete plan is the probability mass attached to (ui , xj , yj ) in this
optimal joint distribution.
A.3    E XTENDING THE O PTIMAL T RANSPORT F ORMULATION TO V ECTOR Q UANTILES
We now wish to deal with the case where the target variable can be a vector. Observe that for the
scalar case, we can write the OT objective as
                                               T X
                                               X N
                                u> Πy =                  Πi,j ui yj = Π    S,
                                               i=1 j=1

where S ∈ RT ×N is a matrix of pairwise products, i.e. Si,j = ui yj , and         denotes the Hadamard
(elementwise) product.
Now let us assume that yj ∈ Rd for any d ≥ 1, and thus our target data will now be arranged
as Y ∈ RN ×d . The quantile levels must now also d-dimensional, since we have a quantile level
dimension for each data dimension. We will choose a uniform grid on [0, 1]d on which to compute
our vector quantiles. Along each dimension of this grid we sample T equally-spaced points, giving
us in total T d points in d dimensions.
To keep the formulation of the optimization problem two dimensional, we arrange the coordinates of
                                    d
these points as the matrix U ∈ RT ×d . Thus, we can naturally extend the pairwise product matrix S
to the multi-dimensional case using a d-dimensional inner-product between each point on the quantile
                                                                                               d
level grid U and each target point in Y . This yields the simple form S = U Y > , where S ∈ RT ×N ,
which can be plugged in to the above formulation (14) and solved directly. Thus we obtain eq. (5).
A.4    R ELAXING THE E XACT O PTIMAL T RANSPORT D UAL F ORMULATION
Recall the exact dual formulation of the OT-based primal VQR problem (5):
                                  min ψ > ν + ϕ> µ + tr β > X̄

                                   ψ,ϕ,β

                                   s.t. ∀i, j :
                                   ϕi + βi > xj + ψj ≥ ui > yj
The above problem has a unique solution (Carlier et al., 2016). Thus, first-order optimality conditions
for each ϕi yield
                             ϕi = max ui > yj − βi > xj − ψj .

                                           j
Substituting the optimal ϕi into the dual formulation results in an unconstrained but exact min-max
problem:
                                             Td
                        >            >
                                           X
                                                µi max ui > yj − βi > xj − ψj .

                 min ψ ν + tr β X̄ +                                                            (15)
                  ψ,β                                        j
                                                  i=1
We can relax this problem by using a smooth approximation for the max operator, given by
                                                              
                                                         x
                                                           j
                                                X
                              max(x) ≈ ε log       exp        .
                                j
                                                 j
                                                          ε

Plugging the smooth approximation into eq. (15) yields the relaxed dual in eq. (7).
A.5    E QUIVALENCE BETWEEN R EGULARIZED P RIMAL AND R ELAXED D UAL
Adding an entropic regularization term to the OT-based primal formulation of the VQR problem (5),
and converting into a minimization problem yields,
                                min hΠ, −Si + ε hΠ, log Πi
                                  Π
                                 s.t. Π> 1T d = ν                         [−ψ]                         (16)
                                      Π1N = µ                             [−ϕ]
                                      ΠX = X̄                             [−β]

                                                        17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                               d              d
where ν ∈ RN , µ ∈ RT , X̄ ∈ RT ×k are defined as in section 3. Note that the entropic
regularization term can be interpreted as minimization of the KL-divergence between the transport
plan Π and the product of marginals, i.e., DKL Π k µν > .
In order to show the equivalence between this regularized problem and the relaxed dual (7), the key
idea is to use the Fenchel-Rockafeller duality theorem (Rockafellar, 1974). This allows us to write
the dual of an optimization problem in terms of the convex conjugate functions of its objective. To
apply this approach, we reformulate eq. (16) into an unconstrained problem of the following form:

                      min f ∗ (A∗ W ) + g ∗ (W ) = max −f (−V ) − g(AV ),
                     W ∈W                                     V ∈V

where we define a pair of operators A : V 7→ W and A∗ : W ∗ 7→ V ∗ adjoint to each other;
f : V 7→ R, f ∗ : V ∗ 7→ R and g : W 7→ R, g ∗ : W ∗ 7→ R are pairs of convex conjugate
                                                                                d
functions. In our problem W = W ∗ and V = V ∗ are the vector spaces W = W ∗ = RT ×N and
              d            d
V = V ∗ = RT × RN × RT ×k .
We define the operator
                                      A∗ Π = Π> 1T d , Π1N , ΠX


and an indicator function,

                                                         0, z = a,
                                          ia (z) =
                                                         ∞, z 6= a.

We can now represent eq. (16) as an unconstrained problem,

                          min hΠ, −Si + ε hΠ, log Πi + i(ν,µ,X̄) (A∗ Π)                              (17)
                           Π


To derive A, the adjoint operator of A∗ , we can write

             h(ψ, ϕ, β), A∗ ΠiV = ψ, Π> 1T d + hϕ, Π1N i + hβ, ΠXi
                                = tr ψ > Π> 1T d + tr ϕ> Π1N + tr β > ΠX


                                       = 1T d ψ > , Π + ϕ1N > , Π + βX > , Π
                                       = hA(ψ, ϕ, β), ΠiW .

Thus, A(ψ, ϕ, β) = 1T d ψ > + ϕ1N > + βX > .
We then define the functions

                                   f ∗ (A∗ Π) = i(ν,µ,X̄) (A∗ Π)
                                      g ∗ (Π) = hΠ, −Si + ε hΠ, log Πi ,

and their corresponding convex conjugates are therefore given by,

              f (ψ, ϕ, β) = (ψ, ϕ, β), (ν, µ, X̄) V = hψ, νi + hϕ, µi + β, X̄

                             X         Wij + Sij − 1
                   g(W ) = ε    exp                    .
                             ij
                                              ε


Using f ∗ and g ∗ , we can write (17) as minW {f ∗ (A∗ W ) + g ∗ (W )} , then by the Fenchel-
Rockafeller duality theorem, we get the equivalent dual form maxV {−f (−V ) − g(AV )} . Substi-
tuting V = (−ψ, −ϕ, −β) (the dual variables of eq. (16)), converting to a minimization problem,
and omitting constant factors in the objective, we get
                                                     d
                                                  T X
                                                    N
             >        >               >
                                                  X                     1                   >

      min ψ ν + ϕ µ + tr β X̄ + ε                             exp         Sij − ψj − ϕi − βi xj .    (18)
     ψ,ϕ,β
                                                  i=1 j=1
                                                                        ε


                                                         18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Now we write ϕ in terms of ψ, β by using a first-order optimality condition of the above problem.
Taking the derivative w.r.t. ϕi and setting to zero, we have:
                                             ϕ  X    N
                                                i             1
                                                                 Sij − ψj − βi > xj

                            0 = µi − exp −              exp
                                               ε j=1          ε
                      ϕ                           µi
                         i
               exp −          =P           1                 >
                                                                                             (19)
                                   j exp ε (Sij − ψj − βi xj )
                        ε
                                                                               

                                         1  X          1
                                                          Sij − ψj − βi > xj 

                          ϕi = ε log           exp                                          (20)
                                         µi j          ε

Finally, substituting eqs. (19) and (20) into eq. (18) and omitting constant terms yields,
                                                                                         
                                          Td           N
                                        X             X         1
          min ψ > ν + tr β > X̄ + ε                                Sij − βi > xj − ψj  ,

                                             µi log      exp                                        (21)
           ψ,β
                                         i=1          j=1
                                                                ε

where Sij = ui > yj . Thus, we obtain that eq. (21) is equal to eq. (7).
In summary, we have shown that the relaxed dual formulation of the VQR problem that we solve (7),
is equivalent to an entropic-regularized version of the OT-based primal formulation eq. (5).
A.6    E XTRACTING THE V ECTOR Q UANTILE R EGRESSION C OEFFICIENTS
                                                                                  d              d
The dual variables obtained from the OT formulation (eq. (4)) are ϕ ∈ RT and β ∈ RT ×k . In
the case of scalar quantiles (d = 1) we can obtain the conditional quantile function from the dual
variables by applying the T × T finite differences matrix D > defined in appendix A.1:
                                 b Y|X (u; x) = D > (βx + ϕ) .

                                 Q                              u

This is effectively taking the u-th component the first-order discrete derivative where u is one of the
T discrete quantile levels.
In the vector case, we have T d discrete d-dimensional quantile levels. Equivalently, the relation
between the dual variables and the quantile function is then
                                 b Y|X (u0 ; x) = [∇u {βx + ϕ}] 0 .
                                 Q                             u
                        d                                                                  d
Here βx + ϕ is in RT and its gradient with respect to u, ∇u {βx + ϕ}, is in RT ×d . We then
evaluate its gradient at o ne of the discrete levels u0 to obtain the d-dimensional quantile. As explained
in section 3, the expression βx + ϕ is convex in u, and thus the co-monotonicity of the estimated
CVQF is obtained by virtue of it being the gradient of a convex function.


                                                   19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


B    C ONVERGENCE OF VQR
Below we mention a few comments regarding the optimization and approximation error of VQR.
Linear VQR. The relaxed dual formulation of VQR, presented in eq. (6), is an unconstrained smooth
convex minimization problem. Thus, in this case, gradient descent is guaranteed to converge to the
optimal solution up to any desired precision. Moreover, given fixed quantile levels, our objective can
be written as the minimization of an expectation under the data distribution P(X,Y) . Under these
criteria, performing SGD by sampling i.i.d. from the data distribution, is known to converge to the
global minimum (Hazan (2019), Chapter 3). We refer to Section 5.4 in (Peyré & Cuturi, 2019) (and
references therein) for further analysis and details regarding the convergence rates of SGD and other
stochastic optimization methods applied to this problem. Specifically, stochastic averaged gradient
(SAG) was shown to have improved convergence rates compared to SGD Genevay et al. (2016).
However, in practice we find that SGD converges well for this problem (see Figure 2, Appendix
fig. A10a), and we use it here for simplicity.
Nonlinear VQR. In the case of non-linear VQR, as formulated in eq. (8), the optimization is over a
non-convex objective, and thus no convergence to a global minimum is guaranteed. Convergence
analyses for non convex objectives only provide guarantees for weak forms of convergence. For e.g.,
the analysis methodology introduced by Ghadimi & Lan (2013) can be used to show that under the
assumption of uniformly bounded gradient estimates, the norm of the gradient of the loss function
decreases on average as O(t−1/2 ), when t → ∞, where t is the iteration. This can be viewed as
a weak form of convergence that does not guarantee convergence to a fixed point, even to a local
minimum.
Approximation error as ε → 0. The nonlinear VQR formulation (8) produces an estimate Q      bε .
                                                                                                 Y|X
By decreasing ε, one can make the problem more exact, as we have shown in practice (fig. A10b).
Following the approach of Proposition A.1 in Genevay et al. (2016), it can be shown that this estimate
approaches the true CVQF as ε → 0.


                                                 20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


C     C ONDITIONAL V ECTOR Q UANTILE F UNCTIONS
C.1    I NTUITIONS A BOUT V ECTOR Q UANTILES
To interpret the meaning of CVQFs, let us consider the 2-dimensional case, where we assume
Y = (Y1 , Y2 )> . Given a specific covariates vector x = (x1 , . . . , xk )> , and level u = (u1 , u2 )> we
may write the components of the conditional vector quantile function as,

                                 Q1 (u; x)       QY1 |Y2 ,X u1 ; QY2 |X (u2 ; x) , x
               QY|X (u; x) =                 =                                             ,
                                 Q2 (u; x)       QY2 |Y1 ,X u2 ; QY1 |X (u1 ; x) , x
where QYi |Yj ,X (u; y, x) denotes the scalar quantile function of the random variable Yi at level u,
given Yj = y, X = x. Thus, for example, the first component Q1 (u; x) is a 2D surface where
moving along u1 for a fixed u2 yields a scalar, non-decreasing function representing the quantiles of
Y1 when Y2 is at a value corresponding to level u2 (see Figure A6b). In addition, the vector quantile
function is co-monotonic with u in the sense defined by eq. (1). For higher dimensions, it becomes
more involved as the conditioning in each component is on the vector quantile of all the remaining
components of the target Y (Figure A6c).
C.2    C ONDITIONAL Q UANTILE C ONTOURS
A useful property of CVQFs is that they allow a natural extension of α-confidence intervals to high
dimensional distributions, which we denote as α-contours.

Vector quantile contours. Formally, we define the conditional contour of Y|X = x at confidence
level α as Qα
            Y|X (x), given by

               Qα

                 Y|X (x) = QY|X (u; x) | u ∈ Uα ,                                         (22)
                               d
                               [
                        Uα =         Uαi ,
                               i=1
                        Uαi = (u1 , . . . , ud )> | ui ∈ [α, 1 − α], u−i ∈ {α, 1 − α}


where u−i denotes any component of u = (u1 , . . . , ud )> except for ui . Note that the contour can be
calculated not only using the true CVQF, QY|X (u; x), as above, but also using an estimated CVQF,
Q
b Y|X (u; x).

For simplicity consider the 2d case. By fixing e.g. u1 to be one of {α, 1 − α} and then sweeping over
u2 (and vice versa), we obtain a set of vector quantile levels Uα corresponding to the confidence level
α (see fig. 1a, left and right). Mapping the set Uα back to the domain of Y by using the values of the
CVQF QY|X (u; x) along it, we obtain a contour of arbitrary shape, which contains 100 · (1 − 2α)d
percent of the d-dimensional distribution (see fig. 1a, middle and fig. A7, right).

Separable quantile contours. In contrast to vector quantile contours obtained by VQR, which
can accurately model distributions with arbitrary shapes, using separable quantiles produces trivial
box-shaped contours. Consider a CVQF estimated with separable quantiles as presented in eq. (10).
Due to the dependence of each component of Q      b Sep (u; x) only on the corresponding component
                                                    Y|X
of u, the shape of the resulting quantile contour will always be box-shaped (see fig. A7, middle).
Such trivial contours result in inferior performance for applications of uncertainty estimation, where
a confidence region with a the smallest possible area for a given confidence level is desired.


                                                    21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                                 (a)


                                                 (b)


                                                 (c)

Figure A6: Visualization (a) 1d, (b) 2d, and (c) 3d vector quantile functions estimated on the
MVN dataset. In each plot, Qi (u) is the ith component of the vector quantile QY (u), plotted over
all quantile levels u. The number of quantile levels calculated was 50, 25 and 10 for 1d, 2d and 3d
quantiles respectively. For 2d quantiles (b), the top plot shows multiple monotonic quantile curves of
one variable while keeping the other at a fixed level.


                                                 22
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Figure A7: Visualization of α-quantile contours constructed using separable quantiles and
vector quantiles. All the contours presented contain ∼ 90% of the points (i.e., α = 0.025). Left (top
to bottom): samples drawn from bivariate normal, heart-shaped, and star-shaped densities. Middle
& Right: black triangles overlaid on the density constitute the α−quantile contour estimated using
separable quantiles and vector quantiles, respectively. The bivariate normal density has zero mean,
unit variance and correlation of ρ = −0.7. Vector quantile contours accurately capture the shape of
distribution whereas the separable quantile contours are always box-shaped due to the assumption of
independence.


                                                 23
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


D     DATASETS
D.1    S YNTHETIC DATASETS
Below we describe the four synthetic datasets which were used in the experiments.
MVN. Data was generated from a linear model y = Ax + η, where x ∼ U[0, 1]k , A ∈ Rd×k is a
random projection matrix and η is multivariate Gaussian noise with a random covariance matrix.
Conditional-banana. This dataset was introduced by Feldman et al. (2021), and inspired by a
similar dataset in Carlier et al. (2017). The target variable Y ∈ R2 has a banana-shaped conditional
distribution, and its shape changes non-trivially when conditioned on a continuous-valued covariate
X ∈ R (see the left-most column of the panel presented in Figure A13). The data generating process
is defined as follows
               X ∼ U[0.8, 3.2], z ∼ U[−π, π], φ ∼ U[0, 2π], r ∼ U[−0.1, 0.1]
                                        β̂
               β̂ ∼ U[0, 1]k , β =
                               ||β̂||1
                   1                                             Z
               Y0 = (− cos (Z) + 1) + r sin (φ) + sin (X), Y1 =    + r cos (φ),
                   2                                            βX
and then Y = [Y0 , Y1 ] > .
Synthetic glasses. This dataset was introduced by Brando et al. (2022). The target variable Y ∈ R
has a bimodal conditional distribution. The mode locations shift periodically when conditioned on a
continuous-valued covariate X ∼ U[0, 1] (fig. A12a). The data generating process is defined as
               z1 = 3πX                                         z2 = π(1 + 3X)
                  ∼ Beta (α = 0.5, β = 1)                        γ ∼ Categorical(0, 1)
               Y1 = 5 sin(z1 ) + 2.5 +                          Y2 = 5 sin(z2 ) + 2.5 −
                Y = γY1 + (1 − γ)Y2 .

Rotating star. In this dataset, the target variable of Y ∈ R2 has a star-shaped conditional distribution,
and its shape is rotated by X ∈ R degrees when conditioned on a discrete-valued X, taking values
in [0, 10, 20, . . . , 60]. Data is generated based on a 600 × 600 binary image of a star. See the first
column in Figure A14 to visualize conditional distributions as a function of X. Since conditional
distributions differ only by a rotation, E [Y|X] remains the same for all X. However, the shape of
the distribution changes substantially with X, especially in tails. Thus, this dataset is a challenging
candidate for estimating vector quantiles which must also represent these tails in order to properly
recover the shape of the conditional distribution.
D.2    R EAL DATASETS
We perform real data experiments on the blog_data, bio, house, meps_20 datasets obtained
from (Feldman et al., 2021). The original real datasets contained one-dimensional targets. Feldman
et al. (2021) constructed an additional target variable by selecting a feature that has high correlation
with first target variable and small correlation to the other input features, so that it is hard to predict.
Summary of these datasets is presented in table A1.

    Dataset Name         N         k     d                    Additional Response
      blog_data        52397      279    2   Time between the blog post publication and base-time
         bio           45730       8     2                 F7 - Euclidean distance
        house          21613      17     2                   Latitude of a house
       meps_20         17541      138    2                Overall rating of feelings

                              Table A1: Information about the real data sets.


                                                    24
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


E     E VALUATION M ETRICS
E.1   M ETRICS FOR S YNTHETIC DATA
The quality of an estimated CVQF can be measured by how well it upholds strong representation and
co-monotonicity (eqs. (1) and (2)). However, measuring strong representation requires knowledge
of the ground-truth joint distribution P(X,Y) or its conditional quantile function. With synthetic
data, adherence to strong representation can be measured via several proxy metrics. The second key
property, violations of co-monotonicity, can be measured directly. Below we describe the metrics we
use to evaluate these properties on estimated conditional quantile functions.

Entropy of inverse CVQF. If strong representation holds, the inverted CVQF, Q         b −1 (Y|X),
                                                                                        Y|X
must result in a uniform distribution, when evaluated on samples drawn from the true conditional
distribution. As a measure of uniformity, we calculate a normalized entropy of the inverted CVQF.
The inversion procedure is done as follows.
                                                            L
      1. Sample L evaluation covariate vectors, {xl }l=1 values at random from the ground truth
         distribution PX .
      2. For each xl ,
                                         M
          (a) Sample M points {ym,l }m=1 from Y|X = xl .
          (b) For each ym,l , find the level of the closest vector quantile w.r.t. the Euclidean distance,
              i.e.
                                     um,l = arg min      ym − Q  b Y|X (u0 ; xl ) .
                                                    u0                           2
                                  d
          (c) For i ∈ 1, . . . , T denote ci as the number of times that the quantile level i is found
                        M
              in {um,l }m=1 , and calculate pi = ci /M .
                                                    P
          (d) Calculate the entropy hl = −              pi log pi and the normalized entropy e
                                                        i                                          hl =
              (exp (hl ) − 1) /(T d − 1).
      3. Report the CVQF inverse entropy as L1
                                                   P e
                                                    l hl .

Note that,

      1. The entropy metric is normalized such that its values are in [0, 1] where 1 corresponds to a
         uniform distribution, and 0 corresponds to a delta distribution.
      2. Some non-uniformity arises due to the quantization of the quantile level grid into T discrete
         levels per dimension. We report a reference entropy, calculated on a uniform sample of M
         quantile-level grid points.
      3. We used L = 20 and M = 4000.

Distribution distance (KDE-L1). Since the CVQF fully represents the conditional distribution
P(Y|X) it can serve as a generative model for it. We used inverse-transform sampling to generate data
from the estimated conditional distribution though the fitted VQR model, Q  b Y|X (u; x), as follows.

                                                            L
      1. Sample L evaluation covariate vectors, {xl }l=1 values at random from the ground truth
         distribution PX .
      2. For each xl ,
                                                  M
          (a) Sample M quantile levels {um,l }m=1 uniformly.
          (b) Generate M samples from the estimated distribution of Y|X using the estimated
                     n                          oM
              CVQF: ŷm,l = Q b Y|X (um,l ; xl )   .
                                                    m=1
                                             n     oM
                                               ∗
          (c) Sample an additional M points ym,l        from the ground truth conditional distribu-
                                                    m=1
              tion PY|X=xl .
          (d) Calculate a Kernel Density Estimate (KDE) fbY|X=x from the VQR samples {ŷm,l }.
                                                                      l


                                                   25
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023



                                                                       n     o
                                 ∗                                        ∗
          (e) Calculate the KDE fY|X=x l
                                         from the ground truth samples  y m,l .

      3. Calculate the KDE-L1 metric as
                                              L
                                         1X ∗
                                            fY|X=xl − fbY|X=xl .
                                         L                     1
                                            l=1

The KDEs are calculated with 100 bins per dimension. An isotropic Gauassian kernel was used,
with σ = 0.1 for the conditional-banana dataset and σ = 0.035 for the star dataset. We used
pykeops (Charlier et al., 2021) for a fast implementation of high-dimensional KDEs. We used
L = 20 and M = 4000.

Quantile function distance (QFD). This metric measures the distance between a true CVQF,
Q∗Y|X , and an estimate for it obtained by VQR, Q
                                                b Y|X .

                                                             L
      1. Sample L evaluation covariate vectors, {xl }l=1 values at random from the ground truth
         distribution PX .
      2. For each xl ,
                                          M
          (a) Sample M points {ym,l }m=1 from the ground truth conditional distribution PY|X=xl .
                                                                                  M
          (b) Estimate an unconditional vector quantile function on {ym,l }m=1 , i.e. perform vector
              quantile estimation, not regression. Denote the estimated unconditional vector quantile
              function as Q∗Y|X . This serves as a proxy for the ground-truth conditional quantile
              function.
          (c) Denote the estimated conditional quantile function evaluated at xl : Q
                                                                                   b Y|X=x .
                                                                                            l

          (d) Compute the normalized difference between them elementwise over each of the T d
              discrete quantile levels, i.e.,

                                   dl = Q∗Y|X=xl − Q
                                                   b Y|X=x
                                                           l
                                                                        / Q∗Y|X=xl        .
                                                                    2                 2
                                            PL
      3. Calculate the QFD metric as L1           l=1 dl .

We used L = 20 and M = 4000.

Percentage of co-monotonicity violations (MV). This value can be measured directly. Given an
estimated vector quantile function Q(u),
                                   b     with T levels per dimension, there are in total T 2d quantile
level pairs. Thus, we measure
                                  d
                                T
                            1 X n                 > b
                                                                        o
                                    I (u i − u j ) (Q(u i ) − Q(u
                                                              b j )) < 0 .
                           T 2d i,j

E.2   M ETRICS FOR R EAL DATA
With real data, only finite samples from the ground truth distribution are available. In particular, since
our real datasets have a continuous X, this means that we never have more than one sample from
each conditional distribution Y|X = x. Strong representation can therefore not be quantified directly
as with the above metrics. Instead, we opt for metrics which can be evaluated on finite samples
and are specifically suitable for our chosen application of distribution-free uncertainty estimation
(section 6.3).

Size of a conditional α-confidence set (AC). This metric approximates |Cα (x)| i.e. the size of an
α-confidence set constructed for a specific covariate x. Lower values of this metric are better, as they
indicate that the confidence set is a better fit for the shape of the data distribution because, intuitively,
the implication is that the same proportion of the data distribution can be represented by a smaller
region. The metric is computed as follows.

      1. Estimate a CVQF Q
                         b Y|X (u; x), e.g. via VQR (7), NL-VQR (8), or separable quantiles (10).


                                                        26
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


      2. Choose a test covariate, denoted by xT .
      3. Construct the corresponding conditional α-contour, Qα     T
                                                             Y|X (x ), as defined by eq. (22),
                            b Y|X (u; xT ).
         using the estimate Q
      4. Construct the corresponding conditional α-confidence set Cα (xT ) from the contour
         Qα      T
          Y|X (x ) by calculating a convex hull of the points within the contour.
      5. Calculate the value of the metric as the volume of the resulting convex hull (area for d = 2).

We note that using a convex hull is only a linear approximation of the true Cα (x) defined by the
points in the contour. For reasonable values of T , we find it to be a good approximation, and it is an
upper-bound on the area/volume of the true Cα (x). In practice we use scipy with qhull (Virtanen
et al., 2020; Barber et al., 1996) to construct d-dimensional convex hulls and measure their volume.

Marginal Coverage (MC). This metric measures the proportion of unseen data points that are
contained within the the conditional α-confidence sets, Cα (x), that was obtained from a given
estimated CVQF. It is computed as follows.

      1. Estimate a CVQF Q
                         b Y|X (u; x) using one of the aforementioned methods on a training set
         sampled from PY|X .
      2. Denote a disjoint held-out test set
                                              T T      NT
                                             xj , yj   j=1
                                                             ∼ PY|X .

      3. Measure the marginal coverage as
                                             TN
                                          1 X
                                               I yjT ∈ Cα (xTj ) ,

                                         NT j

         where Cα (xTj ) is constructed as a convex hull of the conditional α-contour Qα     T
                                                                                       Y|X (xj )
         constructed using the estimated Q
                                         b Y|X (u; x) (eq. (22)).


                                                  27
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


F     A DDITIONAL E XPERIMENTS
F.1   S CALE
Scale with respect to d and k. Figure A8 demonstrates the runtime of our solver with respect to the
number of target dimensions d and covariate dimensions k.


Figure A8: Effect of d and k on runtime. VQR solver runtime is shown as a function of number
of target dimensions d (left) and covariate dimensions k (right). Calculated on the MVN dataset
with N = 10k; for d experiment T = 10; for k experiment T = 50 and d = 2. Runtime scales
exponentially with d as expected, due to having T d quantile levels. For k, we can see that runtime
remains relatively constant even for hundreds of dimensions, then increses due to memory constraints.

Comparison to general-purpose solver. To showcase the scalability of our solver, we compare its
runtime against an off-the-shelf linear program solver, ECOS, available within the CVXPY package
(Diamond & Boyd, 2016). These results are shown in Figure A9. As expected, our custom VQR
solver approaches the performance of the general purpose solver which achieves slightly more
accurate solutions due to solving an exact problem. However, the results demonstrate that with a
linear program solver, the runtime quickly becomes prohibitive even for small problems. Crucially, it
is important to note that linear program solvers only allow solving the linear VQR problem, while
our solver supports nonlinear VQR.


Figure A9: Our proposed solver is orders of magnitude faster than general-purpose linear
program solver, and approaches the exact solution as the problem size increases. VQR and CVX
(using ECOS LP solver) solver runtimes (solid lines) are shown as a function of number of samples
N (left) and quantile levels per dimension T (right). Dashed lines indicate KDE-L1 as measure of
solution quality. CVX obtains the ideal solution due to solving an exact problem. Calculated on the
MVN dataset d = 2, k = 10. Left: T = 30; Right: N = 2000.


F.2   O PTIMIZATION
To further evaluate our proposed VQR solver, we experimented with various values of ε and batch
sizes of samples and quantile levels, denoted as BN and BT respectively. Figure A10a shows the
effect of the mini-batch size in both N and T on the accuracy of the solution. We measured the
QFD metric, averaged over 100 evaluation x values. These results are presented in Figure A10b. As
expected we observe improved accuracy when increasing batch sizes (both BN and BT ) and when
decreasing ε.


                                                 28
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


      (a) Effect of batch sizes BN and BT on optimization. Computed on MVN dataset with d = 2 and
      k = 1. The vertical axis is the QFD metric defined in section 6. Left: Sweeping over BN ; T = 25.
      Right: Sweep over BT ; T = 50 produces 502 total levels.


      (b) Decreasing ε in the relaxed dual improves strong representation. Y-axis: QFD metric.
      Computed on MVN dataset with N = 20k, k = 1. Right: T = 50, d = 2; Left: T = 100, d = 1.

Figure A10: Optimization experiments showing the effect of ε and both batch sizes on convergence.


F.3    VMR
Figure 4 shows the effectiveness of our VMR procedure. We can see that when applying VMR,
there are no monotonicity violations, even for low values of ε, and, moreover, QFD metric improves.
Figures A12b and A12c demonstrate how VMR can remove monotonicity violations, even when the
distribution cannot be estimated correctly (in this case due to linear VQR). Finally, fig. A11 visualizes
the co-monotonicity violations in 2d.


Figure A11: Visualization of monotonicity violations in 2d. Left: co-monotonicity matrix,
showing the value of (ui − uj )> (Q(ui ) − Q(uj )) for all i, j, after fitting VQR without VMR with
d = 2, T = 10 on the MVN dataset. Right: quantile-level pairs i, j where co-monotonicity is
violated. VMR resolves all these violations.

F.4    N ONLINEAR VQR
Here we include additional results comparing linear and nonlinear VQR for various datasets. Fig-
ure A12c compares linear and nonlinear VQR on the synthetic glasses dataset. Figures A13 and A14
and table A3 present the results of linear and nonlinear VQR on the conditional-banana and rotating
star datasets for many values of x.


                                                    29
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


 (a) Ground truth joint distribution            (b) VQR                       (c) VQR + VMR


                                               (d) NL-VQR                   (e) NL-VQR + VMR

Figure A12: VQR and NL-VQR can be used for Simultaneous Quantile Regression (SQR), and
VMR eliminates quantile crossings. SQR on the synthetic glasses dataset (a; gray points show
ground-truth distribution). Linear VQR fails to correctly model the conditional distribution (b, c; gray
points sampled from linear VQR), while nonlinear VQR reconstructs the shape exactly (d, e; gray
points sampled from nonlinear VQR). In both cases case, VMR successfully eliminates any quantile
crossings (c, e).


Table A2: Quantitative evaluation of linear VQR, CVAE and nonlinear VQR on the conditional-
banana dataset. Evaluated on N = 4000 samples with T = 50 levels per dimension. The KDE-L1,
QFD and Entropy metrics are defined in section 6. Arrows ↑/↓ indicate when higher/lower is better;
Numbers are mean ± std calculated over the 20 values of x. Reference entropy is obtained by
uniformly sampling the 2d quantile grid.

                                                   CVAE               VQR           NL-VQR
   KDE-L1                                  ↓    0.175 ± 0.021    0.873 ± 0.175      0.135 ± 0.024
   Quantile Function Distance (QFD)        ↓           -         0.179 ± 0.034      0.055 ± 0.023
   Inverse CVQF Entropy (Ref: 0.70)        ↑           -         0.309 ± 0.077      0.560 ± 0.014
   Train time (min)                        ↓          35              3.5           4


                                                  30
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Figure A13: Qualitative evaluation of VQR, CVAE and NL-VQR on the conditional-banana
dataset. Depicted are the kernel-density estimates of samples drawn from each of these methods.
Models were trained with N = 20k with T = 50 quantile levels per dimension. Numbers depict the
KDE-L1 metric. Better viewed as GIF provided in the supplementary material.

Table A3: Quantitative evaluation of linear VQR, CVAE, and nonlinear VQR on the rotating
stars dataset. Evaluated on N = 4000 samples with T = 50 levels per dimension. The KDE-L1,
QFD and Entropy metrics are defined in section 6. Arrows ↑/↓ indicate when higher/lower is better;
Numbers are mean ± std calculated over the 20 values of x. Reference entropy is obtained by
uniformly sampling the 2d quantile grid.

                                                     CVAE         VQR         NL-VQR
       KDE-L1                               ↓   0.95 ± 0.04    0.35 ± 0.06    0.20 ± 0.01
       Quantile Function Distance (QFD)     ↓        –         0.18 ± 0.04    0.08 ± 0.01
       Inverse CVQF Entropy (Ref: 0.69)     ↑        –         0.51 ± 0.02    0.59 ± 0.02
       Train time (min)                     ↓       35             3.5        4


                                                31
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Figure A14: Qualitative evaluation of linear VQR, CVAE and nonlinear VQR on the rotating
stars dataset. Depicted are the kernel-density estimates of samples drawn from each of these methods.
Models were trained with N = 20k with T = 50 quantile levels per dimension. Numbers depict the
KDE-L1 metric. Better viewed as GIF provided in the supplementary material.


                                                 32
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Figure A15: Nonlinear VQR produces substantially smaller α-confidence sets in real data
experiments. Comparison of nonlinear VQR (NL-VQR), separable nonlinear QR (Sep-NLQR),
linear VQR (VQR), and linear separable QR approaches (Sep-QR) on the four real datasets presented
in table A1. The confidence sets are constructed for each method in such a way to produce same
desired level of marginal coverage (blue dashed line). Error bars generated from 10 trials, each with
a different randomly-sampled train/test split.


Figure A16: Nonlinear VQR produces α-quantile contours which model the shape of the
conditional distribution and have significantly smaller area compared to other methods. Each
column depicts α-quantile contours for two test covariates (top, bottom) sampled from bio (left),
house prices (middle), and blog_data (right) datasets. Separable QR approaches produce
box-shaped confidence regions due to the assumption of statistical independence, whereas VQR and
nonlinear VQR produce contours with non-trivial shapes that adapt to the test covariate at hand (each
column, top vs bottom). The areas of the α-confidence sets are reported relative to NL-VQR in the
legend.


                                                 33
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


G    I MPLEMENTATION DETAILS
Solver implementation details. The log-sum-exp term in eq. (7) becomes numerically unstable as
ε decreases, which can be mitigated by implementing it as

                 logsumexpε (x) = logsumexpε x − max{xk } + max{xk }.
                                                              k             k


Scale and Optimization experiment. For both scale and optimization experiments, we run VQR
for 10k iterations and use a learning rate scheduler that decays the learning rate by a factor of 0.9
every 500 iterations if the error does not drop by 0.5%.

Synthetic glasses experiment. We set N = 10k, T = 100, and ε = 0.001. We optimized both
VQR and NL-VQR for 40k iterations and use a learning rate scheduler that decays the learning rate
by a factor of 0.9 every 500 iterations if the error does not drop by 0.5%. In NL-VQR, as gθ , we used
a 3-layer fully-connected network with each hidden layer of size 1000. We used skip-connections,
batch-norm, and ReLU nonlinearities between the hidden layers. For NL-VQR and VQR, we set the
initial learning rate to be 0.4 and 1, respectively.

Conditional Banana and Rotating Star experiments. We draw N = 20k samples from P(X,Y)
and fit T = 50 quantile levels per dimension (d = 2) for linear and nonlinear VQR (NL-VQR).
Evaluation is performed by measuring all aforementioned metrics on 4000 evaluation samples from
20 true conditional distributions, conditioned on x = [1.1, 1.2, . . . , 3.0]. For NL-VQR, as gθ we use
a small MLP with three hidden layers of size (2, 10, 20) and a ReLU non-linearity. Thus gθ lifts X
into 20 dimensions on which VQR is performed. We set ε = 0.005 and optimized both VQR and
NL-VQR for 20k iterations. We used the same learning rate and schedulers as in the synthetic glasses
experiment.

Real data experiments. In all the real data experiments, we randomly split the data into 80%
training set and 20% hold-out test set. Fitting is performed on the train split, and evaluation metrics,
marginal coverage and quantile contour area (calculated as reported in appendix E.2), are measured
on the test split. We repeat this procedure 10 times with different random splits. The baselines
we evaluate are NL-VQR, VQR, separable nonlinear QR (Sep-NLQR), and separable linear QR
(Sep-QR). In the separable baselines, two QR models are fit separately, one for each target variable.
For both nonlinear separable QR and NL-VQR baselines, we choose gθ to be an MLP with three
hidden layers. In the case of NL-VQR, hidden layers sizes are set to (100, 60, 20) and for nonlinear
separable QR, they are set to (50, 30, 10). All methods were run for 40k iterations, with learning
rate set to 0.3 and ε = 0.01. We set T = 50 for NL-VQR and VQR baselines, and T = 100
for separable linear and nonlinear QR baselines. The α parameter that determines the α-quantile
contour construction is calibrated separately for each method and dataset. The goal of the calibration
procedure is to achieve consistent coverage across baselines in order to allow for the comparison of
the α-quantile contour areas. Table A4 presents the calibrated α’s that were used.

  Dataset       NL-VQR                VQR                    Sep-NLQR             Sep-QR
                α    Cov.      Area   α      Cov.     Area   α     Cov.    Area   α      Cov.    Area
  bio           0.05 85.00     1.57   0.03   82.87    2.49   0.01  85.13   3.18   0.02   85.76   3.59
  blog_data     0.05 84.17     1.19   0.05   84.50    3.41   0.025 84.60   3.02   0.025 71.10    4.73
  house         0.05 82.29     1.69   0.06   80.75    3.39   0.025 82.51   2.53   0.03   82.48   4.76
  meps_20       0.02 74.13     1.81   0.06   74.82    4.04   0.01  74.73   2.78   0.01   75.77   9.70

Table A4: Choice of α for different real datasets. Nominal (requested) coverage for bio and
blog_data was 85%. For house and meps_20 datasets, it was 82% and 75%, respectively.


Machine configuration. All experiments were run on a machine with an Intel Xeon E5 CPU,
256GB of RAM and an Nvidia Titan 2080Ti GPU with 11GB dedicated graphics memory.


                                                     34
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


H    S OFTWARE
We provide our VQR solvers as part of a comprehensive open-source python package vqr which
installed with pip install vqr. The source code is available at https://github.com/
vistalab-technion/vqr and it contains several jupyter notebooks which demonstrate the
use of our package.
import numpy as np
from vqr import VectorQuantileRegressor
from vqr.solvers.regularized_lse import RegularizedDualVQRSolver

# Create the VQR solver and regressor.
vqr_solver = RegularizedDualVQRSolver(
    verbose=True, T=50, epsilon=1e-2, num_epochs=1000, lr=0.9
)
vqr = VectorQuantileRegressor(solver=vqr_solver)

# Fit the model on some training data.
vqr.fit(X_train, Y_train)

# Sample from the fitted conditional distribution, given a specific x.
Y_sampled = vqr.sample(n=100, x=X_test[0])

# Calculate coverage on the samples.
cov_sampled = vqr.coverage(Y_sampled, x=X_test[0], alpha=alpha)

Listing 1: Minimal example of using the vqr library. Demonstrates instantiation of solver and
regressor, fitting VQR, sampling from the fitted CVQF and coverage calculation.

We note that although a reference Matlab implementation of linear VQR by the original authors
exists, this implementation relies on solving the exact formulation (5) using a general-purpose linear
program solver. We found it to be prohibitively slow to use general-purpose linear program solvers
for VQR (fig. A9). For example, we noted a runtime of 4.5 hours for N = 7k, d = 2, k = 10, T = 30,
and for N = 10k the solver did not converge even after 8 hours. Thus, this approach is unsuitable
even for modestly-sized problems. Moreover, when using such solvers, only linear VQR can be
performed. For comparison, our proposed solver converges to a solution of the same quality on
problems of these sizes in less than one minute and supports nonlinear VQR.


                                                 35
