Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


C AUSAL M EAN F IELD M ULTI -AGENT R EINFORCE -
MENT L EARNING

 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                            A BSTRACT

         Scalability remains a challenge in multi-agent reinforcement learning and is cur-
         rently under active research. A framework named mean-field reinforcement learn-
         ing (MFRL) could alleviate the scalability problem by employing Mean Field
         Theory to turn a many-agent problem into a two-agent problem. However, this
         framework lacks the ability to identify essential interactions under non-stationary
         environments. Causality contains relatively invariant mechanisms behind inter-
         actions, though environments are non-stationary. Therefore, we propose an algo-
         rithm called causal mean-field Q-learning (CMFQ) to address the scalability prob-
         lem. CMFQ is ever more robust toward the change of the number of agents though
         inheriting the compressed representation of MFRL’s action-state space. Firstly, we
         model the causality behind the decision-making process of MFRL into a structural
         causal model (SCM). Then the essential degree of each interaction is quantified
         via intervening on the SCM. Furthermore, we design the causality-aware com-
         pact representation for behavioral information of agents as the weighted sum of
         all behavioral information according to their causal effects. We test CMFQ in a
         mixed cooperative-competitive game and a cooperative game. The result shows
         that our method has excellent scalability performance in both training in environ-
         ments containing a large number of agents and testing in environments containing
         much more agents.


1   I NTRODUCTION

multi-agent reinforcement learning (MARL) has achieved remarkable success in some challenging
tasks. e.g., video games(Vinyals et al., 2019; Wu, 2019). However, training a large number of agents
remains a challenge in MARL. The main reasons are 1) the dimensionality of joint state-action space
increases exponentially as agent number increases, and 2) during the training for a single agent, the
policies of other agents keep changing, causing the non-stationarity problem, whose severity in-
creases as agent number increases.(Sycara, 1998; Zhang et al., 2019; Gronauer & Diepold, 2021).
Existing works generally use the centralized training and decentralized execution paradigm to miti-
gate the scalability problem via mitigating the non-stationarity problem(Rashid et al., 2018; Foerster
et al., 2018; Lowe et al., 2017; Sunehag et al., 2017). Curriculum learning and attention techniques
are also used to improve the scalability performance(Long et al., 2020; Iqbal & Sha, 2019). How-
ever, above methods focus mostly on tens of agents. For large-scale multi-agent system (MAS)
contains hundreds of agents, studies in game theory(Blume, 1993) and mean-field theory(Stanley,
1971; Yang et al., 2018) offers a feasible framework to mitigate the scalability problem. Under
this framework, Yang et al. (2018) propose a algorithm called mean-field Q-learning (MFQ), which
replaces joint action in joint Q-function with average action, assuming that the entire agent-wise
interactions could be simplified into the mean of local pairwise interactions. That is, MFQ reduces
the dimensionality of joint state-action space with a merged agent. However, this approach ignores
the importance differences of the pairwise interactions, resulting in the poor robustness. Neverthe-
less, one of the drawbacks to mean field theory is that it does not properly account for fluctuations
when few interactions exist(Uzunov, 1993) (e.g., the average action may change drastically if there
are only two adjacent agents). Wang et al. (2022) attempt to improve the representational ability of
the merged agent by assign weight to each pairwise interaction by its attention score. However, the
observations of other agents are needed as input, making this method not practical enough in the
real world. In addition, the attention score is essentially a correlation in feature space, which seems


                                                  1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


unconvincing. On the one hand, an agent pays more attention to another agent not simply because
of the higher correlation. On the other hand, it may be inevitable that the proximal agents will be
assigned high weight just because of the high similarity of their observation.
In this paper, we want to discuss a better way to represent the merged agent. We propose a algorithm
named causal mean-field Q-learning (CMFQ) to address the shortcoming of MFQ in robustness via
causal inference. Research in psychology reveals that humans have a sense of the logic of interven-
tion and will employ it in a decision-making context(Sloman & Lagnado, 2015). This suggests that
by allowing agents to intervene in the framework of mean-field reinforcement learning (MFRL),
they could have the capacity to identify more essential interactions as humans do. Inspired by this
insight, we assume that different pairwise interactions should be assigned different weights, and the
weights could be obtained via intervening. We introduce a structural causal model (SCM) that rep-
resents the invariant causal structure of decision-making in MFRL. We intervene on the SCM such
that the corresponding effect of specific pairwise interaction can be presented by comparing the dif-
ference before and after the intervention. Intuitively, the intervening enable agents to ask “what if
the merged agent was replaced with an adjacent agent” as illustrated in Fig.1. In practice, the pair-
wise interactions could be embodied as actions taken between two agents, therefore the intervention
also performs on the action in this case.
CMFQ is based on the assumption that the joint Q-function could be factorized into local pairwise
Q-functions, which mitigates the dimension curse in the scalability problem. Moreover, CMFQ
alleviates another challenge in the scalability problem, namely non-stationarity, by focusing on cru-
cial pairwise interactions. Identifying crucial interactions is based on causal inference instead of
attention mechanism. Surprisingly, the scalability performance of CMFQ is much better than the
attention-based method(Wang et al., 2022). The reasons will be discussed in experiments section.
As causal inference only needs local pairwise Q-functions, CMFQ is practical in real-world appli-
cations, which are usually partially observable. We evaluate CMFQ in the cooperative predator-prey
game and mixed cooperative-competitive battle game. The results illustrate that the scalability of
CMFQ significantly outperforms all the baselines. Furthermore, results show that agents controlled
by CMFQ emerge with more advanced collective intelligence.
                                                                                           The imaginary of agent 𝑖
                                                                                                                     𝑟𝑒𝑝𝑙𝑎𝑐𝑒 𝑚𝑒𝑟𝑔𝑒𝑑 𝑎𝑔𝑒𝑛𝑡 𝑤𝑖𝑡ℎ 𝑖4
                                                                                                 𝑟𝑒𝑝𝑙𝑎𝑐𝑒 𝑚𝑒𝑟𝑔𝑒𝑑 𝑎𝑔𝑒𝑛𝑡 𝑤𝑖𝑡ℎ 𝑖3
                                                                                          𝑟𝑒𝑝𝑙𝑎𝑐𝑒 𝑚𝑒𝑟𝑔𝑒𝑑 𝑎𝑔𝑒𝑛𝑡 𝑤𝑖𝑡ℎ 𝑖2
                                                                                    𝑟𝑒𝑝𝑙𝑎𝑐𝑒 𝑚𝑒𝑟𝑔𝑒𝑑 𝑎𝑔𝑒𝑛𝑡 𝑤𝑖𝑡ℎ 𝑖1
               𝑖2

               𝒊𝟐
              𝒂𝒕−𝟏
                                                           What if …                                                                          𝝅′𝒊𝒕   𝑖

                                                                                                                            𝝅′𝒕𝒊   𝑖

                                                                                                              𝝅′𝒊𝒕   𝑖
        𝑖1                                                                                                                                  𝒊𝟐
                                                                                                                                           𝒂𝒕−𝟏 𝑖2
                                                                   agent 𝑖’s
                                                                                                𝝅′𝒕𝒊   𝑖                  𝒊𝟐
        𝒊𝟏
       𝒂𝒕−𝟏                                      𝝅𝒕𝒊             neighborhood                                            𝒂𝒕−𝟏 𝑖2

                         𝑖                             𝑖                                                    𝒊𝟐
                                                                                                                                                                 𝑡
                                                                                                           𝒂𝒕−𝟏 𝑖2

                                                                                              𝒊𝟏
                                                                                                                                                             𝑡
                             𝑖3                                                              𝒂𝒕−𝟏 𝑖1
                                                                                                                                                         𝑡
                              𝒊𝟑
                             𝒂𝒕−𝟏                                                                                                      𝑡
                    𝑖4                       ഥ𝒊𝒕−𝟏
                                             𝒂
                 𝟒  𝒊
                                                                                                                    My policy would change
               𝒂𝒕−𝟏                                                                                              dramatically if the merged agent
                                                                                                                  were replaced with 𝑖2 . I should
                                                                                                                    pay more attention to 𝑖2 !
                                    𝑡                                           𝑡    𝑖


Figure 1: Blue agents and orange agents belong to different teams. The purple agent denote a
merged agent that simply average all agents in agent i’s neighborhood. The diagram on the left
shows a scenario in which the central agent i interacts with many agents, ik denotes the k th agent
in the observation of agent i. In the framework of MFRL, the scenario is transferred to the diagram
in the middle, in which an merged agent is used to characterize all the agents in the central agent’s
observation. Our method further enables the central agent to learn to ask “what if”. When it asks
this question, it can imagine the scenario illustrated in the right diagram. The central agent can                                                                   Imaginary of agent 𝑖

hypothetically replace the action of the merged agent in MFRL with the action of a neighborhood                                                                                               𝒊
                                                                                                                                                                        𝐷𝐼𝑆𝑇 𝝅𝒕𝒊 |𝝅′ 𝒕 is large!
agent, and if this replacement will cause dramatic changes in policy, it means this neighborhood                                                                          I should pay more
                                                                                                                                                                             attention to 𝑖2
agent is potentially important. Thus central agent should pay more attention to the interaction with
this neighborhood agent.                                                                                                                                                                            agent 𝑖’s
                                                                                                                                                                              𝝅′𝒊𝒕                neighborhood
                                                                                                                                                                                          𝑖


2   R ELATED W ORK                                                                                                                                                        𝒊𝟐
                                                                                                                                                                         𝒂𝒕−𝟏        𝑖2


The scalability problem has been widely investigated in current literatures. Yang et al. (2018) pro-                                                                                                             𝑡
pose the framework of MFRL that increases scalability by reducing the action-state space. Several
works in a related area named mean-field game also proves that using a compact representation to


                                                       2
                             Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                             characterize population information helps solve scalability problem(Guo et al., 2019; Perrin et al.,
                             2021).
                             Several works were proposed to improve MFQ. Wu et al. (2022) proposed a weighted mean-field
                             assigning different weights to neighbor actions according to the correlations of the hand-craft agent
                             attribute set, which is difficult to generalize to different environments. Wang et al. (2022) calculate
                             the weights with attention score. The observations of other agents are needed to calculate the
                             attention scores, making its practicality not satisfactory.
                             Our work is also closely related to recent development in causal inference. Researches indicate that
                             once the SCM, which implicitly contains the causal relationships between variables, is constructed,
                             we can obtain the causal effect by intervening. The causal inference has already been exploited for
                             communication pruning(Ding et al., 2020), solving credit assignment problem(Foerster et al., 2018;
                             Omidshafiei et al., 2019), demonstrating the potential of causal inference in reinforcement learning.
                             (Pearl, 2019; 2001; Peters et al., 2017). Xia et al. (2021) and Zečević et al. (2021) further proved
𝑠𝑡                           that SCM could be equally replaced with NCM under certain constraints, enabling us to ask “what
                             if” by directly intervening on neural network.
                                                                                 𝑰𝒏 𝒂𝒈𝒆𝒏𝒕𝒔 𝒊′ 𝒔 𝒏𝒆𝒊𝒃𝒐𝒓𝒉𝒐𝒐𝒅
     Causal   𝑇𝐸𝑡𝑖,1                       𝜔𝑡𝑖,1
                                                              𝑠𝑡
     Module                                                                                                                      Q
                                                              Weighted Average


                                                                                   ത𝑇𝐸𝑖𝑡−1
                                                                                        𝑖,1
                                                                          Causal                                  𝜔𝑡𝑖,1
                                                        𝑖,1
                                                       𝑎𝑡−1               Module
                                                                                   𝑎′   𝑡

                                                                                                                              Network                          Q
                           Normalization


                                                                                                                                 Weighted Average


              𝑇𝐸𝑡𝑖,2                       𝜔𝑡𝑖,2                                                                                                            Network
                                                                                                                                                      𝑖
                                                                                                                                                    𝑎ු𝑡−1                       𝑠𝑡

     Causal                                                                                                                                                                                               𝑠𝑡
                                                                                                  Normalization


                                                                          Causal     𝑇𝐸𝑡𝑖,2                       𝜔𝑡𝑖,2


                                                                                                                                                                                                Softmax
                                                        𝑖,2                                                                                                              𝑖,𝑘             Q

                                                       𝑎𝑡−1               Module
                                                                                                                                                                        𝑎𝑡−1          Network



     Module                                                                                                                                                                                                      𝑖,𝑘
                                                                                                                                                                                                               𝑇𝐸𝑡−1


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Softmax
                                                                                                                                                                                                Softmax
                                                                                                                                                                          𝑖              Q
                                                                                                                                                                        𝑎ത𝑡−1         𝑖,𝑘
                                                                                                                                                                                      Network                             Q
                                                                                                                                                                                     𝑎𝑡−1                              Network
                                                                                                                                                            Softmax
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             𝑖,𝑘
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           𝑇𝐸𝑡−1
                                                                                              𝑖                           𝑖
                                                          𝑖               Causal    𝑇𝐸𝑡𝑖,𝑁                        𝜔𝑡𝑖,𝑁


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Softmax
                                                        𝑖,𝑁
                                                       𝑎𝑡−1               Module                                                                              𝜋𝑡𝑖                      𝑖                                  Q
                                                                                                                                                                                     𝑎ത𝑡−1
                                                                                                                              Softmax                                                                                  Network


                       𝑖                           𝑖                                                        (a)                                                                                                            (b)
     Causal   𝑇𝐸𝑡𝑖,𝑁                       𝜔𝑡𝑖,𝑁
     Module                                                                                                                     𝜋𝑡𝑖
                             Figure 2: (a) is CMFQ’s architecture. Each neighborhood agent is assigned a weight according to
                             its causal effect to the policy of the central agent. (b) is the causal module. It calculate the KL
                             divergence between the two policies that the merged agent is represented by the average action and
                             the k th neighborhood agent action respectively. A large KL divergence means the k th neighborhood
                             agent might be ignored in the merged agent represented by the average action, hence it should be
                             assigned a higher weight to form a better merged agent.


                             3             P RELIMINARY
                             This section discusses the concepts of the stochastic game, mean-field reinforcement learning, and
                             causal inference.

                             3.1            S TOCHASTIC G AME

                             A N -player stochastic game could be formalized as G =< S, A, P, r, N, γ >, in which N agents
                             in the environment take action a ∈ A = ×N            i
                                                                           i=1 A to interact with other agents and the environment.
                             Environment will transfer according to the transition probability P (s′ | s, a) : S × A × S → [0, 1],
                             then every agent obtains its reward ri (s, ai ) : S × Ai → R and γ ∈ [0, 1] is the discount factor.
                             Agent makes decision according to its policy π i (s) : S → Ω(Ai ), where Ω(Ai ) is a probability
                             distribution over agent i’s action space Ai .
                             The joint Q-function of agent i is parameterized by θi and takes s and a. It is updated as
                                                                               h                      2 i
                                                           Li (θi ) = Es,a,r,s′ Qi (s, a; θi ) − y        ,
                                                                                                                                (1)
                                                                                    Qi s′ , a; θi−

                                                                 y = r + γ max  i
                                                                                                                                                            a′

                             where θi− is updated by with θi every C steps and set fixed until the next C steps finish.
                             where predict network parameters θ update at every epoch. Target network parameters θ− denotes
                             parameters to be updated with


                                                                                                                                                                    3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


3.2   M EAN F IELD R EINFORCEMENT L EARNING

Mean field approximation turns a many-agent problem into a two-agent problem by mapping the
joint action space to a single action space. The joint action Q function is firstly factorized considering
only local pairwise interactions, then pairwise interactions are approximated using the mean-field
theory
                                              1 X
                 Qi s, a1 , a2 , . . . , aN = i          Qi s, ai , ak ≈ Qi s, ai , āi

                                                                                                       (2)
                                             N
                                                      k∈N (i)
          i
where N = |N (i)|. N (i) is the set of agent i’s neighboring agents. Interactions between central
agent i and its neighbors are reduced to the interaction between the central agent and an abstract
agent, which is presented by average behavior information of agents in the neighborhood of agent i.
Finally, the policy of the central agent i is determined by pairwise Q-function

                           i  i       i
                                                  exp βQit st , ait , āit−1
                         πt at | s, āt = P                  i            ′i  i
                                                                                               (3)
                                               a′i ∈Ai exp βQt st , a , āt−1

It is proven that πti will converge eventually(Yang et al., 2018).

3.3   C AUSAL I NFERENCE

The data-driven statistical learning method lacks the identification of causality which is quite a
vital part of composing human acknowledge. The SCM established with human knowledge is
needed to represent the causality among all the variables we consider. An SCM is a 4-tuple
M =< U, V, F, P (U) >. U = {U1 , U2 , · · · , Um } is the set of exogenous variables which are
determined by factors outside the model. V = {V1 , V2 , · · · , Vn } is the set of endogenous variables
that are determined by other variables. F is a set of functions {fV1 , fV2 , · · · , fVn } such that fVj
maps PaVj ∪ UVj to Vj . where UVj ⊆ U is all the exogenous variables directly point to Vj and
PaVj ⊆ V\Vj is all the endogenous variables directly point to Vj . That is, Vj = fVj (PaVj , UVj )
for j = 0, 1, · · · , n. P (U) is the probability distribution function over the domain of U. The causal
mechanism in SCM M induced an acyclic graph G, which uses a direct arrow to present a direct
effect between variables as shown in Fig.3. Intervention is performed through an operator called
do(x), which directly deletes fX and replaces it with a constant X = x, while the rest of the model
keeps unchanged. The equation defines the post-intervention distribution
                                          PM (y|do(x)) ≜ PMx (y)                                          (4)
where Mx is the SCM after performing do(x). Once we obtain the post-intervention distribution,
one may measure the causal effect by comparing it with the pre-intervention distribution. A common
measure is the average causal effect.
                                        E[Y |do(x′0 )] − E[Y |do(x0 )]                                    (5)
where x′0 and x0 are two different interventions.             The causal effect may also be measured by the
experimental Risk Ratio(Pearl, 2010)
                                                  E[Y |do(x′0 )]
                                                                                                          (6)
                                                  E[Y |do(x0 )]

4     M ETHOD
4.1   C ONSTRUCTION OF SCM

The first step to obtain the causal effects behind the interactions among agents is constructing an
SCM, which reveals the causal relations among all the variables. In the setting of MFRL, mean
action āit−1 and state st determine the policy πti (· | st , āit−1 ) of agent i. As the key causal effect we
concern is how important an interaction is for decision making, that is, how the interaction contains
in āit−1 affects πti , we construct the SCM center on πtj as illustrated in Fig.3(b). The importance
of the interaction with adjacent agent k on the central agent i could be estimated by replacing āit−1
with ai,k                                     i                                                k
        t−1 and quantified by the change of πt . Formally, the causal effect of acting a on πt is
                                                                                                     i


                T Eti,k = DIST (πti (· | st , ait , āit−1 ), πti (· | st , ait , do(āit−1 = ai,k
                                                                                               t−1 )))    (7)


                                                          4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


where ai,k
         t−1 is the action of the k
                                    th
                                       agent in the neighborhood of agent i. The causal effects in Eq.(5)
and Eq.(6) are quantified using the difference in statistics before and after the intervention. As the
policy are known, we can utilize the difference in policy to quantify causal effects. DIST measures
the difference between pre-intervention policy and post-intervention
                                                            𝑍 ≔ 𝑓𝑍 𝑈𝑍         policy.
                                                                                 𝑍    We 𝑋use KL𝑌 divergence
as the DIST function in practice. As πti is parameterized𝑋 ≔  using
                                                                 𝑓𝑋 𝑍, 𝑈neural
                                                                        𝑋      network, the do(·) calculation
is performed by directly changing the input of πti . It is𝑌 ≔worth               𝑍
                                                                 𝑓𝑌 𝑋, 𝑈𝑌noting that               𝑌
                                                                                      not 𝑋all neural networks
are capable of causal inference(Xia et al., 2021). As a 𝑈neural
                                                              , 𝑈
                                                             𝑍 𝑋 𝑌, 𝑈   network
                                                                      ~𝒩(0,1)    learned   by  interacting  with
                                                                                       𝑑𝑜 𝑥0
the environment, πti lies on the second layer of Pearl Causal Hierarchy (Bareinboim               et al., 2022),
and naturally contains both the causality between agent-wise interaction and the causality between
agent-environment interaction. It is sufficient for estimating the causal effect of certain interaction.
                                                                 𝑠𝑡 ~𝑃(∙ |𝑠𝑡−1 , 𝑎𝑡−1 )                            𝑖
                                                                                                    𝑠𝑡   𝑎𝑡𝑖     𝑎ത𝑡−1
                                                                                    𝑖
                                                                 𝑎𝑡𝑖 ~𝜋𝑡𝑖 ∙ |𝑠𝑡 , 𝑎ത𝑡−1
                                                                           1                                       𝑖
                                                                   𝑖             𝑘                  𝑠𝑡   𝑎𝑡𝑖     𝑎ത𝑡−1
                                                                 𝑎ത𝑡−1 ≔      ෍ 𝑎𝑡−1
                                                                           𝑁𝑖
                                                                               𝑘∈𝑁(𝑖)
                                                                                                                   𝑘
                                                                  𝑘     𝑘               𝑘
                                                                                                               𝑑𝑜 𝑎𝑡−1
                                                                 𝑎𝑡−1 ~𝜋𝑡−1 ∙ |𝑠𝑡−1 , 𝑎ത𝑡−2

                         (a)                                                                    (b)

Figure 3: (a) is a canonical SCM, when do(x0 ) operation is performed on X, all causes of X will be
broken and keep all variable constant but only change X to x0 . (b) is the SCM of MFRL, the do(·)
operation on āit−1 follows the same procedure.


4.2   I MPROVING MFQ WITH C AUSAL E FFECT

In MFRL, we assume that different pairwise Q-functions should be assigned different weights de-
pending on their potential influences on the policy of central agent. Hence, the factorization of
Eq.(2) should be revised to
                                                        X
                       Qi s, a1t , a2t , . . . , aN       wi,k Qi s, ai , ai,k

                                                  t   =                                       (8)
                                                       k∈N (i)

where N (i) is the set of agent i’s adjacent agents. Then Qj (s, a1 , a2 , · · · , aN ) is approximated
using mean-field theory and considering the causality-aware weights
                                X
Qi (s, a1 , a2 , · · · , aN ) =   wi,k Qi s, ai , ai,k


                               k∈N (i)

      X
             i,k    i     i i
                                        i       i i
                                                           i,k     1 i,k       2   i   i i,k
                                                                                                    i,k
 =         w       Q s, a , ǎ + ∇ǎi Q s, a , ǎ · δa + δa · ∇ãi,k Q s, a , ã                · δa
                                                                   2
   k∈N (i)
                                                      

                                                                  i,k 1
                                       X                  X
     i     i i          i     i i            i,k  i,k                    i,k   2   i   i i,k
                                                                                                  i,k
 = Q s,a ,ǎ +∇ǎi Q s,a ,ǎ ·              w δa        +      w         δa ·∇ãi,k Q s,a ,ã     ·δa
                                                                       2
                                     k∈N (i)             k∈N (i)
                      X
 = Qi s, ai , ǎi +          wi,k Rs,a
                                   i      i,k
                                                ≈ Qi s, ai , ǎi

                                      i a

                        k∈N (i)
                                                                                                                         (9)
          i,k     i,k     i        i               i,k i,k                           i,k      i,k
                                         P                              P
where δa = a − ǎ and ǎ = k∈N (i) w a , hence k w δa = 0. In the second-order

term, ãi,k = ǎi + ϵi,k δai,k , ϵi,k ∈ (0, 1). Rs,a
                                                 i
                                                    i a
                                                       i,k
                                                             denotes the first-order Taylor expansion’s

Lagrange remainder which is bounded by [−L, L] in the condition that the Qi s, ai , ai,k function
is L-smoothed. To be self-contained, we put the derivation in Appendix B. The remainder is a value
fluctuating around zero. As Yang et al. (2018) discussed in their work, under the assumption that
fluctuations caused by adjacent agents tend to cancel each other, the remainder could be neglected.
Once causal effects of pairwise interactions are known, the next question is how to to improve
the representational capacity of the merged agent. Both linear methods, e.g., weighted sum, or
nonlinear methods, e.g., encoding with a neural network, might be useful. However, to ensure
the merged agent’s reasonability, we prefer a representation in the linear space formed by adjacent
agents’ action vectors. An intuitive method that can induce reasonable output is a weighted sum. In


                                                       5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


practice, we find that weighted sum using respective causal effects as weight is enough to effectively
improve the representational capacity of average action

      i   i        i             exp βQit st , ait , ǎit−1                   X i,k i,k
                                                                  , ǎit−1 =

    πt at | st , ǎt−1 = P                  i            ′ i i
                                                                                     wt at−1      (10)
                             a′ i ∈Ai exp βQt st , a , ǎt−1                 k∈N (i)



                                                                 T Eti,k + ϵ
                                               wti,k = P                                                                                 (11)
                                                                          i,k
                                                              k∈N (i) T Et + ϵ


where subscripts are used to denote time steps. T Eti,k is calculated according to Eq.(7). Each ai,k
                                                                                                 t−1 is
encoded in one hot vector. Hence the weighted sum returns a reasonable representation in the linear
space formed by the actions of neighborhoods. Moreover, the representation is close to essential
actions, emphasizing high-potential impact interactions. A term ϵ was introduced to smooth the
weight distribution across all adjacent agents, avoiding additional non-stationarity during training.
Besides, the naive mean-field approximation could be achieved when ϵ → ∞.
The Q-function Qi update using the following loss function similar with Eq.(1)
                               "                                                            #
                                                                                        2
                                   i    i i                          i   ′ ′i i −

          Li (θi ) = Es,a,r,s′    Q s, a , ǎ ; θi − r + γ max   i
                                                                   Q s , a , ǎ ; θi               (12)
                                                                                      a′



5     E XPERIMENTS
We evaluate CMFQ in two tasks: a mixed cooperative-competitive battle game and a coopera-
tive predator-prey game. In the battle task, we compare CMFQ with IQL(Tampuu et al., 2017),
MFQ(Yang et al., 2018), and Attention-MFQ(Wang et al., 2022) to investigate the effectiveness and
scaling capacity of CMFQ. We further verify the effectiveness of CMFQ in another task. In the
predator-prey task, we compare CMFQ with MFQ and Attention-MFQ. Our experiment environ-
ment is MAgent(Zheng et al., 2018).

5.1     M IXED COOPERATIVE - COMPETITIVE GAME

Task Setting. In this task, agents are separated into two
groups, each containing N agents. Every agent tries to
survive and annihilate the other group. Ultimately the
team with more agents surviving wins. Each agent ob-
tains partial observation of the environment and knows
                                                                                       7RWDO 5HZDUG


the last actions other agents took. Agents will be pun-
ished when moving and attacking to lead agents to act

efficiently. Agents are punished when dead and only
rewarded when killing the enemy. The reward setting
                                                                                                                $WWHQWLRQ 0)4
                                                                                                                0)4
requires the agent to cooperate efficiently with team-                                                        &0)4
                                                                                                                ,4/
mates to annihilate enemies. In the experiments, we train                                                       5DQGRP

CMFQ, IQL, MFQ, and Attention-MFQ in the setting of
                                                                                      (SLVRGH


N = 64, then we change N from 64 to 400 to investigate
the scalability of CMFQ. The concrete reward values are
set as follow: rattack = −0.1, rmove = −0.005, rdead = Figure 4: Total reward during training.
−0.1, rkill = 5. We train every algorithm in self-play
paradigm.
Quantitative Results and Analysis. As illustrated in Fig.5(a), we compare CMFQ with Attention-
MFQ, MFQ, and IQL. We do not choose Wu et al. (2022) as a baseline because it is a correlation-
based algorithm identical to Attention-MFQ. We assume that the attention-based method is a more
challenging baseline. Moreover, in addition to these algorithms, we also set ablation algorithms
named Random to verify that the performance improvement of CMFQ is not caused by random-
ization. Random follows the same pipeline as CMFQ but returns a random causal effect for each
interaction. Fig.4 shows the learning curve of all algorithms. We can see that the total rewards of
all algorithms converge to a stable value, empirically demonstrating the training scalability of our


                                                                       6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


algorithm.
To compare the performance of each algorithm, we put trained algorithms in the test environment
that N = 64, and let them battle against each other. Fig.5(a) shows that MFQ performs better
than IQL but worse than Attention-MFQ, indicating that the mean-field approximation mitigates
the scalability problem in this task. However, the simply averaging as MFQ is not a good repre-
sentation of the population behavioral information. In order to improve its representational ability
for large-scale scenarios, it is necessary to assign different weights to different agents. Moreover,
CMFQ outperforms Attention-MFQ during the test, verifying the correctness of our hypothesis that
correlation-based weighting is insufficient to catch the essential interactions properly, while the in-
tervention fills this gap by giving agents the ability to ask “what if”.

                                                                            YV  ,4/                                                                       CMFQ64                                                            YV  ,4/
                                                                               YV  0)4                                                                           MFQ64                                                                YV  0)4
                                                                               YV  $WWHQWLRQ 0)4                                                       Attention-MFQ64                                                      YV  $WWHQWLRQ 0)4
                                                                            YV  &0)4

                                                                               YV  5DQGRP



  :LQ 5DWH


                                                                                                                    :LQ 5DWH


                                                                                                                                                                                          :LQ 5DWH


                           ,4/   0)4 $WWHQWLRQ 0)4 &0)4         5DQGRP                                           0)464   0)4100    0)4400
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   = 0.001       = 0.01               =1

        (a) Performance comparisons.                                                                                                        (b) Test Scalability curve.                          (c) Ablation experiments of ϵ.

Figure 5: Win rate during execution. (a) shows the results that algorithms battle against each other.
the horizontal axis is divided into five groups by algorithms, and within each group there are five bars
representing the win rate of the algorithm on the horizontal axis. (b) shows win rates of algorithms
in the label against MFQ algorithms which are on the horizontal axis. (c) shows the win rate of
CMFQ with different ϵ against other algorithms.

We further investigate the test scalability of CMFQ, MFQ, and Attention-MFQ. Firstly, we
train these three algorithms in 64 vs. 64 scenario with self-play, denoted as CMFQ64 , MFQ64 ,
Attention-MFQ64 respectively, and further train the MFQ algorithm in 100 vs. 100 and 400 vs. 400
scenarios, denoted as MFQ100 and MFQ400 . Then, allow CMFQ64 , MFQ64 , and Attention-MFQ64
to battle against MFQ64 , MFQ100 and MFQ400 in environments 64 vs. 64, 100 vs. 100, 400
vs. 400 respectively, that is, letting CMFQ, MFQ, and Attention-MFQ control more agents than
they were trained, to reveal the test scalability of the algorithms. As shown in Fig.5(b), the test
scalability of MFQ is the worst, which means that we need to retrain MFQ when the number of
agents increases and the test scalability of Attention-MFQ is slightly better. The test scalability of
CMFQ is significantly better than both of them. Furthermore, CMFQ achieves win rates of nearly
100% against MFQ100 and 32% against MFQ400 .
Ablations. We set two ablation
experiments. The first one to ablate
the effectiveness of causal effects in                                                                                                                                          Besiege                                                                                           Besiege


CMFQ. As illustrated in Fig.5(a), the
performance of Random is inferior to
MFQ, verifying the validity of     causal
                                Teaming up                                                                                                                                                                                  Teaming up


effect in CMFQ. The other one is
ablation for ϵ. As we analyze in 4.2,
ϵ is an adjustable parameter in the
interval [0, +∞]. As ϵ increases, the
effect of each interaction becomes                                                                                                                                      (a)                                                      (b)
smoother and eventually CMFQ
equal to MFQ when ϵ → +∞. From                                                                                                                  Figure 6: Visualization of CMFQ vs MFQ in 64 vs 64 en-
the Fig.5(c), we can see that as we                                                                                                             vironment. Red squares denote CMFQ, and blue squares
adjust ϵ from 0.001 to 1, the learning                                                                                                          denote MFQ, the vertical bar on the left side of the square
curve of CMFQ always converges,                                                                                                                 indicates its health point, and the surrounding circular area
and in the test environment, win rates                                                                                                          indicates its attack range. When agent attacks, an arrow will
of CMFQ always outperform other                                                                                                                 be extended to point at the attack target.
baselines. When ϵ is relatively large,
the win rate is close to that of MFQ.


                                                                                                                                                             7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Visualization Analysis. As illustrated in Fig.6(a), CMFQ learns the tactic of besieging, while
MFQ tends to confront frontally. The results in Fig.6(b) indicate the tricky issue in mixed
cooperative-competitive game: agents need to cooperate with their teammates to kill enemies,
whereas only the agent who hits a fatal attack gets the biggest reward rkill , driving agents hesitating
to attack first. When there are few agents, the policies of MFQ and CMFQ tend to be conservative.
However, CMFQ presents more advanced tactics: agents learn the trick of teaming up in the mixed
cooperative-competitive game. When an agent chooses to attack, the adjacent teammates will
arrive to help, achieving the maximum reward with the smallest cost of health. Moreover, Fig.6(b)
also shows that attacks of CMFQ are more focused than baselines. CMFQ can discriminate key
interactions and have a more accurate timing of attacks, while MFQ lacks this discriminatory ability
and thus keeps attacking.


5.2                                          C OOPERATIVE GAME

Task Setting. In this task, agents are divided
into predator and prey. Prey move 1.5 times
faster than predators, and their task is to avoid
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            $WWHQWLRQ 0)4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            0)4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          $WWHQWLRQ 0)4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          0)4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          &0)4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            &0)4
predators as much as possible. Predators are


                                                                                                                                                                              7RWDO 5HZDUG


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        7RWDO 5HZDUG

four times larger than prey and can attack but

not yield any damage. Predators only get re-



warded when they are close to prey. Therefore,

to gain the reward, they must cooperate with
                                                                                (SLVRGH

                                                                                                                                         (SLVRGH


other predators and try to surround prey with
their size advantage. In our experiments, to        (a) Total reward of Preda- (b) Total reward of Prey.
                                                    tor.
test the scalability of the CMFQ, we first train
MFQ, CMFQ, and Attention-MFQ employing
the self-play paradigm in a scenario involving                  Figure 7: Total reward during training.
20 predators and 40 prey, and then test them in
environments involving (20 predators, 40 prey), (80 predators, 160 prey), (180 predators, 360 prey)
respectively. The reward are set as follow: rattack = −0.2, rsurround = 1, rbe surrounded = −1.


                                                                                    CMFQ                                                                                                                            CMFQ                                                                                                               MFQ
                                                                                    Attention-MFQ                                                                                                                   MFQ                                                                                                                Attention-MFQ

  $YHUDJH 5HZDUG


                                                                                                     $YHUDJH 5HZDUG


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   $YHUDJH 5HZDUG


                                             î       î    î       î              î                                              î       î    î           î                              î                                                     î       î                      î       î                    î


                                            (a) MFQ controls prey.                                   (b) Attention-MFQ controls prey.                                                                                                                                        (c) CMFQ controls prey.

Figure 8: Total reward of predators during execution changes when the number of agents increases.
1× denotes Npredator =20, Nprey =40, 4× demotes Npredator =80, Nprey =160 and so on. All algo-
rithms are trained in the 1× environment.

Quantitative Results and Analysis. We compare CMFQ with MFQ and Attention-MFQ. First, we
investigate their training scalability in (20 predators, 40 prey), as shown in Fig.7(a) and Fig.7(b),
all of them converge to a stable reward total reward, verifying their training scalability. Then, we
enlarge the number of agents during execution to investigate their test scalability. To demonstrate
the scalability gap of different algorithms, we allow the algorithms to execute in an adversarial
form, which means that one algorithm controls the predator and another controls the prey. For
the environment, we change the number of agents to 1x, 4x, and 9x of the number in the training
environment.
Because the reward rbe surrounded of prey and the reward rsurround of predator are zero-sum and
cooperation exists mainly among predators, we use the total reward of predators to indicate each
algorithm’s performance. The results are shown in Fig.10. Total rewards in specific environment
indicate the train scalability, since a higher total reward means agents learn better policy during


                                                                                                                                                                          8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


training. Trends of lines are related to test scalability, and a more flat line indicates the better test
scalability of the algorithm. We can see that the total reward of Attention-MFQ is higher than that
of MFQ, and the trend is similar to that of MFQ. In comparison, the total reward of CMFQ is higher
than that of both MFQ and Attention- MFQ, and the trend is ever more flat, indicating that CMFQ
has better scalability.


Figure 9: Visualization of cooperative predator prey game. The first row is results of CMFQ,
the second row is results of Attention-MFQ. Npredator =20,Nprey =40 for the left column,
Npredator =40,Nprey =80 for the middle column, Npredator =180,Nprey =360 for the last column. Red
squares are predators while blue squares are prey, the grey squares are obstacles. All images are ob-
tained 400 steps after the game begin.

Visualization Analysis. The results that the trained CMFQ and Attention-MFQ controls predators
are shown in Fig.9. In the the environment that Npredator =20, Nprey =40, both CMFQ and Attention-
MFQ perform similarly. Predators learn two strategies: four predators cooperating to surround the
prey in an open area; two or three predators surrounding the prey with the help of obstacles. In the
environment that Npredator =40, Nprey =80, when the number of agents increases, predators con-
trolled by Attention-MFQ are more dispersed than predators controlled by CMFQ. Besides, MFQ
has more predators idle than CMFQ. Predators controlled by CMFQ gather on map edges, because
it is more efficient to surround prey with the help of map edges. In addition, predators controlled by
CMFQ learn an advanced strategy to drive prey to map edges then take advantage of the terrain to
surround them. In the environment that Npredator =180, Nprey =360, the advanced strategy is also
presented. Moreover, predators controlled by CMFQ master the skill to utilize the bodies of still
teammates who have captured prey as obstacles. Thus, predators controlled by CMFQ present a
high degree of aggregation and environmental adaptability.

6   C ONCLUSIONS

This paper aims at scalability problem in large-scale MAS. Firstly, We inherit the framework of
MFRL which significantly reduce the dimensionality of joint state-action space. To further handle
the intractable non-stationarity when the number of agent is large, we propose a SCM to model the
decision-making process, and enable agents to identify the more crucial interactions via intervening
on the SCM. Finally a causality-aware representation of population behavioral information could be
obtained by the weighted sum of the action of each agent according to its causal effect. Experiments
in two tasks reveal the excellent scalability of CMFQ.

R EFERENCES
Elias Bareinboim, Juan D Correa, Duligur Ibeling, and Thomas Icard. On pearl’s hierarchy and
  the foundations of causal inference. In Probabilistic and Causal Inference: The Works of Judea


                                                   9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


  Pearl, pp. 507–556. 2022.
Lawrence E Blume. The statistical mechanics of strategic interaction. Games and economic behav-
  ior, 5(3):387–424, 1993.
Ziluo Ding, Tiejun Huang, and Zongqing Lu. Learning individually inferred communication for
  multi-agent cooperation. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 33:22069–22079,
  2020.
Jakob Foerster, Gregory Farquhar, Triantafyllos Afouras, Nantas Nardelli, and Shimon Whiteson.
  Counterfactual multi-agent policy gradients. In Proceedings of the AAAI conference on artificial
  intelligence, volume 32, 2018.
Sven Gronauer and Klaus Diepold. Multi-agent deep reinforcement learning: a survey. Artificial
  Intelligence Review, April 2021. ISSN 1573-7462. doi: 10.1007/s10462-021-09996-w.
Xin Guo, Anran Hu, Renyuan Xu, and Junzi Zhang. Learning mean-field games. Advances in
  Neural Information Processing Systems, 32, 2019.
Shariq Iqbal and Fei Sha. Actor-attention-critic for multi-agent reinforcement learning. In Interna-
  tional conference on machine learning, pp. 2961–2970. PMLR, 2019.
Qian Long, Zihan Zhou, Abhibav Gupta, Fei Fang, Yi Wu, and Xiaolong Wang. Evolu-
  tionary population curriculum for scaling multi-agent reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2003.10423, 2020.
Ryan Lowe, Yi I Wu, Aviv Tamar, Jean Harb, OpenAI Pieter Abbeel, and Igor Mordatch. Multi-
  agent actor-critic for mixed cooperative-competitive environments. Advances in neural informa-
  tion processing systems, 30, 2017.
Igor Mordatch and Pieter Abbeel. Emergence of grounded compositional language in multi-agent
  populations. arXiv preprint arXiv:1703.04908, 2017.
Shayegan Omidshafiei, Dong-Ki Kim, Miao Liu, Gerald Tesauro, Matthew Riemer, Christopher
  Amato, Murray Campbell, and Jonathan P How. Learning to teach in cooperative multiagent
  reinforcement learning. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, vol-
  ume 33, pp. 6128–6136, 2019.
Judea Pearl. Direct and indirect effects. Probabilistic and Causal Inference: The Works of Judea
  Pearl, pp. 373, 2001.
Judea Pearl. Causal inference. In Isabelle Guyon, Dominik Janzing, and Bernhard Schölkopf (eds.),
  Proceedings of Workshop on Causality: Objectives and Assessment at NIPS 2008, volume 6 of
  Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pp. 39–58, Whistler, Canada, 12 Dec 2010. PMLR.
  URL https://proceedings.mlr.press/v6/pearl10a.html.
Judea Pearl. The seven tools of causal inference, with reflections on machine learning. Communi-
  cations of the ACM, 62(3):54–60, 2019.
Sarah Perrin, Mathieu Laurière, Julien Pérolat, Matthieu Geist, Romuald Élie, and Olivier Pietquin.
  Mean field games flock! the reinforcement learning way. In Proceedings of the Thirti-
  eth International Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence, California, August 2021. Interna-
  tional Joint Conferences on Artificial Intelligence Organization. ISBN 9780999241196. doi:
  10.24963/ijcai.2021/50.
Jonas Peters, Dominik Janzing, and Bernhard Schölkopf. Elements of causal inference: foundations
  and learning algorithms. The MIT Press, 2017.
Tabish Rashid, Mikayel Samvelyan, Christian Schroeder, Gregory Farquhar, Jakob Foerster, and
  Shimon Whiteson. Qmix: Monotonic value function factorisation for deep multi-agent reinforce-
  ment learning. In International conference on machine learning, pp. 4295–4304. PMLR, 2018.
Steven A Sloman and David Lagnado. Causality in thought. Annual review of psychology, 66:
  223–247, 2015.


                                                 10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


H Eugene Stanley. Phase transitions and critical phenomena, volume 7. Clarendon Press, Oxford,
  1971.
Peter Sunehag, Guy Lever, Audrunas Gruslys, Wojciech Marian Czarnecki, Vinicius Zambaldi, Max
  Jaderberg, Marc Lanctot, Nicolas Sonnerat, Joel Z Leibo, Karl Tuyls, et al. Value-decomposition
  networks for cooperative multi-agent learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:1706.05296, 2017.
Katia P Sycara. Multiagent systems. AI magazine, 19(2):79–79, 1998.
Ardi Tampuu, Tambet Matiisen, Dorian Kodelja, Ilya Kuzovkin, Kristjan Korjus, Juhan Aru, Jaan
  Aru, and Raul Vicente. Multiagent cooperation and competition with deep reinforcement learning.
  PloS one, 12(4):e0172395, 2017.
Dimo I Uzunov. Introduction to the theory of critical phenomena: mean field, fluctuations and
  renormalization. World Scientific, 1993.
Oriol Vinyals, Igor Babuschkin, Wojciech M Czarnecki, Michaël Mathieu, Andrew Dudzik, Juny-
  oung Chung, David H Choi, Richard Powell, Timo Ewalds, Petko Georgiev, et al. Grandmaster
  level in starcraft ii using multi-agent reinforcement learning. Nature, 575(7782):350–354, 2019.
Baolai Wang, Shengang Li, Xianzhong Gao, and Tao Xie. Weighted mean field reinforcement
  learning for large-scale uav swarm confrontation. Applied Intelligence, pp. 1–16, 2022.
Bin Wu. Hierarchical macro strategy model for moba game ai. In Proceedings of the AAAI Confer-
  ence on Artificial Intelligence, volume 33, pp. 1206–1213, 2019.
Tingyu Wu, Wenhao Li, Bo Jin, Wei Zhang, and Xiangfeng Wang. Weighted mean-field multi-
  agent reinforcement learning via reward attribution decomposition. In International Conference
  on Database Systems for Advanced Applications, pp. 301–316. Springer, 2022.
Kevin Xia, Kai-Zhan Lee, Yoshua Bengio, and Elias Bareinboim. The causal-neural connection:
  Expressiveness, learnability, and inference. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems,
  34:10823–10836, 2021.
Yaodong Yang, Rui Luo, Minne Li, Ming Zhou, Weinan Zhang, and Jun Wang. Mean field multi-
  agent reinforcement learning. In International conference on machine learning, pp. 5571–5580.
  PMLR, 2018.
Matej Zečević, Devendra Singh Dhami, Petar Veličković, and Kristian Kersting. Relating graph
 neural networks to structural causal models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2109.04173, 2021.
Kaiqing Zhang, Zhuoran Yang, and Tamer Başar. Multi-Agent reinforcement learning: A selective
  overview of theories and algorithms. November 2019.
Lianmin Zheng, Jiacheng Yang, Han Cai, Ming Zhou, Weinan Zhang, Jun Wang, and Yong Yu.
  Magent: A many-agent reinforcement learning platform for artificial collective intelligence. In
  Proceedings of the AAAI conference on artificial intelligence, volume 32, 2018.


                                               11
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


A    I MPLEMENTATION DETAILS

The pseudocode of CMFQ is listed below.

Algorithm 1 Causal Mean Field Q-learning
Input: Initialize state s0 ; Qθi , Qθ− , ǎi0 for all agent i ∈ {1, 2, · · · , N }; trajectory length M ;
                                        i
  while in the training loop do
        for t = 0, 1, · · · , M do
             for i = 1, 2, · · · , N do
                  Calculate policy πti (· | st , āit−1 ) with average merged agent;
                  Calculate causal effect for every neighborhood agent by Eq.(7);
                  Obtain a new merged agent ǎit−1 and a new policy πti (· | st , ǎit−1 ) by Eq.(10);
             end for
             Sample joint action a = [a1 , a2 , · · · , aN ] from [πt1 , πt2 , · · · , πtN ]
             obtain the next state st+1 and the reward r = [r1 , r2 , · · · , rN ] and merged agent ǎ =
  [ǎ1t−1 , ǎ2t−1 , · · · , ǎN
                               t−1 ];
             Store transition < st , a, r, st+1 , ǎ > in replay buffer;
        end for
        for i = 1, 2, · · · , N do
             Sample a minibatch transition from replay buffer;
             Calculate Li and update θi by Eq.(12);
             Updata target network by θi− = θi after every C updates of θi ;
        end for
  end while


B    D ERIVATION FOR THE BOUND OF THE L AGRANGE REMAINDER

As s, ai in Qi (s, ai , ai,k ) are fixed parameter in the derivation of Eq.(9), for simplicity, the pairwise
Q-function Qi (s, ai , ai,k ) can be rewrite as Q(ak ) in the following. We assume that ak is a one-hot
encoding for n actions, to make Q(ak ) more general, we replace the discrete ak (ak ∈ RN ) by a
continuous x (x ∈ RN ) which don’t violate the domain of the parameterized Q-function. Given the
Q (x) is L-smooth, then for any two points x, y ∈ dom (Q) ⊆ RN , there exists a Lipschitz constant
L ∈ [0, +∞) that

                                  ∥∇Q(x) − ∇Q(y)∥2 < L∥x − y∥2                                         (13)

By the first order Taylor expansion with Lagrange remainder, we have
                              ∇Q (y) = ∇Q (x) + ∇2 Q (x) · u + R (u)                                   (14)

where u = y − x, limu→0 R(u)
                        ∥u∥2 = 0. Assume x ̸= y, then we can reform the first order Taylor
expansion
                ∥∇2 Q(x) · u∥2   ∥∇Q(y) − ∇Q(x) − R(u)∥2
                               =
                     ∥u∥2                  ∥u∥2
                                 ∥∇Q(y) − ∇Q(x)∥2      ∥R(u)∥2
                               ≤                    +                                 (15)
                                       ∥u∥2             ∥u∥2
                                     ∥R(u)∥2
                               ≤L+           , ∀x, y ∈ dom(Q), x ̸= y
                                      ∥u∥2

u could be the eigenvalue of ∇2 Q (x), then Eq.(15) can be convert to

                         ∥∇2 Q(x) · u∥2   ∥λu∥2             ∥R(u)∥2
                                        =       =| λ |≤ L +                                            (16)
                             ∥u∥2          ∥u∥2              ∥u∥2

                                                    12
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Obviously, we can obtain the bound of λ, λ ∈ [−L, L]. ∇2 Q (x) is a real  symmetric        matrix, so
                                                              2                    T   2
there exist an orthogonal matrix U to diagonalize ∇ Q (x) such that U ∇ Q (x) U = Λ ≜
                                                 i      i,k
diag [λ1 , λ2 , . . . , λN ]. Then the bound of Rs,ai (a    ) can be derived as follow

                                                                             N
     i      i,k      1 i,k 2                 1            T            1X                   2
                       δa ·∇ Q ak · δai,k =     U · δai,k Λ U · δai,k =        λn U · δai,k n

    Rs,ai (a    )=
                     2                       2                           2 n=1
                                                                                           (17)
                                           N
                                           X               2
                         −L∥U · δai,k ∥2 ≤   λn U · δai,k n ≤ L∥U · δai,k ∥2               (18)
                                            n=1

where U · δai,k n refers to the nth element of vector U · δai,k .

              ∥U · δai,k ∥2 = ∥δai,k ∥2 = (ai,k − ǎi )T (ai,k − ǎi )
                                   T                                     T                            (19)
                             = ai,k ai,k + ǎiT ǎi − ǎiT ai,k − ǎi ai,k = 2(1 − ǎin ) ≤ 2

where ai,k is a one-hot encoding action, ǎin denotes the nth element in ǎi . Finally, according to
                                       i      i,k
Eq.(17) Eq.(18) Eq.(19), the bound of Rs,ai (a    ) is [−L, L].


C      V ISUALIZATION FOR THE WEIGHTS OF CMFQ AND ATTENTION -MFQ

To further analyze the reasons why CMFQ is more effective than Attention-MFQ empirically, we
randomly select an agent in the mixed cooperative-competitive game task and visualize its weight.
Some interesting observations can be made from Fig.10(a). First of all, it makes sense that the agents
on the front line will be given high weights because they are battling. Secondly, the weights of agents
at the edge of the front line are relatively small, possibly because these agents can cooperate with
nearby teammates to attack an enemy due to their position advantages, so they are in a relatively
dominant state. In addition, agents at the very edge of the front line are given higher weights, even
if they are out of combat. This is because they are in a position to flank their opponents and work
with their teammates to surround the opponents. In Fig.10(b), we observe a result consistent with
the analysis in our paper. That is, the attention-based method uses the attributes of other agents to
calculate the attention scores, and observation is an important part of the attributes, so it tends to
give high weight to the agents nearby because their observations are similar.


          (a) The weights obtained by CMFQ.              (b) The weights obtained by Attention-MFQ.

Figure 10: The two figures visualize the mixed cooperative-competitive task, where each agent in
the blue team in (a) is controlled by CMFQ and each agent in the blue team in (b) is controlled
by Attention-MFQ. Each agent in the red team is controlled by MFQ. We label the agents in the
blue team whose weights are visualized in green. The number above the blue agent represents the
normalized weight given by the green agent to the pairwise interaction between them. Due to space
constraints, the integer bits of all weights are omitted



                                                    13
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


D    S UPPLEMENTAL EXPERIMENT ON MPE
To further investigate the applicability of CMFQ, we perform an experiment on another environment
named multi-agent particle environment (MPE)(Mordatch & Abbeel, 2017). As the dimentionality
of action-state space will change as the initial number of agent changes, making it difficult to verify
scalability, but we believe that CMFQ’s scalability performance has been adequately validated in
previous experiments. For MPE, we tested the predator prey task in MPE when the number of
agents was the same as that in the training environment, and compared it with 5.2 to see whether
the same conclusions could be drawn in the two environments.

Task Setting. There are 20 predators, 40 preys,
and 20 obstacles. Predator gets rcollide = 10
                                                                                                                                                                            $WWHQWLRQ 0)4

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         $WWHQWLRQ 0)4


if it collide with prey. Prey gets rbe collided =
                                                                                                                                                                            0)4
                                                                                                                                                                            &0)4


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         0)4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         &0)4


−10 if it collided with predator. The speed of


                                                       $YHUDJH 5HZDUG SHU 6WHS


                                                                                                                                                                                                          $YHUDJH 5HZDUG SHU 6WHS


prey is 1.3 times of that of predator. In order


to make preys learn to leverage obstacles in-



stead of running to infinity, we manually draws

                                                                                                                                         (SLVRGH

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    (SLVRGH


an area. If preys go beyond this area, they will     (a) Average reward of (b) Average reward of
get penalty rbound which will be aggravate as        Predator.               Prey.
the distance preys go beyond this area increase,
until rbound = −10. We trained MFQ, CMFQ               Figure 11: Average reward during training.
and Attention-MFQ in the self-play paradigm.
The training curve is shown in Fig.11.
Quantitative Results and AnalysisIn the test phase, we controlled 20 Predators and 40 prey with
different algorithms respectively, test 10 times and calculated the average reward of each algorithm,
as shown in Table.1. First, the average reward of MFQ is lower than CMFQ and Attention-MFQ,
regardless of whether it controls predators or preys. This indicates that the representational ability
of average merged agent is insufficient. Secondly, when MFQ controls prey, the average predator
reward of CMFQ is higher than Attention-MFQ, indicating that the weight obtained by CMFQ was
more representational. Finally, in the comparison between CMFQ and Attention-MFQ, CMFQ out-
performs Attention-MFQ in both predator reward and prey reward, further confirms the superiority
of CMFQ. In the task that the number of agents in testing was the same as that in the training, We
compare the performance of MFQ, CMFQ, and Attention-MFQ and come to the same conclusion
consistent with 5.2, empirically certify the applicability of CMFQ.

             Predator           Predator reward                                              Prey                                                                                                        Prey reward
               MFQ                   4.23                                                   CMFQ                                                                                                             -8.64
              CMFQ                   6.68                                                    MFQ                                                                                                            -13.05
               MFQ                   4.01                                               Attention-MFQ                                                                                                        -8.47
          Attention-MFQ              6.05                                                    MFQ                                                                                                            -12.46
              CMFQ                   3.15                                               Attention-MFQ                                                                                                       -11.07
          Attention-MFQ              3.02                                                   CMFQ                                                                                                             -4.23

Table 1: Results that let two different algorithm control predators and preys respectively. Predator
reward is the average reward a predator obtain every step. Prey reward is the average reward a prey
obtain every step.


                                                  14
