Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


D ISCOVERING B UGS IN V ISION M ODELS USING O FF -
THE - SHELF I MAGE G ENERATION AND C APTIONING

 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                             A BSTRACT

         Automatically discovering failures in vision models under real-world settings
         remains an open challenge. This work shows how off-the-shelf, large-scale, image-
         to-text and text-to-image models, trained on vast amounts of data, can be leveraged
         to automatically find such failures. In essence, a conditional text-to-image genera-
         tive model is used to generate large amounts of synthetic, yet realistic, inputs given
         a ground-truth label. A captioning model is used to describe misclassified inputs.
         Descriptions are used in turn to generate more inputs, thereby assessing whether
         specific descriptions induce more failures than expected. As failures are grounded
         to natural language, we automatically obtain a high-level, human-interpretable
         explanation of each failure. We use this pipeline to demonstrate that we can effec-
         tively interrogate classifiers trained on I MAGE N ET to find specific failure cases
         and discover spurious correlations. We also show that we can scale the approach to
         generate adversarial datasets targeting specific classifier architectures. This work
         demonstrates the utility of large-scale generative models to automatically discover
         bugs in vision models in an open-ended manner. We also describe a number of
         limitations and pitfalls related to this approach.



1    I NTRODUCTION

Deep learning has enabled breakthroughs in a wide variety of fields (Goodfellow et al., 2016;
Krizhevsky et al., 2012; Hinton et al., 2012), and deep neural networks are ubiquitous in many
applications, including autonomous driving (Bojarski et al., 2016) and medical imaging (De Fauw
et al., 2018). Unfortunately, these models are known to exhibit numerous failures arising from using
shortcuts and spurious correlations (Geirhos et al., 2020a; Arjovsky et al., 2019; Torralba et al., 2011;
Kuehlkamp et al., 2017). As a result, they can fail catastrophically when training and deployment
data differ (Buolamwini & Gebru, 2018). Hence, it is important to ensure that models are robust and
generalize to new deployment settings.
Yet, only a few tools exist to automatically find failure cases on unseen data. Some methods analyze
the performance of models by collecting new datasets (usually by scraping the web). These datasets
must be large enough to obtain some indication of how models perform on a particular subset of
inputs (Hendrycks et al., 2019; 2020; Recht et al., 2019). Other methods rely on expertly crafted,
synthetic (and often unrealistic) datasets that highlight particular shortcomings (Geirhos et al., 2022;
Xiao et al., 2020).
In this work, we present a methodology to automatically find failure cases of image classifiers in
an open-ended manner, without prior assumptions on the types of failures and how they arise. We
leverage off-the-shelf, large-scale, text-to-image, generative models, such as DALL·E 2 (Ramesh
et al., 2022), I MAGEN (Saharia et al., 2022) or S TABLE -D IFFUSION (Rombach et al., 2022), to obtain
realistic images that can be reliably manipulated using the text prompt. We also leverage captioning
models, such as F LAMINGO (Alayrac et al., 2022) or L EMON (Hu et al., 2021), to retrieve human-
interpretable descriptions of each failure case. This provides the following advantages: (i) generative
models trained on web-scale datasets can be re-used and have broad non-domain-specific coverage;
(ii) they demonstrate basic compositionality, can generate novel data and can faithfully capture the
essence of (most) prompts, thereby allowing images to be realistically manipulated; (iii) textual


                                                   1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


descriptions of failures can be easily interpreted (even by non-experts) and interrogated (e.g., by
performing counterfactual analyses). Overall, our contributions are as follows:

• We describe a methodology to discover failures of image classifiers trained on I MAGE N ET (Deng
  et al., 2009). To the contrary of prior work, we leverage off-the-shelf generative models, thereby
  avoiding the need to collect new datasets or to rely on manually crafted synthetic images.
• Our approach surfaces failures that are human-interpretable by clustering and captioning inputs on
  which classifiers fail. These captions can be modified to produce alternative hypotheses of why
  failures occur allowing insights into the limitations of a given model.
• We demonstrate the scalability of the approach by generating adversarial datasets (akin to
  I MAGE N ET-A; Hendrycks et al., 2019). In contrast to I MAGE N ET-A, our new generated datasets
  align more closely with the original training distribution from I MAGE N ET and generalize to
  multiple classifier architectures.

Importantly, while this work focuses on vision models trained on I MAGE N ET, it is neither limited to
I MAGE N ET nor the visual domain. It serves as a proof-of-concept that demonstrates how large-scale,
off-the-shelf, generative models (Bommasani et al., 2021) can be combined to automate the discovery
of bugs in machine learning models and produce compelling, interpretable descriptions of model
failures. The approach is agnostic to the model architecture, which can be treated as a black box.

2    R ELATED W ORK
Model failures. Spurious correlations can entice models to learn unintended shortcuts that obtain
high accuracy on the training set but fail to generalize (Lapuschkin et al., 2019; Geirhos et al., 2020a).
Recht et al. (2019) show that the accuracy of I MAGE N ET models is impacted by changes in the
data collection process, while Torralba et al. (2011); Khosla et al. (2012); Choi et al. (2012) explore
how contextual bias affects generalization. Mania et al. (2019) demonstrate that models trained on
I MAGE N ET make consistent mistakes with one another and Geirhos et al. (2020b) show that these
mistakes are not necessarily consistent with human judgment.

Evaluation datasets. Understanding how model failures arise and empirically analyzing their
consequences often requires collecting and annotating new test datasets. Hendrycks et al. (2019)
collected datasets of natural adversarial examples (I MAGE N ET-A and I MAGE N ET-O) to evaluate
how model performance degrades when inputs have limited spurious cues. Hendrycks et al. (2020)
collected four real-world datasets (including I MAGE N ET-R) to understand how models behave under
distribution shifts. In many cases, particular shortcomings can only be explored using synthetic
datasets (Cimpoi et al., 2013). Hendrycks & Dietterich (2018) introduced I MAGE N ET-C, a synthetic
set of common corruptions. Geirhos et al. (2018) propose to use images with a texture-shape cue
conflict to evaluate the propensity of models to over-emphasize texture cues. Xiao et al. (2020);
Sagawa et al. (2020) investigate whether models are biased towards background cues by compositing
foreground objects with various background images (I MAGE N ET-9, WATERBIRDS). In all cases,
building such datasets is time-consuming and requires expert knowledge.

Automated failure discovery. In some instances, it is possible to distill rules or specifications
that constrain the input space enough to enable the automated discovery of failures via optimization
or brute-force search. In vision tasks, adversarial examples, which are constructed using `p -norm
bounded perturbations of the input, can cause neural networks to make incorrect predictions with
high confidence (Carlini & Wagner, 2017a;b; Goodfellow et al., 2014; Kurakin et al., 2016; Szegedy
et al., 2013). In language tasks, some efforts manually compose templates to generate test cases for
specific failures (Jia & Liang, 2017; Garg et al., 2019; Ribeiro et al., 2020). Such approaches rely on
human creativity and are intrinsically difficult to scale. Several works (Baluja & Fischer, 2017; Song
et al., 2018; Xiao et al., 2018; Qiu et al., 2019; Wong & Kolter, 2021; Laidlaw et al., 2020; Gowal
et al., 2019) go beyond hard-coded rules by leveraging generative and perceptual models. However,
such approaches are difficult to automate as it is unclear how to relate specific latent variables to
isolated structures of the original input. Finally, we highlight a concurrent work (Ge et al., 2022),
which leverages captioning and text-to-image models to construct background images to evaluate
(and improve) an object detector. Their approach requires compositing the resulting images with
foreground objects and is not open-ended, in the sense that it requires a dataset of background images.
Perhaps, the work by Perez et al. (2022) on red-teaming language models is the most similar to ours.


                                                    2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Perez et al. demonstrate how to prompt a language model to automatically generate test cases to
probe another language model for toxic and other unintended output.
Interpretability. Interpretability techniques aim to explain a rationale behind individual model
predictions. They surface information that allows a user to inspect how a model behaves. Casper et al.
(2022) demonstrate that feature-level attacks, which create adversarial patches, can help diagnose
brittle feature associations. However, much like L IME (Ribeiro et al., 2016) or G RAD -C AM (Selvaraju
et al., 2019), the results are difficult to understand. Other works (Abid et al., 2022; Jain et al., 2022a;
Eyuboglu et al., 2022) leverage auxiliary information in the form of attributes or image-to-text
embeddings (e.g., from C LIP; Radford et al., 2021) to provide explanations in natural language.
However, these methods often rely on an additional dataset which limits their scope.

3    M ETHOD
Notation. We consider a classifier f : X ! Y, where X is the set of inputs (i.e., images) and Y
is the label set. We also assume that inputs x 2 X with label y 2 Y are drawn from an underlying
distribution p(x|z, y) conditioned on latent representations z 2 Z. In the context of this specific work,
z is a textual description of the image x. We are interested in discovering captions z corresponding
to images x ⇠ p(x|z, y) with label y that lead to significantly higher misclassification rates than
generic images drawn from the marginal distribution p(x|y) conditioned solely on the label. Formally,
given a label y, we would like to find z with
                                     E       [f (x) 6= y] >       E      [f (x) 6= y]                              (1)
                                x⇠p(x|z,y)                    x⇠p(x|y)

where [·] represents the Iverson bracket. We may also be interested in identifying specific misclassifi-
cations towards a wrong (target) label ȳ 6= y, and would like that
                                     E       [f (x) = ȳ] >      E       [f (x) = ȳ] .                            (2)
                                x⇠p(x|z,y)                    x⇠p(x|y)


As we do not have access to the true underlying distributions p(x|z, y) and p(x|y), we leverage a
large-scale text-to-image model (such as DALL·E 2 or I MAGEN) to approximate them. Similarly,
we approximate p(z|x, y) with a captioning model (e.g., F LAMINGO or L EMON). We denote
approximations of these distributions with the symbol p̂.
    For each of the following steps, we highlight additional implementation details and explain how
    we construct prompts for the text-to-image and image-to-text models. Some minute details are
    omitted as to not break anonymity and will be added later.

Generating failure cases. Our approach is described in Fig. 1. It consists of initially finding
baseline failures for the underlying model f by sampling inputs x from p̂(x|y).1 Given a label of
interest y, the output of this step is a set D = {xi ⇠ p̂(x|y)}N
                                                               i=1 (where N is the number of images
we wish to generate), a set Dfail = {x 2 D|f (x) 6= y} and an estimate of the baseline failure rate
|Dfail |/N (corresponding to the right-hand side of Eq. 1). In this work, we consider problematic
misclassifications only so we restrict ourselves to failures where any of the top-3 predicted labels are
not under the same parent as the true label y in the W ORD N ET hierarchy (Miller, 1995).2
    This step leverages a text-to-image generative model conditioned on y with prompts such as “a
    realistic photograph of a fly (insect).”, which are automatically generated from the corresponding
    class and W ORD N ET hierarchy. As our domain of interest is composed of real images (much
    like the images in I MAGE N ET), the prompt is designed to enforce the generation of photographs
    of real objects and animals rather than drawings or paintings. Further prompt engineering can
    be explored to find failures on a wide variety of domains (such as sketches or medical imaging;
    Hendrycks et al., 2020; Kather et al., 2022).

    1
      In practice, it is possible to steer the generation process to induce more frequent failures (e.g., by optimizing
latents or conditioning via gradient ascent on the cross-entropy loss; Wong & Kolter, 2021). However, as a
proof-of-concept, we assume only black-box access to off-the-shelf text-to-image model.
    2
      Other options include considering only misclassifications where the true label is not in the top-k predicted
labels or where the confidence in the true label is lower than a predefined threshold.


                                                          3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


            x ⇠ p̂(x|y)                            z ⇠ p̂(z|x, y)

                                                                                         x ⇠ p̂(x|z, y)


       Ex⇠p(x|y) [f (x) 6= y]
                                                                                    Ex⇠p(x|y,z) [f (x) 6= y]


Figure 1: Diagram of our method. The method starts by generating images containing a given class y to
measure the baseline failure rate of that class (right-hand side of Eq. 1). We construct a textual description for
each misclassified image. This description is used to produce new images and measure the failure rate on images
corresponding to that description (left-hand side of Eq. 1). The final description can be edited (manually or
automatically) to understand the source of the failures.


Optional clustering failure cases. Clustering is not necessary, but makes the search for the caption
z leading to high failure rates more efficient and computationally manageable. First, we split Dfail
                                    (1)           (|Y|)          (y)
by predicted label, i.e. Dfail = Dfail [ . . . [ Dfail , where Dfail = {x 2 Dfail |f (x) = y}. Then,
                 (y)
for each subset Dfail , we group inputs that have similar feature representations together (e.g., using
the cosine distance between intermediate activations of a pretrained model). Many other choices
of clustering method exist. The goal of this step is to reduce the number of clusters to a minimum
without amalgamating different causes of failure together.3

Failure case captioning. For each cluster A ✓ Dfail , we would like to find a caption zA that
describes it. Grounding failures in simple textual descriptions allows us to maintain the diversity
of the generated images: the generated images resemble the images leading to the original failure
without being exact copies. Ideally, we would like to find Q    the caption zA that maximizes the
likelihood of sampling elements of A, i.e., zA = arg maxz x2A P̂ (x|z, y). We may wish to
impose constraints on zA , such as a maximum number of words or sentences.4 Finding such a caption
is computationally hard and measuring exact likelihoods P̂ (x|z, y) can be challenging. Hence, we
resort to sampling captions directly from a captioning model p̂(z|x, y) for each image of cluster
A.5 Captions are split into sentences, resulting in a set of sentences S. Sentences are greedily
combined (up to a maximum number of sentences K) to maximize    Q       the likelihood of sampling
the overall captionQzA = [s1 , . . . , sK ] with sj = arg maxs2S x2A P̂ ([s1 , . . . , sj 1 , s]|x, y) and
s1 = arg maxs2S x2A P̂ ([s]|x, y). If no clustering is performed, we can directly sample a caption
z{x} ⇠ p̂(z|x, y) from the captioning model for each element x in Dfail . Each caption serves as a
failure hypothesis.

   3
      Wrongful clustering may lead the next step to produce descriptions that fail to induce more failures. As
a result, we may miss failures that we would have discovered without clustering, but the failures that we do
discover remain valid.
    4
      These constraints guarantee that captions remain simple and not overly descriptive.
    5
      This formulation implicitly assumes that any caption is as likely as another under a given label y, which in
general does not hold true, but serves as a reasonable approximation.


                                                         4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


    This step leverages an image-to-text captioning model and forces descriptive completions via
    few-shot prompting. In particular, we use three shots, with each shot being an image and caption
    pair. Images are publicly available online and are manually described using between four to seven
    short sentences that describe the subject of the photograph and its physical position with respect
    to the camera, as well as the background or context in which the subject appears (see Appendix A
    for more details). To condition on y, we force the captioning model to only consider completions
    to the original baseline prompt, which guarantees that the final caption contains the true label.
    An example of a resulting caption is “a realistic photograph of a fly (insect). the background is
    blurred. the fly is in focus. it is on a yellow flower. the background is green.” Each caption serves
    as a failure hypothesis.


Measuring failure rates of hypotheses. For each failure hypothesis or caption zA , we can measure
its failure rate via sampling Ex⇠p(x|zA ,y) [f (x) 6= y].This step allows us to surface captions z ? that
satisfy Eq. 1 (or alternatively Eq. 2) by comparing the resulting failure rate with the baseline failure
rate obtained initially.
    Much like the first step on generating the baseline failure cases, this step uses the text-to-image
    model, which we now prompt with descriptive cluster captions such as “a realistic photograph of
    a fly (insect). the background is blurred. the fly is in focus. it is on a yellow flower. the background
    is green.”


Caption refinement and counterfactual analysis. Given a caption z ? , we would like to provide
a shorter, self-contained caption that obtains a similar failure rate. For this step, we rely on simple
rules6 and evaluate promising caption rewrites. Finally, as captions are human-readable, users can
interact with the system and test alternative hypotheses.
     In our implementation, we exploit two rules: (i) we evaluate all individual sentences (for our
     ongoing example, these would be “the background is blurred”, “the fly is in focus”, “it is on
     a yellow flower” and “the background is green”) in conjunction with the original prompt (e.g.,
    “a realistic photograph of a fly (insect)”); (ii) the most promising prompt is further refined by
     dropping adjectives (such as “yellow” in “it is on a yellow flower”). More sophisticated rules
     and rewrites are possible (Ribeiro et al., 2018). Alternatively, we could leverage a large-language
     model via few-shot prompting to automate this process (Witteveen & Andrews, 2019).

Finally, we note that it is possible to use part of this pipeline to understand known failure cases (e.g.,
on failures reported by external users of the model f ).

4     R ESULTS

In this section, we elaborate on two use-cases. In the first, we find failure cases of a Residual Network
(R ES N ET) (He et al., 2016) model with 50 layers (R ES N ET-50), trained on I MAGE N ET, in an
open-ended manner. We focus on three arbitrarily chosen labels and show that the failures we obtain
arise from consistent misclassifications caused by spurious correlations. In the second use-case, we
show that we can generate failures at scale for various models. We leverage I MAGE N ET-A as a source
of initial failures and create new variants of I MAGE N ET-A that target specific model architectures.

4.1    O PEN - ENDED FAILURE SEARCH
Setup. We evaluate a R ES N ET-50 trained on I MAGE N ET and available on T F -H UB.7 We select
three labels y at random: Persian cat, fly and crayfish. For each label y, we manually
select target labels ȳ (snow leopard, bee and chainlink fence respectively) and execute
the protocol defined in Sec. 3. At each step, we sample images from the generative model until we
gather 20 images that are misclassified as the target label ȳ and compute failure rates at that point.
Fig. 2 and Table 1 show these automatically discovered failures. More failures for additional true and
    6
      This may seem at odds with our claim on open-endedness. However, we note that this step is optional and
its goal is simply to produce shorter failure descriptions.
    7
      https://tfhub.dev/google/imagenet/resnet_v2_50/classification/5


                                                     5
 Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


   (a) Persian cat ! Snow leopard                       (b) Fly ! Bee                           (c) Crayfish ! Chainlink fence

Figure 2: Distribution of failures of a R ES N ET-50 for the baseline and automatically discovered captions
for three true and target label pairs. For each panel, failures resulting from the baseline caption are on
the left and failures resulting from the discovered caption are on the right. We show the top-15 mistakes and
three randomly sampled images for each caption. We highlight in red the bar corresponding to the target label.
Absolute failure rates are given in Table 1.

  True label    Target label       Caption                                                          Failure rate (any)   Failure rate (target)
                                   a realistic photograph of a Persian cat (domestic animal).        0.11%         1⇥     0.00022%           1⇥
  Persian cat   Snow leopard
                                   — ” — the background is green.                                    0.64%         6⇥     0.0032%          14⇥
                                   a realistic photograph of a fly (insect).                         0.48%         1⇥     0.0014%            1⇥
  Fly           Bee
                                   — ” — it is on a flower.                                          4.11%         9⇥     0.72%           497⇥
                                   a realistic photograph of a crayfish (crustacean).                0.93%         1⇥     0.00047%           1⇥
  Crayfish      Chainlink fence
                                   — ” — it is in a net.                                             6.31%         7⇥     1.73%          3721⇥



Table 1: Absolute failure rates of a R ES N ET-50 for three true and target label pairs. We show the total
failure rate (i.e., the model prediction is different from the true label) and the target failure rate (i.e., the model
prediction is the target label). Captions are automatically discovered using the method detailed in Sec. 3.8


target label pairs are in Sec. B.1 in the appendix. In Sec. B.1, we also evaluate other architectures (i.e.,
V ITs) and demonstrate that the discovered captions yield failure rates that are statistically significant.

 Discovered failures. Fig. 2(a) shows the distribution of failures for the baseline label Persian
 cat. We observe that the most frequent confusion, on images generated using the baseline caption
“a realistic photograph of a Persian cat (domestic animal).” is with lynx. This mistake arises about
 0.1% of the time and constitutes 87.3% of all failures. In comparison, the confusion with snow
 leopard is rather infrequent and arises only 0.00022% of the time. Our approach automatically
 discovers that adding “the background is green.” to the caption results in a large increase in failure
 rates. Failures are 5.72⇥ more likely and the model is 14.3⇥ more likely to predict snow leopard.
 We generally observe that mistakes with wild animals become more prevalent when the cat is outdoors.
 Similarly, Fig. 2(b) and Fig. 2(c) show failures on images of flies and crayfish, respectively. Flies on
 flowers are significantly more likely to be confused for bees when they are on flowers (497⇥), while
 crayfish in nets are more frequently confused as chainlink fences (3721⇥), honeycomb, window
 screens or spider webs. These highlight two shortcomings of the underlying classifier: (i) the
 over-reliance on spurious cues (such as the flower); (ii) the inability to determine which object is the
 main subject of a photograph (e.g., which of the net or crayfish is important).

 Generalizability of failure descriptions. To verify that the discovered failures are not specific
 to the text-to-image model used in this manuscript and do not result from artifacts in the image
 generation process, we generate 30 images using the baseline and discovered captions with DALL·E 2
 and S TABLE -D IFFUSION (samples are shown in Fig. 13 and Fig. 14 in the appendix). We evaluate
    8
      As a point of comparison, we can also evaluate the baseline failure rates on images from the I MAGE N ET test
set. For Persian cat, fly and crayfish the baseline failure rates are 16%, 8% and 18%, respectively
(the target failure rate is 0% for all labels). These failure rates are higher than on images generated by the
generative model, this is perhaps indicating that the generative model produces images that are more canonical
and conservative. We also point out that we generate 9.1M samples to compute the first row of the table, 625K
for the second and 1.4M, 2.8K, 4.3M, 1.2K for the subsequent rows.


                                                                  6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023



   mushroom   jack-o’-lantern   bee       soap dispensor       robin        agama     vulture          flagpole


Figure 3: Examples of failures automatically found in I N -G-R N. The correct label is to the left in green. The
incorrect prediction is to the right in red. Images are not watermarked upon classification.


the failure rates for the fly and crayfish labels (which exhibited higher failure rates). With
DALL·E 2, for the 30 images generated with the prompt “a realistic photograph of a fly (insect).”, 18
are correctly classified as flies and none are classified as bees. When adding “it is on a flower.” to the
prompt, the overall failure rate increases (only 14 images are correctly classified) and nine images
are now classified as bees. Similarly, for “a realistic photograph of a crayfish (crustacean).”, 29
images are correctly classified as either crayfish, spiny lobster, American lobster,
Dungeness crab or king crab, while none are classified as chainlink fence. When
adding “it is in a net.”, four are classified as chainlink fence (with chainlink fence
appearing ten times in the top-3 predictions), while only 21 images are correctly classified. Results
are similar for S TABLE -D IFFUSION images.9 Overall, we observe that discovered failures generalize
across generative models. Finally, we also leverage Google Image Search10 to find 30 images for
each of the following queries: “fly”, “fly on flower”, “crayfish”, “crayfish in net” (images must
have a resolution of at least 256⇥256 and should contain the true label). We classify all images
and observe that the number of failures towards bee increases from zero to two and those towards
chainlink fence increase from zero to four. This illustrates again that discovered failures are
general and extend to real photographs.

4.2   A DVERSARIAL DATASET GENERATION AT SCALE

We demonstrate how to apply our automated pipeline to generate large datasets of failures. We seed
our search by captioning images from I MAGE N ET-A. We show that the discovered failures generalize
across initializations of a given model architecture and between models of different architectures.

Generating large-scale datasets. We assume that we have access to a set of captions that describe
potential failure cases.11 These captions are automatically extracted from the 7,500 images of
I MAGE N ET-A using the captioning model, limiting its output to two sentences maximum. For
each caption, we sample up to a thousand images keeping those leading to misclassifications and
limit the number of misclassified images kept per caption. We consider two models: a R ES N ET-50
(abbreviated hereafter by R N) and a Vision Transformer in its B/16 variant (Dosovitskiy et al., 2020),
abbreviated by V IT. Both models are trained solely on I MAGE N ET and achieve 76% and 80% top-1
accuracy, respectively. This yields two separate datasets of failures which we refer to as I N -G-R N
and I N -G-V IT that are of size 12,332 and 9,536 respectively.

Visualizations of failure cases. Samples from I N -G-R N are shown in Fig. 3, with true and predicted
labels. We can see that while the images clearly show the correct class, the model erroneously predicts
a different one. Additional samples for both I N -G-R N and I N -G-V IT are visible in Fig. 15 and
Fig. 16 (in the appendix). Appendix C provides an analysis for some failure cases found in I N -G-V IT
and details how images from the I MAGE N ET training set may have misled the classifier.

Generalizability of failure cases. To investigate whether the discovered failures generalize across
initializations, we train an additional R ES N ET (R N 2) and V IT (V IT 2) on I MAGE N ET with the exact
    9
      For S TABLE -D IFFUSION, the number of failures increases from one to two and from four to 16, for the fly
and crayfish labels, respectively.
   10
      https://images.google.com
   11
      This assumption is not necessary. However, it accelerates our search by generating images that are more
likely to induce failures.


                                                           7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                                                         Dataset                FID #     KID #
                                                                         I MAGE N ET-A          56.6     0.0460
                                                                         I N -G-R N             48.3     0.0305
                                                                         I N -G-V IT            53.9     0.0330
                                                                         I MAGE N ET (train)     2.3     0.0003

    Figure 4: Failure rates (top-3) for different models on two        Table 2: FID and KID scores. We
    generated datasets and I MAGE N ET. We report the failure          report FID and KID scores in relation
    rates of different models trained on I MAGE N ET.                  to I MAGE N ET (test).


same setup as our two original models but different random seeds. We also consider a large set of
additional models trained on I MAGE N ET and optionally pre-trained on larger datasets obtained from
T F -H UB. Fig. 4 shows the failure rates induced by both datasets on all models (failures are accounted
when the top-3 predictions do not include the true label). First, we observe that failures transfer
well between models of the same architecture. Indeed, 78% of the failures in I N -G-R N transfer
to R N 2, while the ones in I N -G-V IT transfer with 77% chance to V IT 2. Second, we observe that
failures for a given model architecture transfer to a large extent across architectures. Even when
large-scale pretraining is used (with the B IT-M (101x1), V IT-B/16 and V IT-B/32 models pretrained
on I MAGE N ET21K), failures transfer at a rate of 39-53% for I N -G-R N and 50-61% for I N -G-V IT.
Further results for additional models are in Sec. B.2 in the appendix.

Distribution shift. Finally, we compare our generated datasets to I MAGE N ET and I MAGE N ET-A.
The aim is to validate that we generate images that are similar to those in I MAGE N ET. We compute
the Fréchet Inception Distance (FID; Heusel et al., 2017) and the Kernel Inception Distance (KID;
Binkowski et al., 2018) between the generated images and the I MAGE N ET test set. Table 2 also shows
the FID and KID of the I MAGE N ET train set and I MAGE N ET-A. We find that our generated images
are more similar to those from I MAGE N ET under both metrics than those from I MAGE N ET-A.

5     D ISCUSSION AND LIMITATIONS
The motivation behind our work is to develop a proof-of-concept demonstrating that today’s large-
scale text-to-image and image-to-text models can be leveraged to find human-interpretable failures
in vision models. While we focus exclusively on I MAGE N ET, there are encouraging signs that
these generative models could be used to probe models trained on specialized tasks such as medical
imaging (Kather et al., 2022). Overall, there remain a number of key challenges to address.
Coverage. While our approach can successfully be used to demonstrate the presence of failures, it
is important to understand that (just like scraping the web) it cannot prove their absence. In other
words, there is no guarantee that it will discover all failures of a given model.12 Moreover, the
generative model is only an approximation of the distribution of interest and may lack coverage. For
example, it might almost never generate “a lawnmower falling down from the sky” (an actual image
from the I MAGE N ET training set; Jain et al., 2022b) when prompted with “a realistic photograph of
a lawnmower”. While this can help ground failures to scenes that are likely to occur in the real-world,
it also means that rare failures are unlikely to be discovered (see Fig. 5(a)).
Bias. While we take the view here that off-the-shelf large-scale generative models are trained on
diverse and unbiased data, the reality is far from it: these models mirror the distribution of images
and captions seen on the web. The generative model may over-sample particular regions of the image
manifold and, as a result, our approach is more likely to discover failures in these high-density regions
and miss failures pertaining to other regions (see Fig. 5(b)). Possible solutions to reduce bias include
clever prompting (which introduces expert knowledge) or discovering failure prompts more actively
by avoiding random sampling (e.g., through adversarial techniques).
  12
     However, if the generative model matches the true distribution of images, it is possible to provide meaningful
probabilistic guarantees.


                                                        8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


     (a) Coverage             (b) Bias         (c) Captioning issues (d) Generation issues (e) OOD sampling


Figure 5: Illustrative examples of various challenges. (a) Persian cats in snow (generated using “a realistic
photograph of a Persian cat (domestic animal). it is walking in the snow.”) are misclassified as snow leopards at
a rate of 0.016%, which is significantly higher than the failure rate of 0.0032% induced by the automatically
found caption (“— ” — the background is green.”); the total failure rate also increases twelve-fold to 8.15%
(from 0.64%). (b) It is estimated that only 1 in 10,000 crayfish turn blue. However, 9% of the images generated
using “a realistic photograph of a crayfish (crustacean).” contain a blue crayfish (estimated by manually looking
at 100 samples). (c) This image of a crayfish is misclassified as a chainlink fence. The output of the captioning
model for this particular image is “a realistic photograph of a crayfish. the crayfish is very detailed. the crayfish
is facing the camera. the crayfish is orange. it has two antennae.” While the caption describes the image, it does
not provide enough detail to reconstruct the image. (d) This image is generated from the caption “a realistic
photograph of a saltshaker (container). there is a lemon slice on the side of the salt shaker.” While the image
contains a lemon, the true class y (saltshaker) is not visible. (e) Generated with the caption “a realistic
photograph of a ladybug (insect). it is in a plastic bag.”, this image illustrates that text-to-image models can
create image that are not from the intended distribution (i.e., of realistic photographs).



Captioning issues. Using captions as our latent representation allows our approach to produce
human-interpretable explanations and constrains our search to failures that can be explained in words.
Not only is it possible for the captioning model to miss important details or produce ungrounded
captions, but some failures may simply be hard to describe (even by a human). As a result, newly
generated images may look different from the set of images that induced the original failure. We note
that efficiently enforcing consistency between the generated and original images (through a common
caption) is an open problem since we would like to search over reasonable captions that are likely
to produce images corresponding to the original failure. Fig. 5(c) shows an example. The figure
shows a crayfish misclassified as a chainlink fence. While the reason for that failure is
immediately obvious to us, it remains difficult to describe with a succinct caption.

Image generation issues. While the text-to-image model may make occasional mistakes (such as
generating the wrong object for unambiguous prompts), subtle errors can also arise from the interplay
between the model and its prompt. The prompt may be ambiguous, such as using words that have
multiple meanings (e.g., a “walking stick” can be both a cane or an insect), or may describe multiple
objects with complex relationships that exacerbate mistakes (see Fig. 5(d)).

Out-of-distribution sampling. Ensuring that images sampled from an off-the-shelf generative
model are part of the intended distribution (e.g., resembling I MAGE N ET) is difficult. We start our
prompts with “a realistic photograph” in a bid to help steer the approximated distribution p̂(x|y, z)
away from artistic drawings and closer to the true distribution p(x|y, z). This approach is effective,
but not always successful (see Fig. 5(e)). In some cases, finding a suitable prompt is not obvious (e.g.,
to output images from a particular medical domain; Kather et al., 2022) and fine-tuning models on
the dataset of interest may be necessary.

Privacy. As we are generating large amounts of data, it is important to consider the associated
privacy risks. While these risks can be mitigated by using generative models trained on public,
non-sensitive data, more research on private generative modelling is necessary (Harder et al., 2022).
Despite these challenges, we foresee that large-scale generative models will increasingly be used as
debugging tools. In this work, we introduced an automated pipeline that discovers failure cases in
vision models. It constitutes a proof-of-concept that such a system allows for large-scale investigations
of vision models in an open-ended manner.


                                                         9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


R EFERENCES
Abubakar Abid, Mert Yuksekgonul, and James Zou. Meaningfully debugging model mistakes using
  conceptual counterfactual explanations. In International Conference on Machine Learning. PMLR,
  2022. 3

Jean-Baptiste Alayrac, Jeff Donahue, Pauline Luc, Antoine Miech, Iain Barr, Yana Hasson, Karel
  Lenc, Arthur Mensch, Katie Millican, Malcolm Reynolds, Roman Ring, Eliza Rutherford, Serkan
  Cabi, Tengda Han, Zhitao Gong, Sina Samangooei, Marianne Monteiro, Jacob Menick, Sebastian
  Borgeaud, Andrew Brock, Aida Nematzadeh, Sahand Sharifzadeh, Mikolaj Binkowski, Ricardo
  Barreira, Oriol Vinyals, Andrew Zisserman, and Karen Simonyan. Flamingo: a visual language
  model for few-shot learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2204.14198, 2022. 1

Martin Arjovsky, Léon Bottou, Ishaan Gulrajani, and David Lopez-Paz. Invariant risk minimization.
 arXiv preprint arXiv:1907.02893, 2019. 1

Shumeet Baluja and Ian Fischer. Adversarial transformation networks: Learning to generate adver-
  sarial examples. arXiv preprint arXiv:1703.09387, 2017. 2

Battista Biggio, Igino Corona, Davide Maiorca, Blaine Nelson, Nedim Srndic, Pavel Laskov, Giorgio
  Giacinto, and Fabio Roli. Evasion Attacks against Machine Learning at Test Time. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:1708.06131, 2013. 25

Mikolaj Binkowski, Dougal J. Sutherland, Michael Arbel, and Arthur Gretton. Demystifying MMD
 GANs. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2018. 8

Mariusz Bojarski, Davide Del Testa, Daniel Dworakowski, Bernhard Firner, Beat Flepp, Prasoon
 Goyal, Lawrence D. Jackel, Mathew Monfort, Urs Muller, Jiakai Zhang, Xin Zhang, Jake Zhao,
 and Karol Zieba. End to end learning for self-driving cars. arXiv preprint arXiv:1604.07316, 2016.
 1

Rishi Bommasani, Drew A. Hudson, Ehsan Adeli, Russ Altman, Simran Arora, Sydney von Arx,
  Michael S. Bernstein, Jeannette Bohg, Antoine Bosselut, Emma Brunskill, Erik Brynjolfsson,
  Shyamal Buch, Dallas Card, Rodrigo Castellon, Niladri Chatterji, Annie Chen, Kathleen Creel,
  Jared Quincy Davis, Dora Demszky, Chris Donahue, Moussa Doumbouya, Esin Durmus, Stefano
  Ermon, John Etchemendy, Kawin Ethayarajh, Li Fei-Fei, Chelsea Finn, Trevor Gale, Lauren
  Gillespie, Karan Goel, Noah Goodman, Shelby Grossman, Neel Guha, Tatsunori Hashimoto, Peter
  Henderson, John Hewitt, Daniel E. Ho, Jenny Hong, Kyle Hsu, Jing Huang, Thomas Icard, Saahil
  Jain, Dan Jurafsky, Pratyusha Kalluri, Siddharth Karamcheti, Geoff Keeling, Fereshte Khani, Omar
  Khattab, Pang Wei Koh, Mark Krass, Ranjay Krishna, Rohith Kuditipudi, Ananya Kumar, Faisal
  Ladhak, Mina Lee, Tony Lee, Jure Leskovec, Isabelle Levent, Xiang Lisa Li, Xuechen Li, Tengyu
  Ma, Ali Malik, Christopher D. Manning, Suvir Mirchandani, Eric Mitchell, Zanele Munyikwa,
  Suraj Nair, Avanika Narayan, Deepak Narayanan, Ben Newman, Allen Nie, Juan Carlos Niebles,
  Hamed Nilforoshan, Julian Nyarko, Giray Ogut, Laurel Orr, Isabel Papadimitriou, Joon Sung
  Park, Chris Piech, Eva Portelance, Christopher Potts, Aditi Raghunathan, Rob Reich, Hongyu
  Ren, Frieda Rong, Yusuf Roohani, Camilo Ruiz, Jack Ryan, Christopher Ré, Dorsa Sadigh,
  Shiori Sagawa, Keshav Santhanam, Andy Shih, Krishnan Srinivasan, Alex Tamkin, Rohan Taori,
  Armin W. Thomas, Florian Tramèr, Rose E. Wang, William Wang, Bohan Wu, Jiajun Wu, Yuhuai
  Wu, Sang Michael Xie, Michihiro Yasunaga, Jiaxuan You, Matei Zaharia, Michael Zhang, Tianyi
  Zhang, Xikun Zhang, Yuhui Zhang, Lucia Zheng, Kaitlyn Zhou, and Percy Liang. On the
  opportunities and risks of foundation models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2108.07258, 2021. 2

Joy Buolamwini and Timnit Gebru. Gender shades: Intersectional accuracy disparities in commercial
  gender classification. In Conference on Fairness, Accountability and Transparency, 2018. 1

Nicholas Carlini and David Wagner. Adversarial examples are not easily detected: Bypassing ten
  detection methods. In Proceedings of the ACM Workshop on Artificial Intelligence and Security,
  2017a. 2

Nicholas Carlini and David Wagner. Towards evaluating the robustness of neural networks. In 2017
  IEEE Symposium on Security and Privacy, 2017b. 2


                                               10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Stephen Casper, Max Nadeau, Dylan Hadfield-Menell, and Gabriel Kreiman. Robust feature-level
  adversaries are interpretability tools. arXiv preprint arXiv:2110.03605, 2022. 3
Myung Jin Choi, Antonio Torralba, and Alan S Willsky. Context models and out-of-context objects.
 Pattern Recognition Letters, 2012. 2
Mircea Cimpoi, Subhransu Maji, Iasonas Kokkinos, Sammy Mohamed, and Andrea Vedaldi. De-
 scribing textures in the wild. arXiv preprint arXiv:1311.3618, 2013. 2
Jeffrey De Fauw, Joseph R Ledsam, Bernardino Romera-Paredes, Stanislav Nikolov, Nenad Tomasev,
   Sam Blackwell, Harry Askham, Xavier Glorot, Brendan O’Donoghue, Daniel Visentin, George
   van den Driessche, Balaji Lakshminarayanan, Clemens Meyer, Faith Mackinder, Simon Bouton,
   Kareem Ayoub, Reena Chopra, Dominic King, Alan Karthikesalingam, Cı́an O Hughes, Rosalind
   Raine, Julian Hughes, Dawn A Sim, Catherine Egan, Adnan Tufail, Hugh Montgomery, Demis
   Hassabis, Geraint Rees, Trevor Back, Peng T Khaw, Mustafa Suleyman, Julien Cornebise, Pearse A
   Keane, and Olaf Ronneberger. Clinically applicable deep learning for diagnosis and referral in
   retinal disease. In Nature Medicine, 2018. 1
Jia Deng, Wei Dong, Richard Socher, Li-Jia Li, Kai Li, and Li Fei-Fei. Imagenet: A large-scale
   hierarchical image database. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision
   and Pattern Recognition, 2009. 2
Alexey Dosovitskiy, Lucas Beyer, Alexander Kolesnikov, Dirk Weissenborn, Xiaohua Zhai, Thomas
  Unterthiner, Mostafa Dehghani, Matthias Minderer, Georg Heigold, Sylvain Gelly, Jakob Uszkoreit,
  and Neil Houlsby. An Image is Worth 16x16 Words: Transformers for Image Recognition at Scale.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2010.11929, 2020. 7, 18
Sabri Eyuboglu, Maya Varma, Khaled Saab, Jean-Benoit Delbrouck, Christopher Lee-Messer, Jared
  Dunnmon, James Zou, and Christopher Ré. Domino: Discovering systematic errors with cross-
  modal embeddings. arXiv preprint arXiv:2203.14960, 2022. 3
Sahaj Garg, Vincent Perot, Nicole Limtiaco, Ankur Taly, Ed H. Chi, and Alex Beutel. Counterfactual
  fairness in text classification through robustness. In Proceedings of the AAAI/ACM Conference on
  AI, Ethics, and Society, 2019. 2
Yunhao Ge, Jiashu Xu, Brian Nlong Zhao, Laurent Itti, and Vibhav Vineet. Dall-e for detection:
  Language-driven context image synthesis for object detection. arXiv preprint arXiv:2206.09592,
  2022. 2
Robert Geirhos, Patricia Rubisch, Claudio Michaelis, Matthias Bethge, Felix A Wichmann, and
  Wieland Brendel. ImageNet-trained CNNs are biased towards texture; increasing shape bias
  improves accuracy and robustness. In International Conference on Learning Representations,
  2018. 2
Robert Geirhos, Jörn-Henrik Jacobsen, Claudio Michaelis, Richard Zemel, Wieland Brendel, Matthias
  Bethge, and Felix A Wichmann. Shortcut learning in deep neural networks. In Nature Machine
  Intelligence, 2020a. 1, 2
Robert Geirhos, Kristof Meding, and Felix A. Wichmann. Beyond accuracy: quantifying trial-by-trial
  behaviour of cnns and humans by measuring error consistency. In Advances in Neural Information
  Processing Systems. 2020b. 2
Robert Geirhos, Kantharaju Narayanappa, Benjamin Mitzkus, Tizian Thieringer, Matthias Bethge,
  Felix A Wichmann, and Wieland Brendel. Partial success in closing the gap between human and
  machine vision. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2021. 19
Robert Geirhos, Patricia Rubisch, Claudio Michaelis, Matthias Bethge, Felix A Wichmann, and
  Wieland Brendel. Imagenet-trained cnns are biased towards texture; increasing shape bias improves
  accuracy and robustness. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2022. 1
Ian Goodfellow, Yoshua Bengio, and Aaron Courville. Deep Learning. MIT Press, 2016. 1
Ian J Goodfellow, Jonathon Shlens, and Christian Szegedy. Explaining and harnessing adversarial
  examples. arXiv preprint arXiv:1412.6572, 2014. 2


                                                11
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Sven Gowal, Chongli Qin, Po-Sen Huang, Taylan Cemgil, Krishnamurthy Dvijotham, Timothy Mann,
  and Pushmeet Kohli. Achieving Robustness in the Wild via Adversarial Mixing with Disentangled
  Representations. arXiv preprint arXiv:1912.03192, 2019. 2
Fredrik Harder, Milad Jalali Asadabadi, Danica J. Sutherland, and Mijung Park. Differentially private
  data generation needs better features. arXiv preprint arXiv:2205.12900, 2022. 9
Kaiming He, Xiangyu Zhang, Shaoqing Ren, and Jian Sun. Deep residual learning for image
  recognition. Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition,
  2016. 5, 18
Dan Hendrycks and Thomas Dietterich. Benchmarking Neural Network Robustness to Common
  Corruptions and Perturbations. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2018. 2
Dan Hendrycks, Kevin Zhao, Steven Basart, Jacob Steinhardt, and Dawn Song. Natural adversarial
  examples. arXiv preprint arXiv:1907.07174, 2019. 1, 2
Dan Hendrycks, Steven Basart, Norman Mu, Saurav Kadavath, Frank Wang, Evan Dorundo, Rahul
  Desai, Tyler Zhu, Samyak Parajuli, Mike Guo, Dawn Song, Jacob Steinhardt, and Justin Gilmer.
  The Many Faces of Robustness: A Critical Analysis of Out-of-Distribution Generalization. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2006.16241, 2020. 1, 2, 3
Martin Heusel, Hubert Ramsauer, Thomas Unterthiner, Bernhard Nessler, and Sepp Hochreiter. Gans
 trained by a two time-scale update rule converge to a local nash equilibrium. In Advances in Neural
 Information Processing Systems. 2017. 8
Geoffrey Hinton, Li Deng, Dong Yu, George E Dahl, Abdel-rahman Mohamed, Navdeep Jaitly,
  Andrew Senior, Vincent Vanhoucke, Patrick Nguyen, Tara N Sainath, and others. Deep neural
  networks for acoustic modeling in speech recognition: The shared views of four research groups.
  IEEE Signal processing magazine, (6), 2012. 1
Xiaowei Hu, Zhe Gan, Jianfeng Wang, Zhengyuan Yang, Zicheng Liu, Yumao Lu, and Lijuan Wang.
  Scaling up vision-language pre-training for image captioning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2111.12233,
  2021. 1
Saachi Jain, Hannah Lawrence, Ankur Moitra, and Aleksander Madry. Distilling model failures as
  directions in latent space. arXiv preprint arXiv:2206.14754, 2022a. 3
Saachi Jain, Hadi Salman, Alaa Khaddaj, Eric Wong, Sung Min Park, and Aleksander Madry. A
  data-based perspective on transfer learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2207.05739, 2022b. 8
Robin Jia and Percy Liang. Adversarial examples for evaluating reading comprehension systems.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:1707.07328, 2017. 2
Jakob Nikolas Kather, Narmin Ghaffari Laleh, Sebastian Foersch, and Daniel Truhn. Medical domain
  knowledge in domain-agnostic generative ai. In npj Digital Medicine, 2022. 3, 8, 9
Aditya Khosla, Tinghui Zhou, Tomasz Malisiewicz, Alexei A Efros, and Antonio Torralba. Undoing
  the damage of dataset bias. In European Conference on Computer Vision, 2012. 2
Alexander Kolesnikov, Lucas Beyer, Xiaohua Zhai, Joan Puigcerver, Jessica Yung, Sylvain Gelly, and
  Neil Houlsby. Big transfer (bit): General visual representation learning. In European conference
  on computer vision, 2020. 18
Alex Krizhevsky, Ilya Sutskever, and Geoffrey E Hinton. Imagenet classification with deep convolu-
  tional neural networks. In Advances in neural information processing systems, 2012. 1
Andrey Kuehlkamp, Benedict Becker, and Kevin Bowyer. Gender-from-iris or gender-from-mascara?
  In IEEE Winter Conference on Applications of Computer Vision, 2017. 1
Alexey Kurakin, Ian Goodfellow, and Samy Bengio. Adversarial examples in the physical world.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:1607.02533, 2016. 2
Cassidy Laidlaw, Sahil Singla, and Soheil Feizi. Perceptual Adversarial Robustness: Defense Against
  Unseen Threat Models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2006.12655, 2020. 2


                                                 12
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Sebastian Lapuschkin, Stephan Wäldchen, Alexander Binder, Grégoire Montavon, Wojciech Samek,
  and Klaus-Robert Müller. Unmasking clever hans predictors and assessing what machines really
  learn. In Nature Communications, 2019. 2
Horia Mania, John Miller, Ludwig Schmidt, Moritz Hardt, and Benjamin Recht. Model similarity
  mitigates test set overuse. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems. 2019. 2
Henry B Mann and Donald R Whitney. On a test of whether one of two random variables is
  stochastically larger than the other. The annals of mathematical statistics, pp. 50–60, 1947. 18
George A Miller. Wordnet: a lexical database for english. Communications of the ACM, 1995. 3
Ethan Perez, Saffron Huang, Francis Song, Trevor Cai, Roman Ring, John Aslanides, Amelia Glaese,
  Nat McAleese, and Geoffrey Irving. Red teaming language models with language models. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2202.03286, 2022. 2, 3
Haonan Qiu, Chaowei Xiao, Lei Yang, Xinchen Yan, Honglak Lee, and Bo Li. SemanticAdv:
  Generating Adversarial Examples via Attribute-conditional Image Editing. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:1906.07927, 2019. 2
Alec Radford, Jong Wook Kim, Chris Hallacy, Aditya Ramesh, Gabriel Goh, Sandhini Agarwal,
  Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, Pamela Mishkin, Jack Clark, Gretchen Krueger, and Ilya Sutskever.
  Learning Transferable Visual Models From Natural Language Supervision. OpenAI Blog, 2021. 3
Aditya Ramesh, Prafulla Dhariwal, Alex Nichol, Casey Chu, and Mark Chen. Hierarchical text-
  conditional image generation with clip latents. arXiv preprint arXiv:2204.06125, 2022. 1
Benjamin Recht, Rebecca Roelofs, Ludwig Schmidt, and Vaishaal Shankar. Do ImageNet Classifiers
  Generalize to ImageNet? arXiv preprint arXiv:1902.10811, 2019. 1, 2
Marco Tulio Ribeiro, Sameer Singh, and Carlos Guestrin. ”why should i trust you?”: Explaining the
 predictions of any classifier. arXiv preprint arXiv:1602.04938, 2016. URL https://arxiv.
 org/pdf/1602.04938. 3
Marco Tulio Ribeiro, Sameer Singh, and Carlos Guestrin. Semantically equivalent adversarial
 rules for debugging NLP models. In Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Association for
 Computational Linguistics, 2018. 5
Marco Tulio Ribeiro, Tongshuang Wu, Carlos Guestrin, and Sameer Singh. Beyond accuracy:
 Behavioral testing of NLP models with CheckList. In Proceedings of the 58th Annual Meeting of
 the Association for Computational Linguistics, 2020. 2
Robin Rombach, Andreas Blattmann, Dominik Lorenz, Patrick Esser, and Björn Ommer. High-
  resolution image synthesis with latent diffusion models. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Confer-
  ence on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, 2022. 1
Shiori Sagawa, Pang Wei Koh, Tatsunori B. Hashimoto, and Percy Liang. Distributionally robust
  neural networks for group shifts: On the importance of regularization for worst-case generalization.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:1911.08731, 2020. 2
Chitwan Saharia, William Chan, Saurabh Saxena, Lala Li, Jay Whang, Emily Denton, Seyed
  Kamyar Seyed Ghasemipour, Burcu Karagol Ayan, S. Sara Mahdavi, Rapha Gontijo Lopes, Tim
  Salimans, Jonathan Ho, David J Fleet, and Mohammad Norouzi. Photorealistic text-to-image
  diffusion models with deep language understanding. arXiv preprint arXiv:2205.11487, 2022. 1
Ramprasaath R. Selvaraju, Michael Cogswell, Abhishek Das, Ramakrishna Vedantam, Devi Parikh,
  and Dhruv Batra. Grad-cam: Visual explanations from deep networks via gradient-based localiza-
  tion. arXiv preprint arXiv:1610.02391, 2019. 3
Yang Song, Rui Shu, Nate Kushman, and Stefano Ermon. Constructing unrestricted adversarial
  examples with generative models. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2018. 2
Andreas Steiner, Alexander Kolesnikov, Xiaohua Zhai, Ross Wightman, Jakob Uszkoreit, and Lucas
  Beyer. How to train your vit? data, augmentation, and regularization in vision transformers.
 Transactions on Machine Learning Research, 2022. 18


                                                 13
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Christian Szegedy, Wojciech Zaremba, Ilya Sutskever, Joan Bruna, Dumitru Erhan, Ian Goodfellow,
  and Rob Fergus. Intriguing properties of neural networks. arXiv preprint arXiv:1312.6199, 2013.
  2, 25
Christian Szegedy, Wei Liu, Yangqing Jia, Pierre Sermanet, Scott Reed, Dragomir Anguelov, Du-
  mitru Erhan, Vincent Vanhoucke, and Andrew Rabinovich. Going deeper with convolutions. In
  Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, 2015. 18
Christian Szegedy, Sergey Ioffe, Vincent Vanhoucke, and Alexander A Alemi. Inception-v4, inception-
  resnet and the impact of residual connections on learning. In Thirty-first AAAI conference on
  artificial intelligence, 2017. 18
Antonio Torralba, Alexei A Efros, and others. Unbiased look at dataset bias. In Proceedings of the
  IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, 2011. 1, 2
Sam Witteveen and Martin Andrews. Paraphrasing with large language models. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:1911.09661, 2019. 5
Eric Wong and J Zico Kolter. Learning perturbation sets for robust machine learning. In International
  Conference on Learning Representations, 2021. 2, 3
Chaowei Xiao, Bo Li, Jun-Yan Zhu, Warren He, Mingyan Liu, and Dawn Song. Generating adversarial
  examples with adversarial networks. arXiv preprint arXiv:1801.02610, 2018. 2
Kai Xiao, Logan Engstrom, Andrew Ilyas, and Aleksander Madry. Noise or Signal: The Role of
  Image Backgrounds in Object Recognition. arXiv preprint arXiv:2006.09994, 2020. 1, 2


                                                 14
