Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


S EMANTIC U NCERTAINTY: L INGUISTIC I NVARIANCES
FOR U NCERTAINTY E STIMATION IN NATURAL
L ANGUAGE G ENERATION
 Lorenz Kuhn, Yarin Gal, Sebastian Farquhar
 OATML Group, Department of Computer Science, University of Oxford
 lorenz.kuhn@cs.ox.ac.uk



                                            A BSTRACT
         We introduce a method to measure uncertainty in large language models. For
         tasks like question answering, it is essential to know when we can trust the natu-
         ral language outputs of foundation models. We show that measuring uncertainty
         in natural language is challenging because of ‘semantic equivalence’—different
         sentences can mean the same thing. To overcome these challenges we introduce
         semantic entropy—an entropy which incorporates linguistic invariances created
         by shared meanings. Our method is unsupervised, uses only a single model, and
         requires no modifications to ‘off-the-shelf’ language models. In comprehensive
         ablation studies we show that the semantic entropy is more predictive of model
         accuracy on question answering data sets than comparable baselines.


1   I NTRODUCTION
Despite progress in natural language generation (NLG) tasks like question answering or abstractive
summarisation (Brown et al., 2020; Hoffmann et al., 2022; Chowdhery et al., 2022), there is little
understanding of uncertainty in foundation models. Without measures of uncertainty in transformer-
based systems it is hard to use generated language as a reliable source of information. Reliable
measures of uncertainty have been identified as a key problem in building safer AI systems (Amodei
et al., 2016; Hendrycks et al., 2022).
Unfortunately, uncertainty in free-form NLG faces unique challenges. This limits how much we can
learn from uncertainty estimation techniques in other applications of deep learning (Gal et al., 2016;
Lakshminarayanan et al., 2017; Ovadia et al., 2019) which focuses especially on image classification
(Kendall & Gal, 2017) or regression in low-dimensional data spaces (Kuleshov et al., 2018).
The key challenges come from the importance in language of meanings and form. This corresponds
to what linguists and philosophers call the semantic content of a sentence and its syntactic or lexical
form. Foundation models output token-likelihoods—representing lexical confidence. But for almost
all applications we care about meanings! For example, a model which is uncertain about whether to
generate “France’s capital is Paris” or “Paris is France’s capital” is not uncertain in any important
sense. Yet, at a token-level the model is uncertain between two forms of the same meaning. Existing
unsupervised methods (e.g., Malinin & Gales (2020)) ignore this distinction.
To address semantic equivalence, we estimate semantic likelihoods—probabilities attached to mean-
ings of text rather than standard sequence-likelihoods. We introduce an algorithm for clustering
sequences that mean the same thing based on the principle that two sentences mean the same thing
if you can infer each from the other. We then use these semantic-likelihoods to estimate seman-
tic uncertainty—uncertainty over different meanings. In particular, we compute the entropy of the
probability distribution over meanings. Adjusting for semantic equivalence in this way offers bet-
ter uncertainty estimation than standard entropy and also greatly improves over methods for model
self-evaluation (Kadavath et al., 2022). In addition, semantic entropy scales better with model size
and makes better use of increasing numbers of samples than baselines.
We further analyse major challenges for measuring uncertainty in NLG. We show empirically how
sampling a set of model answers to estimate entropies in NLG must balance sample accuracy and
diversity, which significantly strengthens the baselines we compare against relative to prior imple-


                                                  1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


             0.85                                            0.82
             0.80                                            0.80



     AUROC


                                                     AUROC
             0.75                                            0.78
                                                             0.76                Semantic entropy (ours)
             0.70                                                                Normalised entropy
             0.65                                            0.74                Predictive entropy
                                                                                 Lexical similarity
                                                             0.72


                             py


                              )
               (ou trop tic


                       py d


                          rue
                     ila cal
                   tro ise


                        rity
                         tro
                eneman
               No rs) y


                       p(T
                sim xi
               enrmal

                     En

                      e


                                                                    B
                                                                         B

                                                                                B


                                                                                                      B
                    L


                                                               2.7
                                                                     6.7

                                                                              13


                                                                                                    30
                  S

                                                                        Number of parameters of model
                          (a)                                                    (b)

Figure 1: (a) Our semantic entropy (blue) predicts model accuracy better than baselines on the
free-form question answering data set TriviaQA (30B parameter OPT model). Normalised entropy
reimplements single-model variant of Malinin & Gales (2020), lexical similarity measures the av-
erage Rouge-L in a sampled set of answers for a given question analogously to Fomicheva et al.
(2020), entropy and p(True) reimplement Kadavath et al. (2022). (b) Our method’s outperformance
increases with model size while also doing well for smaller models.


mentations. We also examine the situational heuristic of length-normalising predictive entropies.
Our main contributions are thus as follows:

       • We explain why uncertainty in free-form NLG is different from other settings (Section 3).
       • We introduce semantic entropy—a novel entropy-based uncertainty measure which uses
         our algorithm for marginalising over semantically-equivalent samples (Section 4) and show
         that it outperforms comparable baselines in extensive ablations with both open- and closed-
         book free-form question answering using TriviaQA and CoQA (Section 6).
       • Through hyperparameter ablations we suggest how to balance the trade-off between sam-
         pling diverse and accurate generations for our method as well as baselines (Section 6.2) and
         show that far fewer samples are needed for effective uncertainty than prior work presumes.

We focus on free-form question answering (QA) because it is a difficult and important use of NLG
with high-stakes applications. At the same time, it is easier to establish a ground truth without
expensive human evaluation than more nebulous tasks like summarisation.
Ultimately, we show that semantic entropy is an effective unsupervised way to estimate uncertainty
in NLG. As an unsupervised method, it requires no further training or data-gathering, unlike super-
vised methods including Lin et al. (2022a); Kadavath et al. (2022). Semantic entropy is designed
to work with existing foundation and large language models with no modifications ‘out-of-the-box’.
Our experiments use OPT (Zhang et al., 2022) but semantic entropy works with any similar model.

2   BACKGROUND ON U NCERTAINTY E STIMATION
Our method draws inspiration from probabilistic tools for uncertainty estimation, which have been
extensively employed in settings like deep image classification (Gal et al., 2016). Although these
methods are often used in Bayesian models, we emphasise that our method does not require any
special training or architectural modifications and is not limited to Bayesian settings.
The total uncertainty of a prediction can be understood as the predictive entropy of the output dis-
tribution. This measures the information one has about the output given the input. This entropy is
highest when the output is minimally informative—predicting the same probability for all possible
outcomes. The predictive entropy for a point x is the conditional entropy of the output random
variable Y with realisation y given x
                                                  Z
                         P E(x) = H(Y | x) = − p(y | x) ln p(y | x)dy                            (1)

One can further distinguish aleatoric uncertainty—uncertainty in the underlying data distribution—
and epistemic uncertainty—resulting from missing information (Kendall & Gal, 2017). Epistemic


                                                 2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


uncertainty, measured using a mutual information, can be useful but is hard to estimate, especially
for very large models, requiring special methods and computational expense. Instead of estimating
the epistemic uncertainty based on the model variance, the epistemic uncertainty can also be pre-
dicted directly using a second model (see e.g. Jain et al. (2021)). We do not use mutual information
in this work, because our focus is on existing foundation models ‘off-the-shelf’. Similarly, while,
e.g., Malinin & Gales (2020) use ensembles of models to estimate the integral in Eq. (1) we use
samples from a single model’s output distribution. Prior networks (Malinin & Gales, 2018; Malinin
et al., 2020) estimate model uncertainty by emulating an ensemble with a single model. This could
be important for NLG because of large model sizes.
For sequence-prediction tasks like NLG, the probability of the entire sequence, s, is the product
of the conditional P probabilities of new tokens given past tokens, whose resulting log-probability
is log p(s | x) = i log p(si | s<i ), where si is the i’th output token and s<i denotes the set of
previous tokens. Sometimes, instead of the entropy of these probabilities, the geometric mean token-
probability is used instead (Malinin & Gales, 2020) becoming an arithmetic mean log-probability
 1
   PN
N     i log p(si | s<i ). Despite empirical success Murray & Chiang (2018), so far this has little
theoretical justification.
Direct application of language models to uncertainty. In contrast to our approach using prob-
abilistic methods, recent work has sought to use the generating language model itself to estimate
its own uncertainty. For example, Lin et al. (2022a) finetune language models to verbally describe
their confidence. Meanwhile, Kadavath et al. (2022) sample multiple generations and return the
completion to an NLG prompt asking if a proposed answer is true (further detail in Appendix B.5).
Both Lin et al. (2022a) and Kadavath et al. (2022) also propose ways to finetune predictors on the
embeddings of generating models to predict models uncertainty. While promising, these approaches
need task-specific labels, additional training, and seem to be unreliable out-of-distribution (as shown
in Figures 13 and 14 in Kadavath et al. (2022)).
3     C HALLENGES IN U NCERTAINTY E STIMATION FOR NLG
Approaches to NLG uncertainty might treat the language model as a black-box (e.g., asking it if
its answer is correct) or alternatively focus on the probabilistic model without accounting for the
special characteristics of language (e.g., measuring predictive entropy).
Our unsupervised approach instead uses the powerful tools of probabilistic modelling, but also
recognises the unique challenges posed by free-form NLG. In this section, we critically analyse
the probabilistic interpretation of language models in order to ground both our method and future
exploration of the field.
3.1   S EMANTIC EQUIVALENCE IN LANGUAGE OUTPUTS
Most machine learning problems have mutually exclusive outputs. An image in class 17 is not class
29 as well; a regression output of 23.1 is not anything else; an RL agent going left does not go right.
In contrast, for free-form text generation an output usually means the same thing as many other
outputs. For example, “The capital of France is Paris” means the same thing as “France’s capital
is Paris”. Linguists and philosophers distinguish text’s meaning—its semantic content—from its
syntactic and lexical form. The syntax is the grammatical structure while its lexical form is the
specific words used. Lexical equivalence entails the other two, but not the reverse.
We almost always care about the semantic content of a sentence. For decision-problems relying
on NLG, meaning is usually an invariance in output-space which is not present in the model spec-
ification. This is true for question answering, summarisation, artificial assistants. Meanings are
especially important for trustworthiness: a system can be reliable even with many different ways to
say the same thing but answering with inconsistent meanings shows poor reliability.
We can formalize semantic equivalence mathematically. Let the space of tokens in a language be
T . The space of all possible sequences of tokens of length N is then SN ≡ T N . For some sentence
s ∈ SN , a sequence of tokens si ∈ T there is an associated meaning.1
Let us introduce a placeholder semantic equivalence relation, E(·, ·), which holds of any two sen-
tences that mean the same thing—we operationalise this in Section 4. Recall that an equivalence
  1
    Theories of meaning are contested (Speaks, 2021). However, for specific models and deployment contexts
many considerations can be set aside. Care should be taken comparing very different models and contexts.


                                                    3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Table 1: Answers to the question “What is the capital of France?” (a) When all generations from the
model mean different things, semantic clustering has no effect—the entropy and semantic entropy
are identical. (b) When some of the answers are semantically equivalent (“Paris” and “It’s Paris”)
the semantic entropy does a better job of capturing the actually low uncertainty.

       (a) Scenario 1: No semantic equivalence            (b) Scenario 2: Some semantic equivalence

    Answer    Likelihood     Semantic
                               P      likelihood       Answer       Likelihood Semantic
                                                                                 P      likelihood
      s        p(s | x)          s∈c p(s | x)            s           p(s | x)      s∈c p(s | x)
                                                                             o
    Paris         0.5                 0.5              Paris           0.5               0.9
    Rome          0.4                 0.4              It’s Paris      0.4
    London        0.1                 0.1              London          0.1               0.1
    Entropy       0.31               0.31              Entropy         0.31                 0.16


relation is any reflexive, symmetric, and transitive relation, and that any equivalence relation on a
set corresponds to a set of equivalence classes. Each semantic equivalence class corresponds to one
possible meaning that our text can have. That is, for the space of semantic equivalence classes C the
sentences in the set c ∈ C all share a meaning such that ∀s, s0 ∈ c : E(s, s0 ).
Ordinarily, large language models produce conditional distributions over tokens and their resulting
sequences. That is, the probability ofQthe sequence conditioned on the context comes from condi-
tional token probabilities p(s | x) = i p(si | s<i , x). Instead, we focus on the probability of the
model generating any sequence that shares some meaning. This can be written as
                                      X             XY
                           p(c | x) =    p(s | x) =         p(si | s<i , x).                     (2)
                                       s∈c             s∈c   i

Formally, this treats the output random variable whose event-space is C, a sub-σ-algebra of the
standard event-space S.
3.2    S AMPLING THE EXTREMELY HIGH - DIMENSIONAL LANGUAGE - SPACE
Recall from Eq. (1) that estimating predictive entropy requires taking an expectation in output-space.
However, the output-space of natural language has O(|T |N ) dimensions. Moreover, while we can
sample from our autoregressive token-model, we lack a normalized probability density function over
sentences. The expectation must be approximated by Monte Carlo integration—sampling a finite set
of sentences from the output distribution and averaging their likelihoods to compute the entropy. For
entropies the average is dominated by low-probability sentences (whose logs are large and negative)
making Monte Carlo integration difficult (Mackay, 2003).
3.3    VARIABLE LENGTH GENERATIONS
Sentences of natural language have different lengths. As is widely noted (Murray & Chiang, 2018)
and especially in the context of NLG uncertainty by Malinin & Gales (2020), in expectation longer
sequences have lower joint likelihoods because of the conditional independence of the token prob-
abilities. The joint likelihood of a sequence of length N shrinks exponentially in N . Its negative
log-probability therefore grows linearly in N , so longer sentences tend to contribute more to entropy.
We therefore interpret length-normalising the log-probabilities when estimating the entropy as as-
serting that the expected uncertainty of generations is independent of sentence length. Sometimes,
this is approximately valid. Other times, longer sentences may well be usually more uncertain (e.g.,
when the goal is to exactly match a typically short reference answer, such as for TriviaQA). In these
cases, the advantages of length-normalisation become less clear-cut, as we show empirically in Sec-
tion 6.1. This offers some guidance a priori on cases when length-normalisation is appropriate.

4     S EMANTIC U NCERTAINTY
We have introduced the idea that uncertainty over meanings is more important for most situations
than uncertainty over the exact tokens used to express those meanings. Our method examines un-
certainty in meaning-space—the entropy of the random variable representing the output distribution
in the semantic event-space. This is in contrast to entropy in the usual token event-space. To do this
we introduce a novel algorithm for estimating the semantic equivalence relation as well as a novel
uncertainty estimation algorithm for semantic entropy. At a high level this involves three steps:


                                                   4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


      1. Generation: Sample M sequences {s(1) , . . . , s(M ) } from the predictive distribution of a
         large language model given a context x.
      2. Clustering: Cluster the sequences which mean the same thing using our bi-directional
         entailment algorithm.
      3. Entropy estimation: Approximate semantic entropy by summing probabilities that share
         a meaning following Eq. (2) and compute resulting entropy. This is illustrated in Table 1.

Step 1: Generating a set of answers from the model
First we sample M sequences {s(1) , . . . , s(M ) } which we will use later to estimate the uncertainty.
These sequences must be sampled according to the distribution p(s | x). In this paper, we sample
these sequences only from a single model using either multinomial sampling or multinomial beam
sampling. We show in Section 6.2, that the choice of sampling temperature and sampling method
can have a significant impact on the performance of both our method and the baselines. Unlike
Malinin & Gales (2020), we do not use an ensemble of models. Ensembling would probably improve
performance, but the cost of training multiple independent foundation models is often prohibitive.
Step 2: Clustering by semantic equivalence
In Section 3.1, we formalised semantic equivalence by introducing the semantic equivalence rela-
tion, E(·, ·), which induces semantic equivalence classes which are sets of sequences that share a
meaning. Recall that the equivalence class c is a set of sequences s such that ∀s, s0 ∈ c : E(s, s0 ).
We operationalise E(·, ·) using the idea of bi-directional entailment. A sequence, s, means the same
thing as a second sequence, s0 , if and only if they entail (i.e. logically imply) each other. E.g., “The
capital of France is Paris.” entails “Paris is the capital of France.” because they mean the same thing.
Importantly, we require that the sequences mean the same thing with respect to the context—key
meaning is sometimes contained within the context. For example, “Paris.” does not entail “The
capital of France is Paris.” because “Paris.” is not a declarative sentence without context. But within
the context of the question, the one-word answer does entail the fuller answer.
In general, any natural language inference classification system (NLI) can be used for our bidirec-
tional entailment clustering algorithm. In our case, we use a Deberta-large model (He et al., 2020a)
that is fine-tuned on the NLI data set MNLI (Williams et al., 2017). For each pair of sequences in
our set of samples, s and s0 , we detect whether it is possible to infer the concatenation of the context
and s from the concatenation of the context and s0 and vice versa. To do this we concatenate each
of the two question/answer pairs, and then concatenate them both together separated by a special
token. The Deberta model then classifies this sequence into one of: entailment, neutral,
contradiction. We compute both directions, and the algorithm returns equivalent if and
only if both directions were entailment. Algorithm pseudocode is provided in Appendix A.2.
Because this component is novel, we confirm in Appendix B.2 that the bidirectional entailment
classifier works by manually labelling 300 generations for semantic equivalence, finding an accuracy
of 92.7% on TriviaQA and 95.5% on CoQA.
Computational  cost. The bidirectional equivalence algorithm is combinatorially complex in M , it
requires M 2 -many comparisons in the worst-case. In practice, however, the computational cost is
small compared to the cost of generating sequences. First, as we show in Section 6.2, M < 20 is
often sufficient for good uncertainty. Second, because the Deberta-large model is so much smaller
than the main language model (1.5B parameters), each pair comparison is much faster than generat-
ing even one token from the main model. Third, because semantic equivalence is transitive we only
need to compare one member of each equivalence class to remaining sequences (see Algorithm 1).
Additionally, the number of semantic clusters in our tasks is empirically quite low, see Table 2.
Step 3: Computing the semantic entropy
Having determined the clusters of generated sequences that mean the same thing, we add their like-
lihoods following Eq. (2) as a way of determining the likelihood of each meaning, rather than each
sequence. We then compute the semantic entropy (SE) as the entropy over the meaning-distribution
                   X                              X    X                  hX           i
       SE(x) = −        p(c | x) log p(c | x) = −            p(s | x) log      p(s | x) .      (3)
                      c                                c    s∈c                 s∈c



                                                   5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


We do not have access to every possible meaning-class c. Instead, we can only sample c from the
sequence-generating distribution induced by the model. To handle this, we estimate the expectation
in Eq. (3) using Monte Carlo integration over the semantic equivalence classes C from Algorithm 1
                                                     |C|
                                                     X
                                                −1
                                SE(x) ≈ −|C|                log p(Ci | x).                         (4)
                                                      i=1

This is an unbiased estimator of the entropy in Eq. (3). In addition, in some cases we use length-
normalisation as described in Section 3.3.

4.1   H OW THE SEMANTIC ENTROPY ADDRESSES THE CHALLENGES OF NLG
The main inspiration of semantic entropy is to address the semantic invariance of natural language
head-on by converting the problem of uncertainty estimation into meaning-space. In addition, se-
mantic entropy goes some way towards addressing unequal token importance. Generations whose
meanings are the same but differ on unimportant tokens will be added together, which we expect
will reduce the effect of the likelihoods of unimportant tokens although we do not demonstrate this
empirically. However, this challenge is only partially addressed: semantic entropy will still pay too
much attention to non-keyword likelihoods. This is one area where supervised language-model-
based uncertainty tools (Lin et al., 2022a; Kadavath et al., 2022) might enable future improvements
that handle this challenge better. We address the challenges of sampling and variable-length gener-
ation using specific details of our sampling procedure in Section 4.

5     R ELATED W ORK
Prior work on uncertainty in foundation models for NLP has largely focused on the calibration of
classifiers (Jiang et al., 2021; Desai & Durrett, 2020) and text regressors (Glushkova et al., 2021;
Wang et al., 2022). These settings, are analogous to classification or regression settings in other
modalities like vision, and conventional uncertainty measures like MC dropout or Deep Ensembles
can be applied without modification (see Section 2 for a discussion of uncertainty in deep learning in
general). As we argue in Section 3, generative natural language poses important further challenges.
Jiang et al. (2021) do examine calibration in generative question answering and find only a weak
correlation between the log-likelihood models assign to their answer and the answer’s correctness.
In Section 6 we explain however why semantic equivalence in natural language makes calibration
a problematic evaluation for generative language models. Reliable uncertainty can be useful on
downstream tasks such as graph semantic parsing (Lin et al., 2022b).
Some research has addressed uncertainty or calibration in NLG either by prompting the models
to evaluate their own generations or by fine-tuning the generating model to predict its uncertainty
(Mielke et al., 2020; Lin et al., 2022a; Kadavath et al., 2022). These methods need further training
and supervision. Because they need additional training and supervision, they are hard to reproduce,
expensive to create, and have been shown to be sensitive to distribution shift. For example, we were
unable to implement one proposal by Kadavath et al. (2022) to train a language model to directly
predict confidence due to hardware limitations. Our unsupervised method which uses models ‘off-
the-shelf’ avoids these limitations.
Many of the issues that make probabilistic uncertainty estimation in NLG difficult also make au-
tomatic evaluation of NLG difficult. Ott et al. (2018), for instance, study how the performance of
machine translation models suffers because one sentence can be translated in multiple ways. Sim-
ilarly, Sai et al. (2022) discuss how paraphrase detection can be used to evaluate NLG and other
related methods might transfer to uncertainty estimation.
Automatic paraphrase identification can be based on comparing lexical features of two given se-
quences (Fernando & Stevenson, 2008; Issa et al., 2018) or on measuring the similarity between the
embeddings of the two sequences (Yu et al., 2014; Socher et al., 2011). Recently, however, SotA
paraphrase identification approaches have primarily used BERT-based models to classify pairs of
sequences into the classes paraphrases and not paraphrases (He et al., 2020b; Tay et al.,
2021). The idea of formalising semantic equivalence via textual entailment has a long history in
linguistics (Culicover, 1968) and NLP (Padó et al., 2009; Androutsopoulos & Malakasiotis, 2010).
Transformer-based paraphrase detection models such as EFL (Wang et al., 2021) achieve SotA per-
formance on paraphrase detection benchmarks such as Quora Question Pairs Wang et al. (2017).

                                                  6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023

                                      Semantic entropy                        Predictive entropy
                                      Normalised entropy                      p(True)
                                      Lexical similarity
                                                                       0.80
             0.75


                                                               AUROC
     AUROC
                                                                       0.70
             0.70
                                                                       0.60
                    B
                         B

                                B


                                                     B


                                                                              B
                                                                                   B

                                                                                           B


                                                                                                               B
               2.7
                     6.7

                              13


                                                   30


                                                                         2.7
                                                                                6.7

                                                                                         13


                                                                                                             30
                        Number of parameters of model                             Number of parameters of model
                              (a) CoQA                                                 (b) TriviaQA

Figure 2: (a) On CoQA open-book question answering semantic entropy demonstrates better uncer-
tainty than ordinary predictive entropy with and without normalisation at larger model sizes. It also
performs significantly better than p(True). (b) TriviaQA shows similar results. Identical to Fig. 1b
with the addition of p(True), which was previously omitted to avoid stretching the scale.

6   E MPIRICAL EVALUATION
We demonstrate that semantic entropy is an effective way to quantify the uncertainty of NLG on
free-form QA tasks. Effective uncertainty measures should offer information about how reliable the
model’s answers are—that is, very uncertain generations should be less likely to be correct.
Performance evaluation. Following prior work (e.g. Filos et al. (2019)), we evaluate uncertainty by
treating uncertainty estimation as the problem of predicting whether to rely on a model generation
for a given context—whether to trust an answer to a question. The area under the receiver operator
characteristic curve (AUROC) metric is equivalent to the probability that a randomly chosen correct
answer has a higher uncertainty score than a randomly chosen incorrect answer. Higher scores are
better, with perfect uncertainty scoring 1 while a random uncertainty measure would score 0.5.
The AUROC is a better measure of uncertainty for free-form question answering and NLG than
calibration measures like the Brier score, which are often used in classification or for multiple choice
QA. This is because the language model outputs a likelihood for a given token-sequence, but not
for an entire meaning. In order to estimate the Brier score, we would need to estimate the entire
probability mass assigned to any possible way of saying the correct answer. This is intractable for
free form text where we do not have access to probabilities about meanings. In contrast, we can
estimate the entropy because it is structured as an expected information, which makes Monte Carlo
integration suitable.
Model. We use the GPT-like OPT models (Zhang et al., 2022). We vary the size of the model
between 2.7B, 6.7B, 13B and 30B parameters, while our headline results are all reported using the
largest computationally feasible model, with 30B parameters. In all cases we use only a single un-
modified model. There is no ensembling and no stochastic or Bayesian modification. We chose this
because in most cases cutting-edge foundation models are not available as ensembles and are too
large to efficiently perform approximate Bayesian inference with. We do not fine-tune these models
on TriviaQA or CoQA but use them in their pre-trained form.
Datasets. We use CoQA Reddy et al. (2019) as an open-book conversational question answering
problem (in which the model answers a question using a supporting paragraph). We use the devel-
opment split (∼8000 questions). We also use TriviaQA (Joshi et al., 2017) as a closed-book QA
problem (in which the model must answer a question without access to a supporting paragraph). We
use a subset of 8000 questions of the training split to match the size of CoQA.
We evaluate correctness of our model’s generations on the underlying dataset using the a fuzzy
matching criterion: L(s, s0 ) = 1RougeL(s,s0 )>0.3 . That is, we consider an answer s to be correct if
its Rouge-L (Lin & Och, 2004) — a measure of the longest common subsequence — with regards
to the reference answer is larger than 0.3. In Appendix B.3 we study other objective functions such
as exact matching and Rouge-1 and find our method to be robust to these choices.
Baselines. We compare our method against predictive entropy, length-normalised predictive en-
tropy (Malinin & Gales, 2020), p(True) (Kadavath et al., 2022), and lexical similarity (similar to
(Fomicheva et al., 2020)). Predictive entropy is a widely used measure of uncertainty in other


                                                           7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Table 2: Incorrectly answered questions have more semantically distinct answers than correct ones.
On its own, this count is a reasonable uncertainty measure, though semantic entropy is better.

  Dataset      Average # of semantically distinct answers                      AUROC
               Correctly answered     Incorrectly answered      Semantic entropy     # distinct answers
  CoQA                 1.27                    1.77                    0.77                 0.66
  TriviaQA             1.89                    3.89                    0.83                 0.79

domains, and has been used as a baseline without length-normalisation in, e.g., Kadavath et al.
(2022). Here, the score is just the predictive entropy of the output distribution as described in Eq. (1).
Length-normalised predictive entropy divides the joint log-probability of each sequence by the
length of the sequence, as proposed by Malinin & Gales (2020) in the case of NLG uncertainty and
further discussed in Section 3.3. Note that unlike Malinin & Gales (2020), we use only a single
model, not an ensemble, and use multinomial sampling as we do for all other methods. p(True)
proposed by (Kadavath et al., 2022) as a way to estimate the probability that a model’s generation
is correct by ‘asking’ the model if its answer is correct. They propose sampling M answers and
constructing a new natural language question using these possible answers as context before ask-
ing whether the proposed answer is correct and measuring the probability of the completion being
True. An example of the format is provided in Appendix B. Note that our implementation of this
uses OPT models with up to 30B parameters, while Kadavath et al. (2022) use a proprietary 52B
parameter model. We are also limited computationally to 10-shot prompting while the original paper
uses 20-shot prompting. Lexical similarity uses the average similarity of the answers in the answer
          P|A| P|A|
set A: C1 i=1 j=1 sim (si , sj ), where C = |A| ∗ (|A| − 1)/2, and sim is Rouge-L. Additionally,
we evaluate a margin-probability baseline (Lin et al., 2022b) in Appendix B.6, and study why it is
not very predictive of model accuracy in this setting. All code and data used in our experiments are
available at https://github.com/lorenzkuhn/semantic_uncertainty.

6.1   S EMANTIC E NTROPY UNCERTAINTY
For both TriviaQA and CoQA, semantic entropy improves over baselines in predicting whether a
model’s answer to a question is correct. For TriviaQA, using the largest model we show in Fig. 1a we
show that semantic entropy has a significantly higher AUROC than entropy in sequence-probability-
space with and without length-normalisation, as well as the lexical similarity baseline. At the same
time, it performs dramatically better than p(True). Similarly, we find in Fig. 1b that our method out-
performs more for larger model sizes and continues to steadily improve as the model size increases,
with the performance of the p(True) baseline added in Fig. 2b (not shown in the opening figure for
visual clarity). For CoQA, in Fig. 2a we show that semantic entropy predicts model correctness
significantly better than the baselines at larger model sizes.
The ground truth answers for TriviaQA are generally single words or very short phrases, while
CoQA contains both longer and shorter ground truth answers. This is why performing length-
normalisation has a large effect for CoQA but no effect for TriviaQA (compare Fig. 2a and Fig. 2b).
TriviaQA is also a more challenging dataset: accuracy of 50.6% against 82.3% for CoQA.
We can better understand the mechanism of action for semantic entropy by examining the differ-
ence between incorrect and correct answers generated by the model. In Table 2 we show that the
average number of semantically distinct clusters of answers (|C|) from the 30B parameter model
is significantly greater for incorrectly answered questions than correctly answered ones. This fits
our predictions, which is that the model is more likely to generate incorrect answers when it is un-
certain about the most likely generation. There are 10 answers generated per question, so there is
substantial overlap in meaning. We also show that simply using the number of semantically distinct
answers as an uncertainty measure on its own performs reasonably well. Semantic entropy has a
higher AUROC than the number of distinct answers, especially for CoQA whose difficulty causes
greater spread in predicted probabilities between possible answers.
Finally, we can see that much of the performance gain comes from making better use of more
samples. In Fig. 3a we show that for both CoQA (top) and TriviaQA (bottom) the gap between
semantic entropy and length-normalised entropy widens as the number of samples increases.

6.2   H YPERPARAMETERS FOR EFFECTIVE SAMPLING
Adjusting the temperature used for multinomial sampling has two competing effects on the gener-
ated sequences produced by the model. Increasing the temperature increases the diversity of samples


                                                      8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


         0.76
         0.74                                                0.800
         0.72


                                                     AUROC
 AUROC                                                       0.775
         0.70                                                0.750              Semantic entropy (ours)
         0.68                                                                   Length-normalised entropy
                                                             0.725
         0.66
                              5                10                        0.25      0.50                1.00              1.50
                                                                   0.4
        0.800                                                                                                                   0.9
        0.775
                                                                   0.3                                                          0.8


                                                        Accuracy


                                                                                                                                  Diversity
AUROC


        0.750                                                      0.2                                                          0.7
                       Semantic entropy (ours)                                  Average correctness of sampled answers
        0.725          Length-normalised entropy                                                                                0.6
                       Entropy                                     0.1          Diversity of sampled answers
        0.700                                                                                                                   0.5
                             5                  10                       0.25      0.50              1.00                1.50
                #samples used to estimate entropy                                            Temperature

    (a) (top) CoQA, (bottom) TriviaQA                                                            (b)

Figure 3: (a) Semantic entropy makes better use of additional samples because it handles duplication
better, the performance gap therefore continues to improve. (b) (bottom) Higher temperatures result
in more diversity but less accurate generations. (top) The best performing uncertainty comes from
an intermediate temperature that balances these two forces. Results on TriviaQA.
(Fig. 3b, bottom figure, solid line). One would expect more diverse generations to cover the space
of possible meanings more fully. Here we measure the  diversity      using the average overlap of the
longest sub-sequence among sampled answers (1 − M        −1                          0
                                                             P
                                                      2        s6=s ∈C Rouge-L(s, s )). At the same
                                                                   0

time, reducing the temperature improves the average correctness of the answer (Fig. 3b, bottom
figure, dashed line). Typically, more accurate models are also better at estimating uncertainty.
In fact, we find that these two effects compete and the highest AUROC for semantic entropy and
length-normalised entropy is optimised by an intermediate temperature of 0.5 (Fig. 3b, top figure). A
lower temperature would improve accuracy, while a higher temperature would improve diversity. A
similar figure for CoQA can be found in Appendix B. Note that prior work using predictive entropy
as a baseline uses a temperature of 1.0 (Kadavath et al., 2022), which our evaluation suggests would
significantly weaken the baseline relative to our implementation.

7 D ISCUSSION
Many natural language problems display a crucial invariance: sequences of distinct tokens mean the
same thing. Addressing this directly, we introduce semantic entropy—the entropy of the distribu-
tion over meanings rather than sequences—and show that this is more predictive of model accuracy
on QA than strong baselines. Our unsupervised approach using ‘out-of-the-box’ models improves
reproducibility and is easier to deploy. Unsupervised uncertainty may also help address the obser-
vation raised in prior work that supervised uncertainty measures struggle with distribution shift.
For semantic entropy, we introduce a novel bidirectional entailment clustering algorithm which uses
a smaller natural language inference model. Our method therefore represents a middle ground be-
tween fully probabilistic methods and methods that use language models to exploit aspects of natural
language that are not transparently present in the model activations. We believe that this sort of joint
approach is more promising than relying on either perspective on its own, especially as language
models continue to improve. This will become more important in cases where language models
are capable of deception, something which our method does not protect against, rather than merely
being uncertain between many possible meaningful options. By combining model internals with
model prediction one can hope to stay a step ahead of model capabilities.
We focus on question answering because this is a particularly important free-form NLG problem
with relatively clear ground truths. In the future, however, we hope our work on semantic equiva-
lence can pave the way towards progress in settings like summarisation where correctness requires
more human evaluation although additional progress on paraphrase identification in these settings
is likely required first. Semantic likelihoods could also be extended to other tools for probabilistic
uncertainty like mutual information, potentially offering new strategies for NLG uncertainty.


                                                                          9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We are grateful to Geoffrey Irving, Kuba Perlin, Laura Rimell, and Miles Turpin for their advice and
feedback on earlier drafts of this paper. We are also grateful to the members of the OATML group
for helpful discussions about this project.

E THICS S TATEMENT

Our aim is to work towards safer AI systems by enabling users to understand the confidence and re-
liability of language model generations. In principle, this could help mitigate many of the potential
harms of NLG from foundation models such as generating false and harmful information in response
to genuine questions about important topics like medical questions. However, this potential benefit
comes with the risk that systematic mistakes in the assessment of uncertainty or its communication
could cause unfounded and misplaced confidence. While this paper represents research progress in
identifying new considerations and methods for uncertainty quantification in NLG, before deploy-
ment we advise that practitioners conduct extensive evaluations specific to the deployment context
to make sure that uncertainty is communicated in a way that empowers users and is not misleading
or confusing.

R EPRODUCIBILITY S TATEMENT

Because of the computational cost of experimentation with foundation models, most of the relatively
small amount of existing research into NLG uncertainty relies on proprietary models, finetuning
of expensive models, and human evaluation. These factors put this kind of research out of reach
for many academic groups. Our work takes advantage of the recently released, publicly available
OPT models, and builds on this to provide an uncertainty quantification pipeline for NLG that uses
entirely open source tools. Meanwhile our method requires no finetuning or training of foundation
models and can work with ‘off-the-shelf’ existing models. We hope that this can facilitate more
research on these important topics in the academic community as well as making our methods easier
to replicate. We make all of our code, as well as the hand-labelled semantic equivalence dataset
drawn from TriviaQA and CoQA, available under an MIT license.

R EFERENCES
Dario Amodei, Chris Olah, Jacob Steinhardt, Paul Christiano, John Schulman, and Dan Mané. Con-
  crete Problems in AI Safety. arXiv, 2016. 1
Ion Androutsopoulos and Prodromos Malakasiotis. A survey of paraphrasing and textual entailment
  methods. Journal of Artificial Intelligence Research, 38:135–187, 2010. 6
Tom Brown, Benjamin Mann, Nick Ryder, Melanie Subbiah, Jared D Kaplan, Prafulla Dhariwal,
  Arvind Neelakantan, Pranav Shyam, Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, et al. Language models are
  few-shot learners. Advances in neural information processing systems, 33:1877–1901, 2020. 1
Aakanksha Chowdhery, Sharan Narang, Jacob Devlin, Maarten Bosma, Gaurav Mishra, Adam
  Roberts, Paul Barham, Hyung Won Chung, Charles Sutton, Sebastian Gehrmann, et al. Palm:
  Scaling language modeling with pathways. arXiv preprint arXiv:2204.02311, 2022. 1
Peter W Culicover. Paraphrase generation and information retrieval from stored text. Mech. Transl.
  Comput. Linguistics, 11(3-4):78–88, 1968. 6
Shrey Desai and Greg Durrett. Calibration of pre-trained transformers. In Proceedings of the
  2020 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing (EMNLP), pp. 295–
  302, 2020. 6
Samuel Fernando and Mark Stevenson. A semantic similarity approach to paraphrase detection. In
  Proceedings of the 11th annual research colloquium of the UK special interest group for compu-
  tational linguistics, pp. 45–52. Citeseer, 2008. 6
Angelos Filos, Sebastian Farquhar, Aidan N Gomez, Tim G J Rudner, Zachary Kenton, Lewis Smith,
  Milad Alizadeh, Arnoud de Kroon, and Yarin Gal. Benchmarking Bayesian Deep Learning with
  Diabetic Retinopathy Diagnosis. Bayesian Deep Learning Workshop at NeurIPS, 2019. 7


                                                 10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Marina Fomicheva, Shuo Sun, Lisa Yankovskaya, Frédéric Blain, Francisco Guzmán, Mark Fishel,
 Nikolaos Aletras, Vishrav Chaudhary, and Lucia Specia. Unsupervised quality estimation for
 neural machine translation. Transactions of the Association for Computational Linguistics, 8:
 539–555, 2020. 2, 7

Yarin Gal et al. Uncertainty in deep learning. PhD thesis, 2016. 1, 2

Taisiya Glushkova, Chrysoula Zerva, Ricardo Rei, and André FT Martins. Uncertainty-aware ma-
  chine translation evaluation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2109.06352, 2021. 6

Pengcheng He, Xiaodong Liu, Jianfeng Gao, and Weizhu Chen. Deberta: Decoding-enhanced bert
  with disentangled attention. arXiv preprint arXiv:2006.03654, 2020a. 5

Ruining He, Anirudh Ravula, Bhargav Kanagal, and Joshua Ainslie. Realformer: Transformer likes
  residual attention. arXiv preprint arXiv:2012.11747, 2020b. 6

Dan Hendrycks, Nicholas Carlini, John Schulman, and Jacob Steinhardt. Unsolved Problems in ML
  Safety. arXiv, 2022. 1

Jordan Hoffmann, Sebastian Borgeaud, Arthur Mensch, Elena Buchatskaya, Trevor Cai, Eliza
  Rutherford, Diego de Las Casas, Lisa Anne Hendricks, Johannes Welbl, Aidan Clark, et al. Train-
  ing compute-optimal large language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2203.15556, 2022. 1

Fuad Issa, Marco Damonte, Shay B Cohen, Xiaohui Yan, and Yi Chang. Abstract meaning repre-
  sentation for paraphrase detection. In Proceedings of the 2018 Conference of the North American
  Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Human Language Technologies, Vol-
  ume 1 (Long Papers), pp. 442–452, 2018. 6

Moksh Jain, Salem Lahlou, Hadi Nekoei, Victor Butoi, Paul Bertin, Jarrid Rector-Brooks, Maksym
 Korablyov, and Yoshua Bengio. Deup: Direct epistemic uncertainty prediction. arXiv preprint
 arXiv:2102.08501, 2021. 3

Zhengbao Jiang, Jun Araki, Haibo Ding, and Graham Neubig. How can we know when language
  models know? on the calibration of language models for question answering. Transactions of the
  Association for Computational Linguistics, 9:962–977, 2021. 6

Mandar Joshi, Eunsol Choi, Daniel S Weld, and Luke Zettlemoyer. Triviaqa: A large scale distantly
 supervised challenge dataset for reading comprehension. arXiv preprint arXiv:1705.03551, 2017.
 7

Saurav Kadavath, Tom Conerly, Amanda Askell, Tom Henighan, Dawn Drain, Ethan Perez,
  Nicholas Schiefer, Zac Hatfield Dodds, Nova DasSarma, Eli Tran-Johnson, et al. Language mod-
  els (mostly) know what they know. arXiv preprint arXiv:2207.05221, 2022. 1, 2, 3, 6, 7, 8, 9,
  18

Alex Kendall and Yarin Gal. What uncertainties do we need in bayesian deep learning for computer
  vision? Advances in neural information processing systems, 30, 2017. 1, 2

Volodymyr Kuleshov, Nathan Fenner, and Stefano Ermon. Accurate uncertainties for deep learning
  using calibrated regression. In International conference on machine learning, pp. 2796–2804.
  PMLR, 2018. 1

Balaji Lakshminarayanan, Alexander Pritzel, and Charles Blundell. Simple and scalable predictive
  uncertainty estimation using deep ensembles. Advances in neural information processing systems,
  30, 2017. 1

Chin-Yew Lin and Franz Josef Och. Automatic evaluation of machine translation quality using
  longest common subsequence and skip-bigram statistics. In Proceedings of the 42nd Annual
  Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (ACL-04), pp. 605–612, 2004. 7

Stephanie Lin, Jacob Hilton, and Owain Evans. Teaching models to express their uncertainty in
  words. arXiv preprint arXiv:2205.14334, 2022a. 2, 3, 6


                                                11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Zi Lin, Jeremiah Zhe Liu, and Jingbo Shang. Towards collaborative neural-symbolic graph semantic
   parsing via uncertainty. In Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics: ACL 2022,
   pp. 4160–4173, 2022b. 6, 8, 19
David Mackay. Information Theory, Inference and Learning Algorithms. Cambridge University
  Press, 2003. 4
Andrey Malinin and Mark Gales. Predictive uncertainty estimation via prior networks. Advances in
  neural information processing systems, 31, 2018. 3
Andrey Malinin and Mark Gales. Uncertainty estimation in autoregressive structured prediction.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2002.07650, 2020. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 7, 8
Andrey Malinin, Sergey Chervontsev, Ivan Provilkov, and Mark Gales. Regression prior networks.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2006.11590, 2020. 3
Sabrina J Mielke, Arthur Szlam, Y-Lan Boureau, and Emily Dinan. Linguistic calibration through
  metacognition: aligning dialogue agent responses with expected correctness. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2012.14983, 2020. 6
Kenton Murray and David Chiang. Correcting length bias in neural machine translation. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:1808.10006, 2018. 3, 4
Myle Ott, Michael Auli, David Grangier, and Marc’Aurelio Ranzato. Analyzing uncertainty in
 neural machine translation. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 3956–3965.
 PMLR, 2018. 6
Yaniv Ovadia, Emily Fertig, Jie Ren, Zachary Nado, David Sculley, Sebastian Nowozin, Joshua
  Dillon, Balaji Lakshminarayanan, and Jasper Snoek. Can you trust your model’s uncertainty?
  evaluating predictive uncertainty under dataset shift. Advances in neural information processing
  systems, 32, 2019. 1
Sebastian Padó, Daniel Cer, Michel Galley, Dan Jurafsky, and Christopher D Manning. Measur-
  ing machine translation quality as semantic equivalence: A metric based on entailment features.
  Machine Translation, 23(2):181–193, 2009. 6
Siva Reddy, Danqi Chen, and Christopher D Manning. Coqa: A conversational question answering
  challenge. Transactions of the Association for Computational Linguistics, 7:249–266, 2019. 7
Ananya B Sai, Akash Kumar Mohankumar, and Mitesh M Khapra. A survey of evaluation metrics
  used for nlg systems. ACM Computing Surveys (CSUR), 55(2):1–39, 2022. 6
Richard Socher, Eric Huang, Jeffrey Pennin, Christopher D Manning, and Andrew Ng. Dynamic
  pooling and unfolding recursive autoencoders for paraphrase detection. Advances in neural infor-
  mation processing systems, 24, 2011. 6
Jeff Speaks. Theories of Meaning. In Edward N. Zalta (ed.), The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philos-
   ophy. Metaphysics Research Lab, Stanford University, 2021. 3
Yi Tay, Vinh Q Tran, Sebastian Ruder, Jai Gupta, Hyung Won Chung, Dara Bahri, Zhen Qin, Si-
  mon Baumgartner, Cong Yu, and Donald Metzler. Charformer: Fast character transformers via
  gradient-based subword tokenization. arXiv preprint arXiv:2106.12672, 2021. 6
Sinong Wang, Han Fang, Madian Khabsa, Hanzi Mao, and Hao Ma. Entailment as few-shot learner.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2104.14690, 2021. 6
Yuxia Wang, Daniel Beck, Timothy Baldwin, and Karin Verspoor. Uncertainty estimation and reduc-
  tion of pre-trained models for text regression. Transactions of the Association for Computational
  Linguistics, 10:680–696, 2022. 6
Zhiguo Wang, Wael Hamza, and Radu Florian. Bilateral multi-perspective matching for natural
  language sentences. arXiv preprint arXiv:1702.03814, 2017. 6
Adina Williams, Nikita Nangia, and Samuel R Bowman. A broad-coverage challenge corpus for
  sentence understanding through inference. arXiv preprint arXiv:1704.05426, 2017. 5


                                                12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Lei Yu, Karl Moritz Hermann, Phil Blunsom, and Stephen Pulman. Deep learning for answer
  sentence selection. arXiv preprint arXiv:1412.1632, 2014. 6
Susan Zhang, Stephen Roller, Naman Goyal, Mikel Artetxe, Moya Chen, Shuohui Chen, Christo-
  pher Dewan, Mona Diab, Xian Li, Xi Victoria Lin, et al. Opt: Open pre-trained transformer
  language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2205.01068, 2022. 2, 7


                                               13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Table 3: Illustration of semantic, syntactic, and lexical equivalence. Work with foundation mod-
els implicitly focuses on lexical equivalence, which entails the others, but we usually care about
semantic equivalence.

                                                                               Equivalence
Sentence A                        Sentence B                         Lexical    Syntactic    Semantic
Paris is the capital of France.   Paris is the capital of France.      !           !            !
                                  Berlin is the capital of France.                 !
                                  France’s capital is Paris.                                    !


A     F URTHER DETAILS ON SEMANTIC ENTROPY
A.1    F URTHER DISCUSSION OF SEMANTIC EQUIVALENCE
We illustrate the distinction between different kinds of equivalence in Table 3. Lexically equivalent
sequences use exactly the same symbols. They are always also semantically and syntactically equiv-
alent (in a given context). Syntactically equivalent sentences have the same grammatical form. But
they can have different meanings (not semantically equivalent) and can use different symbols (not
lexically equivalent). Semantically equivalent sentences mean the same thing, but they might have
different grammatical form (not syntactically equivalent) or symbols (not lexically equivalent). Two
sentences can also be both syntactically and semantically equivalent but not lexically equivalent if
they match up to a synonym.
Soft equivalence and transitivity. Formally, semantic equivalence is transitive. That is, if E(s, s0 )
and E(s0 , s00 ) then it follows that E(s, s00 ). However, the implementation of our bidirectional equiv-
alence algorithm permits some classification errors and it is slightly ‘soft’—it will sometimes return
equivalent for pairs that are not quite equivalent. As a result, it is not strictly true that our equiv-
alence relation is transitive, and therefore not strictly true that there is a unique set of equivalence
classes. For example, the clusters might depend on the order in which the comparisons are made.
In practice, however, we find that this does not pose a noticeable problem—usually, inspecting the
outputs shows that the equivalence appears clear cut. However, we acknowledge this potential issue
as an area for improvement in future clustering algorithms.
Unequal token importance. From the perspective of meaning, some tokens can matter more than
others—key words. Naive methods like predictive entropy do distinguish between key words or
unimportant tokens. Supervised uncertainty methods that make use of language models in the un-
certainty evaluation can potentially take this into account better. In addition, our semantic entropy
approach partly adjusts for this, as discussed in Section 4.1.

A.2    F URTHER ALGORITHMIC DETAILS
In addition to the description of the method provided in the main body, in Algorithm 1 we provide
the pseudocode for our bi-directional entailment algorithm.

A.3    I MPACT OF SAMPLING METHOD ON QUALITY OF UNCERTAINTY ESTIMATE
In Section 4, we study the impact of the temperature hyper-parameter on the performance of the
uncertainty measures. Here, we show a variant of Fig. 3b for the CoQA dataset showing an almost
identical pattern. Like TriviaQA, the optimal temperature is 0.5 despite a significantly harder prob-
lem with lower accuracy, suggesting that this choice hyperparameter may generalize well. Unlike
TriviaQA, normalised entropy outperforms semantic entropy at high temperatures.
Beyond the temperature, there are a number of other design choices to be made when sampling:
the sampling method and hyper-parameters such as top-p and top-k. Our contribution in this
paper is to show the importance of these choices for uncertainty estimation which has been over-
looked previously, and study the temperature in particular. While we leave the detailed study of
these hyperparameters to future work, we do compare our default multinomial sampling method,
to multinomial beam search sampling which focuses more on high-likelihood regions of the output
space.


                                                   14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Algorithm 1 Bidirectional Entailment Clustering
Require: context x, set of seqs. {s(2) , . . . , s(M ) }, NLI classifier M, set of meanings C = {{s(1) }}
  for 2 ≤ m ≤ M do
      for c ∈ C do                                             . Compare to already-processed meanings.
          s(c) ← c0                                          . Use first sequence for each semantic-class.
          left ← M(cat(x, s(c) , “<g/>”, x, s(m) ))                   . Does old sequence entail new one?
          right ← M(cat(x, s(m) , “<g/>”, x, s(c) ))                                           . Vice versa?
          if left isSentailment and right is entailment then
              c ← c s(m)                                                           . Put into existing class.
          end if
      end for S
      C ← C {s(m) }                                                . Semantically distinct, gets own class.
  end for
  return C



                              0.76
                              0.74
                              0.72
                      AUROC


                              0.70
                              0.68
                                               Semantic entropy (ours)
                              0.66             Length-normalised entropy
                                        0.25         0.50                    1.00       1.50
                                  0.6                                                          0.8
                                  0.5                                                          0.7
                       Accuracy


                                                                                                 Diversity
                                                                                               0.6
                                  0.4
                                                                                               0.5
                                  0.3          Average correctness of sampled answers          0.4
                                               Diversity of sampled answers
                                        0.25         0.50                   1.00        1.50
                                                                   Temperature

Figure 4: CoQA temperature ablation. (bottom) Similar to TriviaQA, higher temperatures mean
higher diversity and lower accuracy. (top) The best performance for both methods comes at a
temperature of 0.5. Unlike TriviaQA, normalised entropy outperforms semantic entropy at high
temperatures.



In Table 4 we show that multinomial beam search sampling yields uncertainty measures that are less
predictive of model accuracy than multinomial sampling. Beam search also generates much less
diverse samples. We conjecture that multinomial beam search sampling focuses too much on the
most likely sequences. The diversity of this beam search corresponds to the lowest temperature result
in Fig. 4. As in the main body of the paper, we measure diversity as the average lexical overlap of the
answers in the answer set. Additionally, we investigate, why the semantic entropy underperforms
the length-normalised entropy at high temperatures. To that end, we manually inspect and label 100
classifications of our semantic equivalence method at T=1.5, and we find that at these temperatures,
many of the generated model answers are nonsensical combinations of words from the context that is
provided for the question. While the likelihood of these sequences still seems somewhat predictive
of the model’s accuracy, semantic clustering becomes very difficult and an unreliable signal for
uncertainty estimation. At this temperature, the accuracy of the semantic equivalence methods is
only 61%, whereas it is over 92% at lower temperatures (see Appendix B.2)
Note, that at low-temperatures, where one does gets plausible and well-formed model generations,
semantic entropy does clearly outperform the baselines. This finding further underlines the im-
portance of choosing appropriate sampling hyper-parameters when using entropy-based uncertainty
measures in NLG.

                                                                      15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Table 4: Multinomial beam search sampling produces sampled answers that are less diverse and thus
less useful for uncertainty estimation than multinomial sampling.

         Sampling method                          Semantic Entropy AUROC   Diversity of answers
         Multinomial sampling                                0.758                 0.490
         Multinomial beam search sampling                    0.735                 0.258



B        E XPERIMENTAL DETAILS AND ABLATIONS
We use both the OPT models2 and the Deberta-large model3 via the HuggingFace transformers
library which can be easily adopted for reproducibility. All of our code is open-source and relies on
no proprietary models.
We use the following functions of the HuggingFace API to sample the most likely answers, and the
set of answers:

           • To obtain the answer which is compared to the reference answer, which determines whether
             the question is correctly answered, we use beam search using the generate() function
             with num beams = 5 and do sample = True .
           • To obtain the answer set for uncertainty estimation, by default we use multinomial sam-
             pling, that is generate() using do sample = True and num beams = 1 . If
             indicated explicitly, we use beam multinomial sampling, that is generate() using
             num beams = 5 and do sample = True.

We run all of our experiments on 80GB NVIDIA A100s.
Testing up to 20 samples per answer on the 2.7B, 6.7B and 13B CoQA experiments, we conclude
that using more than 10 samples does not significantly improve the performance of the uncertainty
measure, we use 10 sampled answers per question in the remaining experiments on TriviaQA. Note,
that in Table 2 we compare the 30B model on CoQA and TriviaQA where in both settings we use
answer sets of size 10.
We use the following prompts on CoQA and TriviaQA. We find that on CoQA, we obtain accurate
model results with zero-shot prompting. While we have to use few-shot prompting to obtain accurate
answers on closed-book TriviaQA. We use the following prompts for each of the settings:
CoQA:
[The provided context paragraph]
[additional question-answer pairs]
Q: [Provided question]
A:
where additional question-answer pairs are preceding turns of the conversation about
the paragraph consisting of questions and reference answers.
TriviaQA:
For TriviaQA, we use a 10-shot prompt of the format:
Q: Which Oscar-nominated film had You Sexy Thing as its theme
song? A: The Full Monty Q: Which Joan’s career revived in
Whatever Happened to Baby Jane? A: Crawford Q: Which much-loved
actor won the Best Actor Oscar for The Philadelphia Story? A:
James Stewart (...) Q: In which river is the Boulder Dam? A:
To account for generations where the model continues the Q:...A:... pattern after providing an
answer to the given question, we trim all generations by pattern matching for a selection of stop-
words that we observe in the generations: Q:, Question:, QUESTION: and questions:.
    2
        https://huggingface.co/docs/transformers/model doc/opt
    3
        https://huggingface.co/docs/transformers/model doc/opt


                                                       16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Table 5: Automatic evaluation of question answering is highly accurate as compared to human
evaluation. We evaluate how accurate the automatic evaluation metric. The predictions, in this
settings are the automatically determined accuracy labels on our question answering task, and the
ground truth are human labels for the accuracy of the provided model generation given the reference
answer

                             Data set      Accuracy of automatic evaluation
                             CoQA                          0.89
                             TriviaQA                      0.96


Table 6: TriviaQA: the exact choice of accuracy metric for the free-form QA task has little effect on
the assessment of the quality of the uncertainty measure.

           Metric                                         AUROC                   Accuracy
                                        Semantic entropy     Normalised entropy
                         0
           Rouge-L(y, y ) > 0.3              0.828                 0.802           0.506
           Rouge-L(y, y 0 ) > 0.5            0.835                 0.810           0.456
           Rouge-1(y, y 0 ) > 0.5            0.835                 0.810           0.457
           Exact matching                    0.828                 0.808           0.394



B.1   R ELIABILITY OF ACCURACY METRIC AS COMPARED TO HUMAN EVALUATION
In our experiments, we evaluate how well our uncertainty measures predict the model’s accuracy
when answering a given question. The choice of accuracy metric is thus a crucial component of
our experimental setup. Generally, it has been shown to be difficult to develop automatic metrics
for free-form generation that correlate well with human evaluations. We thus verify our choice of
accuracy criterion: Rouge-L(y, y 0 ) > 0.3, for a given reference answer y and a model generation y 0 .
We manually evaluate the accuracy of 200 answers of the 30B parameter model on both COQA and
on TriviaQA, and evaluate how closely the human evaluation matches the automatic evaluation. We
find that on both data sets, the accuracy of the automatic labels as compared to the human labels as
the ground truth is high, see Table 5.

B.2   T ESTING THE BI - DIRECTIONAL ENTAILMENT CLASSIFIER
To the best of our knowledge, this paper is the first application of the bi-directional entailment
approach to identifying answers with the same meaning in question answering. Since this is a core
component of our approach, we verify how accurately this approach identifies model answers with
the same meaning. To this end, we manually label 300 samples for each of TriviaQA and CoQA
produced by the 13B parameter model to provide a ground truth as to whether or not they mean the
same thing. We find that the model achieves an accuracy of 92.7% and 95.3% respectively.

B.3   S ENSITIVITY OF RESULTS TO ACCURACY METRIC
In principle, the choice of metric to decide whether or not an answer is ‘correct’ might have a large
effect on the assessment of our method and baselines. However, we find empirically that our results
are relatively insensitive to the choice of accuracy metric.
In Table 6 we show that for TriviaQA the choice of accuracy metric for the question answering
has almost no effect on the measured AUROC of the uncertainty estimation, despite making the
measured accuracy of the model’s generation significantly different. In particular, the exact matching
requirement reduces the accuracy significantly but has little effect on the AUROCs.
For CoQA, which is an open-book QA task with greater answer variability and longer answers the
results are broadly similar (see Table 7) except for the exact matching accuracy criterion which is
too demanding because of the much larger variety of possible answers for this task.


                                                     17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Table 7: CoQA: the exact choice of the accuracy metric for the free-form open-book QA task has
little effect on the assessment of the quality of the uncertainty measure except for the use of exact
matching. For CoQA, getting an exact match is significantly harder.

             Metric                                     AUROC                      Accuracy
                                      Semantic entropy        Normalised entropy
                          0
             Rouge-L(y, y ) > 0.3         0.7672                   0.7533              0.8239
             Rouge-L(y, y 0 ) > 0.5       0.7379                   0.7290              0.7657
             Rouge-1(y, y 0 ) > 0.3       0.7672                   0.7533              0.8239
             Rouge-1(y, y 0 ) > 0.5       0.7397                   0.7309              0.7677
             Exact matching               0.6749                   0.6727              0.6459



                                                        0.8
      0.80
                                                        0.6
      0.75
                                                        0.4
      0.70            Accuracy on QA task                                Accuracy on QA task
                      AUROC of Semantic entropy                          AUROC of Semantic entropy
                                                        0.2
        2.7B
           B
           B

                         B


                                             B



                                                         2.7B
                                                            B
                                                            B

                                                                           B


                                                                                                  B
        1.3

        6.7

                       13


                                           30



                                                         1.3

                                                         6.7

                                                                         13


                                                                                                30
                Number of parameters of model                     Number of parameters of model
                       (a) CoQA                                         (b) TriviaQA

Figure 5: Accuracy improves with model size, as does semantic entropy’s uncertainty performance.
At the smallest model size, both accuracy and uncertainty diminish.


B.4    ACCURACY ABLATIONS WITH MODEL SIZE

We confirm that increasing the model size improves the accuracy of the generations on both QA
datasets (see Fig. 5a and Fig. 5b). Semantic entropy’s uncertainty performance is also shown for
context.

B.5    E XAMPLE P (T RUE ) FORMAT
The format of the prompt, reproduced here for convenient reference from the original source Kada-
vath et al. (2022), is:
Question: Who was the third president of the United States?
Here are some brainstormed ideas: James Monroe
Thomas Jefferson
John Adams
Thomas Jefferson
George Washington
Possible Answer: James Monroe
Is the possible answer:
(A) True
(B) False
The possible answer is:
where the “brainstormed answers” are from the set of sampled answers A and P(True), i.e. the
likelihood of the next token being True is taken as the uncertainty measure. The authors note that
doing the above needs to be done in a few-shot manner and does not work well as in a zero-shot
format. In our experiments, we use a few-shot prompt with 10 examples.


                                                   18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023

                                  Semantic entropy                     Predictive entropy
                                  Normalised entropy                   p(True)
                                  Lexical similarity                   Margin probability
                                                                0.80
 AUROC   0.70


                                                        AUROC
                                                                0.70
         0.60   B                                               0.60
                     B

                            B


                                                 B


                                                                       B
                                                                            B

                                                                                    B


                                                                                                        B
           2.7
                 6.7

                          13


                                               30


                                                                   2.7
                                                                         6.7

                                                                                  13


                                                                                                      30
                    Number of parameters of model                          Number of parameters of model
                           (a) CoQA                                             (b) TriviaQA

Figure 6: The margin probability, i.e. the difference between the likelihood of the most likely answer
and the likelihood of the second most likely answer, is not very predictive of models’ accuracy on
CoQA open-book question answering (a) nor on TriviaQA (b). Identical to Fig. 2 with the addition
of Margin probability which was previously omitted to avoid stretching the scale.

B.6       M ARGIN - PROBABILITY BASELINE
We additionally compare our method to the margin probability method used for neural-symbolic
parsing in Lin et al. (2022b):

                         Hmargin (p(y | x, D)) = p y (1) | x, D − p y (2) | x, D ,

where y(1) is the top-1 beam search result and y(2) is the top-2 beam search result.
Initially, running the method as proposed in Lin et al. (2022b) using a 13B parameter model on
CoQA, we find that Hmargin is not very predictive of the model’s accuracy on answering questions
in CoQA achieving an AUROC of 0.54.
We hypothesise that two factors contribute to this poor performance. First, since this measure only
looks at the difference of likelihoods, the information about the magnitude of the likelihood of a
given answer is lost. Second—analogously to the predictive entropy—it would be important to take
semantic uncertainty into account when computing Hmargin . Manually inspecting model answers
on CoQA, and the corresponding Hmargin , we see that the margin between two semantically equiv-
alent answers and two semantically distinct answers is often similar. That is, this measure does not
distinguish between uncertainty between paraphrases of the same meaning (in which case the model
might actually be confident about meaning of the answer), and the model’s uncertainty about which
semantically distinct meaning is correct.
We find that if instead of obtaining y(1) and y(2) by multinomial sampling (as in our other ex-
periments) instead of by beam search, this second problem becomes less pronounced and Hmargin
performs better while still being clearly outperformed by the other methods we study. We report our
full results in Fig. 6.

Table 8: Example of challenges for Hmargin . Hmargin does not distinguish between lexical and
semantic uncertainty and thus can not distinguish cases where the model is certain about the cor-
rect answer (but uncertain about the precise formulation) as in row 1, and cases where the model
is uncertain about the correct answer as in row 2. The semantic entropy correctly indicates low
uncertainty in the first case and high uncertainty in the second case.


                          y(1)                 y(2)     Hmargin          Semantic entropy
                          Thomas Edison.     Edison.        0.90                0.10
                          Thomas.            George.        0.36                0.87


                                                       19
