Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


D UAL S TUDENT N ETWORKS FOR DATA -F REE
M ODEL S TEALING
    James Beetham1∗ , Navid Kardan1∗, Ajmal Mian2 , Mubarak Shah1
 1                                           2
    Center for Research in Computer Vision     Department of Computer Science
         University of Central Florida          University of Western Australia
        Orlando, Florida 32816, USA              Crawley WA 6009, Australia
                 {james.beetham,kardan}@knights.ucf.edu
                           ajmal.mian@uwa.edu.au
                              shah@crcv.ucf.edu



                                                A BSTRACT

              Data-free model stealing aims to replicate a target model without direct access to
              either the training data or the target model. To accomplish this, existing methods
              use a generator to produce samples in order to train a student model to match the
              target model outputs. To this end, the two main challenges are estimating gradients
              of the target model without access to its parameters, and generating a diverse set
              of training samples that thoroughly explores the input space. We propose a Dual
              Student method where two students are symmetrically trained in order to provide
              the generator a criterion to generate samples that the two students disagree on.
              On one hand, disagreement on a sample implies at least one student has classi-
              fied the sample incorrectly when compared to the target model. This incentive
              towards disagreement implicitly encourages the generator to explore more diverse
              regions of the input space. On the other hand, our method utilizes gradients of
              student models to indirectly estimate gradients of the target model. We show that
              this novel training objective for the generator network is equivalent to optimizing
              a lower bound on the generator’s loss if we had access to the target model gra-
              dients. In other words, our method alters the standard data-free model stealing
              paradigm by substituting the target model with a separate student model, thereby
              creating a lower bound which can be directly optimized without additional target
              model queries or separate synthetic datasets. We show that our new optimization
              framework provides more accurate gradient estimation of the target model and bet-
              ter accuracies on benchmark classification datasets. Additionally, our approach
              balances improved query efficiency with training computation cost. Finally, we
              demonstrate that our method serves as a better proxy model for transfer-based
              adversarial attacks than existing data-free model stealing methods.


1        I NTRODUCTION

Model stealing has been shown to be a serious vulnerability in current machine learning models.
Machine learning models are increasingly being deployed in products where the model’s output is
accessible through APIs, also known as Machine Learning as a Service. Companies put a large
amount of effort into training these models through the collection and annotation of large amounts
of data. However, recent work has shown that the ability to query a model and get its output –
without access to the target model’s weights – enables adversaries to utilize different model stealing
approaches, where the attacker can train a student model to have similar functionality to the target
model (Kesarwani et al., 2018; Yu et al., 2020; Yuan et al., 2022; Truong et al., 2021; Sanyal et al.,
2022). Two major motivations for stealing a private model are utilizing the stolen model for down-
stream adversarial attacks as well as monetary gains, therefore, model stealing methods present an
increasing problem (Tramèr et al., 2016; Zhang et al., 2022).

     ∗
         Equal contribution


                                                      1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Data-free model stealing is a generalization of black-box model stealing which is an extension of
knowledge distillation. In all three areas, the aim is to obtain a student model which imitates the
target model. However, while knowledge distillation environments typically retain full knowledge
of the target model training data and weights, black-box model stealing eliminates the need to have
access to the target model weights and training data. Going one step further, black-box model steal-
ing typically uses real-world data samples to train the student network, whereas data-free model
stealing removes that requirement by leveraging a generator. As the relationship between the substi-
tute dataset and true dataset is typically unknown, the removal of the substitute data results in more
generalizable approaches.
Existing methods for data-free model stealing involve either using a min-max adversarial approach
(Truong et al., 2021; Kariyappa et al., 2021; Zhang et al., 2022), or a generator-discriminator setup
incorporating Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs) (Sanyal et al., 2022). DFME (Truong et al.,
2021) and DFMS-HL (Sanyal et al., 2022) are the two most recent and highest performing methods
for each of these approaches, respectively. In both approaches, a student is optimized to minimize
the distance between the student and target model outputs. However, in the former, a generator is
optimized to maximize the distance between student and target model outputs, while in the latter,
the generator-discriminator is optimized to generate samples similar to a synthesized dataset which
have balanced student classifications. Even though utilizing a synthesized dataset relaxes the truly
data-free requirement, the current state of the art (SOTA) is provided by the DFMS-HL method
which does utilize synthetic data, while DFME method provided the previous SOTA and doesn’t
require synthetic data.
Our proposed Dual Student method alters the generator-student min-max framework by training two
student models to match the target model instead of one. This allows the generator to use one of the
students as a proxy for the target model, resulting in a much more effective training criterion. The
two students are symmetrically trained to match the target model, while employing the new generator
objective to generate samples on which the two students disagree. Disagreement between the two
students implies disagreement between at least one of the students and the target model, resulting in
the generated sample being a hard sample (c.f. hard sample mining (Shrivastava et al., 2016)) to at
least one student. This hard sample provides the driving force to explore controversial regions in the
input space on which the students and teacher disagree on. Finding samples on which the student
and teacher disagree is also an implicit goal of DFME. However, while DFME does optimize the
generator to find disagreement between the student and target, it uses gradient estimations of the
target. Our method, on the other hand, uses the true gradients of the second student which can be
obtained using direct backpropagation.
Using two student models as a proxy for the target model results in better target model gradient
estimates than data-free model stealing methods like DFME, which use explicit gradient estimates.
Formalizing our setup, substituting a second student model for the target model creates an alternative
lower bound for the student-teacher optimization. Changing the training objective of the generator-
student framework to more directly optimize to match the target model results in student model
gradients being better aligned with the target model gradients. In our experiments, we show the
gradients used when training dual students is closer to using the true gradients of the target model
than the estimation method used by DFME (Truong et al., 2021). This important change eliminates
the need of some existing approaches (Truong et al., 2021; Kariyappa et al., 2021) to estimate the
gradient through the target model. Gradient estimation techniques used in these existing works
assume the target model provides soft-label outputs - removing the gradient estimation removes this
dependence on soft-labels and allows existing methods to be easily extended to the more difficult
hard-label setting. Removing the gradient estimation also reduces the number of queries made to the
target model. Finally, we also explore a more difficult data-free setting where the number of classes
is not know in advance. To the best of our knowledge, we are the first to address this setting and
provide a solution to this new challenging data-free setup.
In summary, our contributions in this paper are as follows: (1) We propose the Dual Student method
which provides a tractable approach for the data-free model extraction problem with minimal added
components. This includes a mathematical reframing of the data-free model stealing objective along
with an empirical comparison with the previous formulation provided by DFME (Truong et al.,
2021). (2) The Dual Student method can be incorporated into existing soft-label approaches to
extend them to hard-label settings, and has better classification accuracy than existing methods. (3)
We show the effectiveness of utilizing the Dual Student setup to fine-tune fully trained models by


                                                  2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


directly improving the existing SOTA from DFMS-HL and evaluate the effectiveness of the top
data-free model stealing approaches for transfer-based adversarial attacks against the target model.

2     R ELATED W ORK

In this section, we outline the foundational papers our method is built upon, as well as other recent
works in this area. We start with knowledge distillation - distilling the knowledge out of a target
model and into a student. Then we describe the transition towards model extraction and model
stealing, and its extension into the data-free model domain. Finally we discuss the use of data-free
model stealing for transfer-based adversarial attacks.

2.1   K NOWLEDGE D ISTILLATION

Knowledge distillation is the process of using transfer learning to train a different, typically smaller,
model. From the area of model compression (Buciluǎ et al., 2006; Romero et al., 2014), knowledge
distillation was initially used to determine the necessary depth of deep learning models in Ba &
Caruana (2014). The objective was then expanded towards the general goal of creating smaller and
more efficient models (Hinton et al., 2015; Urban et al., 2016; Yin et al., 2020). Our approach to data-
free model extraction builds off of knowledge distillation techniques for training a student model
from a target model, otherwise referred to as the “teacher” or “victim” model in other methods.
Model extraction, also called model stealing, is used to obtain a new model which performs similarly
to the target model without knowledge of the target model’s gradients. First uses of model extrac-
tion were in extracting decision trees to help better explain deep learning models (Bastani et al.,
2017b;a), however, recent applications have focused on obtaining a substitute model for the purpose
of transfer-based attacks on the target model (Wang et al., 2021). Though early knowledge distilla-
tion works relied on access to the original training data, more recent data-free knowledge distillation
methods utilize a generator to remove this dependence (Fang et al., 2019; Binici et al., 2022). Re-
cent works utilize activation regularization between the target and student models, in addition to
interpolation between generated examples to improve training (Qu et al., 2021).

2.2   DATA -F REE M ODEL E XTRACTION

Data-free model extraction aims to train a student model without being given a dataset prior. Most
existing model extraction techniques rely on either some small set of labeled samples, or an alterna-
tive training dataset (Orekondy et al., 2019; Barbalau et al., 2020; Wang, 2021). The first solutions
to this data-free model extraction problem are called DFME and MAZE, and use an adversarial
setup between a generator and a student (Truong et al., 2021; Kariyappa et al., 2021). The student
aims to match the target model and the generator aims to find examples which result in different
classifications between the student and target models. However, these methods rely on estimating
the gradient of the target model, so more recent work has focused on removing this dependence
by altering the generator objective (Hong et al., 2022; Sanyal et al., 2022). The current SOTA for
data-free model stealing is DFMS-HL by Sanyal et al. (2022), which not only sets the bar for student
model classification accuracy, it also extends the problem to the hard-label setting. Their approach
utilizes a full generator-discriminator GAN setup to generate samples similar to a synthetic dataset
while retaining balanced class classifications of the samples by the student model. These two aspects
– keeping samples similar to the synthetic dataset, and balancing the generated class distribution –
remove the reliance on gradient estimation techniques that methods such as DFME require. We note
that DFMS-HL utilizes a synthetic dataset of random shapes generated on colored backgrounds,
which breaks the truly data-free setting.

2.3   T RANSFER - BASED ATTACKS

Adversarial attacks (Szegedy et al., 2013; Akhtar & Mian, 2018; Kardan & Stanley, 2017; Kardan
et al., 2021; Beetham et al., 2022) pose a significant obstacle against deploying deep models. In
particular, transfer-based adversarial attacks Akhtar et al. (2021) use a substitute model’s gradients
to generate an adversarial image to fool the target model. This setting was explored extensively by
early methods, however, recent work has moved towards a more realistic data-free setting (Zhang


                                                   3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Figure 1: Our network consists of a generator, two students, and a target model. The generator
generates images which the two students are trained to classify. The student losses in the Dual
Student setup aim to reduce the distance between the target and student model outputs, and only
require the soft-label or hard-label outputs of the target model. The generator loss competes against
the two student losses by maximizing the distance between the target and student model outputs.


et al., 2021). A prominent use-case for model stealing attacks is to use the student model as a proxy
for transfer-based adversarial attacks (Hong et al., 2022; Li & Merkel, 2021; Yue et al., 2021). The
method proposed in Zhang et al. (2022) leverages data-free model stealing work to use fewer queries
to train a substitute model for transfer-based adversarial attacks. However, we do not include this
work in our transfer-based attack comparison, as that work is targeted towards transfer-based adver-
sarial attacks as opposed to our primary objective of mimicking the performance of a classification
model.


3     D UAL S TUDENTS M ETHOD

This section outlines the framework of the Dual Students method. We first explain why our proposed
optimization is better, and then provide an empirical analysis of our algorithm. The Dual Students
method consists of a generator, two students, and a target model with limited black-box access.
Similar to the adversarial objective in GANs where the generator tries to fool the discriminator, the
generator in the Dual Students method generates images on which the two students should have
disagreeing outputs. A mismatch between the outputs of the two students on a generated image
implies that at least one of the student outputs does not match the teacher output for this image.
This is beneficial for optimizing the students to match the target model, especially in the hard-
label setting where hard examples are crucial for correcting the student models. These differing
objectives – generator promoting disagreement between the students and the students aiming for
agreement with the teacher – form the min-max framework of our setup, which facilitates the exact
computation of the gradients for all losses.
Architecture of the proposed method is show in Figure 1, where a key contribution is that our gen-
erator optimization no longer requires the estimated gradient of the target model. In our method,
the student model gradients are not used as a direct proxy for the target model gradients. De-
spite this, when compared with ideal gradients from a student model trained in a white-box setting,
our method results in student-model gradients closer to the white-box setting than the single-step
forward-differences method.

3.1   DATA -F REE M ODEL S TEALING F RAMEWORK

For target T , generator G, student S, and noise z, our broad objective for solving data-free model
stealing is to optimize:
                                min max ||T (G(z)) − S(G(z))||p .                                 (1)
                                  S   G

The original Data-Free Model Extraction framework aimed to extract the target model by utilizing
a generator G with parameters θG to generate images x from noise z ∼ U([0, 1]d ), where d is the
dimension of the latent space, in which the student S with parameters θS is trained to match the


                                                 4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


output of target model T . The loss function for the student is:
                                min LS (S(G(z; θG ); θS ), T (G(z; θG ))),
                                  θS

where student loss LS is typically LS = DKL or LS = ℓ1 . We choose to use the latter when
applicable, as it has been shown to perform better than DKL (Truong et al., 2021). The generator,
on the other hand, is optimized to maximize the difference between student and teacher. To this end,
the negative of the student loss is typically used:
                             min −LG (S(G(z; θG ); θS ), T (G(z; θG ))).
                                θG

However, whereas the student loss only requires the gradient through the student model, the genera-
tor loss requires the gradient through the student, target, and generator. Due to the limited black-box
access to the target model, existing approaches utilize the forward differences method to estimate the
gradient through the target model (Truong et al., 2021). An additional problem is that the generator
loss does not directly promote a diversity of classes within the generated images. Though this has not
been a problem for 10-class datasets like SVHN and CIFAR10, we note in Section 4.2 that diversity
of classes becomes a larger challenge when using datasets with more classes like CIFAR100.

3.2   A PPROXIMATING G RADIENT WITH D UAL S TUDENTS

Towards making the broad DFMS objective outlined in Eq. 1 differentiable, we propose adding an
additional student S2 to solve the following optimization problem:
                         min max ||S1 (x) − T (x)||p + ||S2 (x) − T (x)||p ,                       (2)
                         S1 ,S2      G

for any ℓp norm loss. Though, neither the original objective in Eq. 1 or this new objective are
differentiable due to requiring the gradients through the Target model T , adding the second student
S2 allows us to make a substitution to use the generator optimization:
                                         max ||S1 (G(z)) − S2 (G(z))||p .                          (3)
                                          G

This optimization for Generator G removes the Target model T and makes the problem directly
differentiable. This new generator optimization is related to our new objective in Eq. 2 through the
triangle inequality,
                   ||S1 (x) − S2 (x)||p ≤ ||S1 (x) − T (x)||p + ||S2 (x) − T (x)||p .              (4)
The LHS of the inequality in Eq. 4 corresponds to the generator’s loss in Dual Student with x =
G(z) in Eq. 3, and the RHS is the minimization desired in Eq. 1 with an additional student. In other
words, when the LHS is maximized during generator optimization, the lower bound is increasing:
             max ||S1 (x) − S2 (x)||p ≤ max ||S1 (x) − T (x)||p + ||S2 (x) − T (x)||p .
               x                                 x

This ensures that either S1 (x) or S2 (x) is getting farther away from T (x) during the generator
optimization. To optimize min-max optimization in Eq. 3, we iteratively update the student and
generator networks. In the first step, Student Si with parameters θSi is optimized to match the
output of the target model for a particular query:

                              min LS (Si (G(z; θG ); θSi ), T (G(z; θG ))).
                                θSi

Next, the generator is updated according to:

                          max LG (S1 (G(z; θG ); θS1 ), S2 (G(z; θG ); θS2 )).                     (5)
                           θG

The student loss used for soft-labels is LS = ℓ1 , whereas the student loss used for hard-labels is
cross entropy, i.e. LS = ce, as this is standard for classification tasks. The generator optimization
maximizes the difference between the outputs of the two students, and LG = ℓ1 is used in the
generator loss when training on both soft-labels and hard-labels. We provide an algorithm for our
method in the supplemental materials.


                                                        5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                       (a)                                                      (b)

Figure 2: The distance between the true and estimated target model gradients of either Generated
images or Real images. The gradient is computed w.r.t. input image x, and a formal description of
the distance used is provided in Eq. 6. (a) Cross-Entropy loss is used to compute the gradient in the
hard-label setting, and (b) ℓ1 loss is used in the soft-label setting. Real images are from the test split
of the CIFAR10 dataset.



A major benefit of our approach is the simplicity of requiring only an additional student to overcome
the non-differentiability of the black-box teacher. Our method is fully differentiable, in contrast to
methods like DFME which approximate teacher gradients using forward differences. Additionally,
the Dual Students approach is compatible with both soft-label and hard-label learning through a
simple change to the loss function. Existing gradient-estimation based methods like DFME can
only be used in the soft-label setting due to the forward differences method needing the additional
information provided by the soft-label to remain effective. For other fully trained DFMS, our method
can be used to fine-tune the trained models as long as there is a student and generator. In the next
subsection, we evaluate the accuracy of the different gradient approximation methods compared to
our Dual Students method.


3.3   E VALUATING THE G RADIENT A PPROXIMATION
The aim for the generator optimization under the black-box scenario proposed in Eq. 5 is to get as
close as possible to the generator optimization under the white-box scenario outlined in Eq. 1. One
way to evaluate the quality of the estimated gradients between the forward differences method and
the Dual Students method is to compare the gradients computed. Specifically, the gradients from
LG w.r.t. the generated image x when using the black-box estimate, versus the gradients computed
when using the white-box Target model directly. By comparing difference between the normalized
gradients, the difference can be shown as:

                         LG (S(x; θS ), T (x; θT ))          LG (S1 (x, θS1 ), S2 (x; θS2 ))
         f (x) = ∇x                                   − ∇x                                           .   (6)
                       ||LG (S(x; θS ), T (x; θT ))||      ||LG (S1 (x; θS1 ), S2 (x; θS2 ))||   2


The results of the forward differences method compared with our Dual Students using this setup is
shown in Figure 2. The figure plots the difference between the normalized gradient of the generated
image using the target model (white-box gradient) versus the estimate (forward differences or Dual
Students). Figure 2a shows that our method provides a gradient estimate closer to the white-box set-
ting than the forward differences method used in DFME in the hard-label setting for both generated
and real images. Figure 2b shows error for the soft-label setting, where we see DFME has similar
estimation error between real and generated images, while our Dual Students has a smaller error for
both between real and generated images. We note that the performance on generated images are
more important as generated images are the only images the models have access to during training.
Empirically, we see that this new generator loss results in more accurate gradient estimations for
the target model than the forward differences method, as is shown in Figure 2. We note that the
forward differences method utilizes soft-labels, and performance is much worse when the soft-label
information is reduced to hard-labels.


                                                    6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Table 1: Percent student accuracy for different methods with and without the Dual Student (DS)
method.

       Dataset        Target Accuracy          Method               Probabilities    Hard-Labels
                           99.66               DFME                    99.15            97.85
       MNIST
                           99.66                 DS                    99.36            99.25
                           93.84               DFME                    85.17            48.91
    FashionMNIST
                           93.84                 DS                    91.17            80.53
                           97.21               DFME                    96.35            85.69
       GTSRB
                           97.21                 DS                    96.40            93.20
                           96.20               DFME                    95.33            93.87
       SVHN
                           96.20                 DS                    95.72            95.43
                            95.5               DFME                    88.10            68.40
                            95.5                 DS                    91.34            78.72
      CIFAR10
                            95.5             DFMS-SL/HL                88.51            79.61
                            95.5           DFMS-SL/HL + DS             89.38            85.06
                           77.99               DFME                    26.46             6.91
                           77.99                 DS                    45.32             9.77
      CIFAR100
                           77.99             DFMS-SL/HL                44.86            35.78
                           77.99           DFMS-SL/HL + DS             50.98            36.38



4     E XPERIMENTS

We evaluate the Dual Students method on various datasets for standard classification accuracy and
transfer-based attack effectiveness. The datasets used are MNIST, FashionMNIST, GTSRB, SVHN,
CIFAR10, and CIFAR100 (Xiao et al., 2017; Stallkamp et al., 2011; Netzer et al., 2011; Krizhevsky
et al., 2009). The target model architecture is ResNet-34, while the students are ResNet-18 and
are trained for 2 million queries for MNIST, FashionMNIST, GTSRB, and SVHN and 20 million
queries for CIFAR10 and CIFAR100 (He et al., 2016). The generator architecture is the same 3-
layer convolutional model used in DFME. For the classification task an average of the two student’s
outputs are used in an ensemble. However, for transfer-based attacks, only the higher accuracy
student is used as a proxy in order to help make the performance more comparable across methods.
More experiment details are provided in the supplemental material.
4.1   C LASSIFICATION P ERFORMANCE
The standard evaluation setting for data-free model extraction is to test the student model accuracy
on the test set respective to the dataset the target model was trained on. Table 1 provides a com-
parison between DFME (Truong et al., 2021), DFMS-HL (Sanyal et al., 2022), our proposed Dual
Students method, and when our Dual Students method is used with DFMS-HL. As can be seen, our
method outperforms DFME and DFMS-HL on the different datasets using soft-labels (probabilities),
with the most notable increase being on FashionMNIST. On hard-labels, our method outperforms
DFMS-HL when used to fine-tune the DFMS-HL trained student.
Using Dual Students to fine-tune fully trained generator-student-teacher methods is an effective way
to increase accuracy. Specifically, we take the fully trained student from one method and insert it as
a pretrained method into our Dual Students setup. At the start of fine-tuning using Dual Students,
the generator along with one of the students is uninitialized, while the remaining student uses the
weights trained by the original method. After fine-tuning, only the fine-tuned student is used during
evaluation. This fine-tuning is especially beneficial for methods that have a different optimization
scheme such as DFMS-HL. From a high level view, the DFMS-HL method optimizes the generator
to generate images that are similar to the proxy data and that have a balanced distribution of classes,
when classified by the student model. Due to the student model being optimized to match the target
model outputs, the generator is indirectly optimized to generate a balanced distributions of classes
as classified by the target model. There is no loss in the setup which directly incentivizes samples on
which the student and teacher disagree. Thus when our method is used to fine-tune the fully trained
DFMS-HL models for 1 million queries (5% of total), we see an improvement of over 5% in Table 1.
We note that the DFMS-SL/HL results shown were trained using our target model in order to better


                                                  7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                              Figure 4: Accuracy on Target Model of perturbed im-
Figure 3: Class distribution of gener-        ages generated using PGD attack with varying epsilons
ated classes at the end of training for CI-      ϵ
                                              ( 255 ) where different soft-label DFMS student models
FAR10 dataset. Dual Student is able to        are used.
produce more balanced samples.


compare with other methods, and don’t fully match the accuracies reported in Sanyal et al. (2022).
They achieve 85.92% accuracy on hard-labels compared with the 79.61% accuracy we found. When
their model is fine-tuned using Dual Students, we observe an increased accuracy of 88.46%.
4.2   Q UERY E FFICIENCY AND N UMBER OF C LASSES

The Dual Student generator loss avoids the extra queries necessary for zeroth order gradient es-
timation when optimizing the Generator. Using zeroth order gradient estimation adds additional
queries to the target model during the generator training. The DFME method has the same al-
ternating generator-student training and uses the same parameters generator and student iterations.
However, due to their use of the forward differences method when updating the generator, each gen-
erator iteration requires an additional 2 queries to the target model. This results in our method using
5
7 ≈ 71.42% of the queries that DFME does.
When compared with the DFMS-HL, our Dual Student method benefits from a simpler training
setup and requires less compute. Though both methods have the same number of separate models,
DFMS-HL requires the generator to be pretrained on the synthetic data, whereas our method can be
trained from scratch using alternating generator-student training loops.
DFMS faces challenges when scaling to datasets with larger numbers of classes. Intuitively, datasets
with more classes tend to be more difficult than datasets with fewer classes, and this is what we
found when extending our method to CIFAR100. With no changes to our setup, DFME achieves
around 26.46% accuracy on CIFAR100, while our Dual Students method achieves around 45.32%.
A reason for this large reduction in accuracy, when going from CIFAR10 to CIFAR100, is the lack of
explicit diversity within the generator loss optimization LG that we define. Though the generator is
optimized to find confusing images for the two students, there is no guarantee that those confusing
images are evenly distributed across classes. Despite this, Figure 3 shows that the generator for
the Dual Students method generates a more balanced set of classes than the DFME generator on
CIFAR10, where perfectly balanced classes would be 10% prevalence for all classes. We provide
additional figures and analysis of generated image class distributions in our supplementary material.
A natural extension to the data-free black-box hard-label environment that DFMS works in is to
remove the knowledge about the number of classes in the target dataset. This raises the challenge of
how to learn about the number of classes, and how to alter the classifier to grow as the number of
classes grows. To extend our method and address these challenges, the seen classes are mapped in
the order they are observed, and student classifier training is limited to the number of seen classes.
As additional classes are discovered naturally by the generator traversing the image-space, the final
classification layer of the student model expands to include these additional classes as separate
outputs. Training on CIFAR10 using hard-labels without the number of classes known, our method
achieves 74.95% accuracy, which is comparable to the hard-label accuracy when the number of
classes are known.


                                                   8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Table 2: Attack success percentage of different DFMS methods on the Target Model trained on
                             3
CIFAR10 when attack ϵ = 255     . All attacks are evaluated on the Target Model. The Target Model
row is a white-box attack, Proxy Model is a transfer-based black-box attack where the proxy is
trained using the same data as the target model. The other DFMS methods provide trained student
models which act as the proxy in transfer-based black-box attacks.

                                        Untargeted Attacks                 Targeted Attacks
 Attack           Method
                                    Probabilities Hard-Labels         Probabilities Hard-Labels
              Target Model                      45.00                             19.64
              Proxy Model                       33.12                             14.38
                 DFME                  56.84          39.22              21.07          17.15
    FGSM
                  DS                   62.35          44.58              21.58          21.04
              DFMS-HL/SL               54.88          48.89              19.74          21.85
            DFMS-HL/SL + DS            54.99          50.41              20.53          23.59
              Target Model                      96.78                             76.32
              Proxy Model                       55.01                             28.33
                 DFME                  83.59          54.71              51.97          31.49
    PGD
                  DS                   91.04          62.21              61.96          33.39
              DFMS-HL/SL               81.97          72.40              52.64          39.95
            DFMS-HL/SL + DS            81.04          73.08              51.38          42.53


4.3   B LACK - BOX ATTACKS

The effectiveness of using the trained student model as a substitute for the target model in a black-
box transfer-based adversarial attack can be seen in Table 2. The DaST method (Zhou et al., 2020)
and the work done by Zhang et al. (2022) also have a similar generator-student setup, however the
focus of those works are primarily on being used as a transfer-based proxy model. Our work, on the
other hand, focuses on the classification accuracy of CIFAR10. In the fooling rates in Table 2, we
can see that our method has a much higher fooling rate for the different attacks. We chose to use a
                      3                                8
small epsilon of ϵ = 255  instead of the standard ϵ = 255 to highlight the difference in effectiveness.
For higher epsilons the attack success rate becomes 100%, as can be seen in Figure 4.
Two observations of note in Table 2 are that the data-free methods have a higher attack success
rate than the proxy model trained on the real dataset, and that the data-free methods outperform
the white-box attack when using FGSM (Goodfellow et al., 2015). For the former, it might seem
counter intuitive that the student models significantly outperform the regularly trained proxy model.
However, this result is expected, as the millions of queries to the target model used to train the
student model result in the students having gradients more similar to the target model. For the
latter, the DFMS methods having a higher fooling rate than the white-box setting is surprising. One
explanation for this is that the FGSM attack is more susceptible to noise within the attacked-model’s
gradients due to only taking a single step in the direction of the signed gradient. The white-box
model is a larger model trained on the real dataset, and thus has a higher tendency for noise within
its gradients as compared with the student models. The student models, on the other hand, are
trained on images designed to be near the class boundaries, as, if there is noise within the student
model gradients, the generator will leverage that noise to cause disagreement between the students.
PGD takes multiple smaller steps and is thus less susceptible to the noise which explains why the
white-box setting is more optimal that attack (Madry et al., 2017).

5     C ONCLUSION
In summary, we outlined a new Data-Free Model Stealing optimization cultivated in the Dual Stu-
dents method. We showed the Dual Students method is effective in stealing the functionality of the
target model as well as providing a good proxy from which to generate transfer-based adversarial
attacks. Towards improving model stealing methods, reducing the number of queries required and
extending to more complex datasets and tasks are major challenges to be explored in future work.


                                                  9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Ethics Statement: Advancing the model stealing area has the potential to improve the effectiveness
of attacks from adversaries with ill intentions. However, for the data-free area specifically, this is not
an immediate concern due to current DFMS methods being very limited when it comes to scaling to
more useful or valuable problems. And, as with many areas of machine learning research, it is not
clear that work in this area will not bring about benefits towards knowledge distillation and machine
learning as a whole which may outweigh potentially exacerbating the model stealing threat.
Reproducibility Statement: We outline the general idea of our method and provide the key hyper-
parameters used during training. In the supplemental material we provide the algorithm as well as
additional hyperparameters necessary for replicating the results shown in the tables. Because the
dual students method does not require pretraining, other synthetic datasets, or models that require
separate training routines, the environment can be setup and trained from scratch without using
proprietary datasets or environments.

6    ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
We thank Dr. Mitch Hill for insightful discussions and feedback. This material is partially based
upon work supported by the Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency (DARPA) under Agree-
ment No. HR00112090137, and is approved for public release; distribution is unlimited. Professor
Ajmal Mian is the recipient of an Australian Research Council Future Fellowship Award (project
number FT210100268) funded by the Australian Government.

R EFERENCES
Naveed Akhtar and Ajmal Mian. Threat of adversarial attacks on deep learning in computer vision:
  A survey. Ieee Access, 6:14410–14430, 2018.
Naveed Akhtar, Ajmal Mian, Navid Kardan, and Mubarak Shah. Advances in adversarial attacks
  and defenses in computer vision: A survey. IEEE Access, 9:155161–155196, 2021.
Jimmy Ba and Rich Caruana. Do deep nets really need to be deep? In Z. Ghahramani, M. Welling,
  C. Cortes, N. Lawrence, and K. Q. Weinberger (eds.), Advances in Neural Information Processing
  Systems, volume 27. Curran Associates, Inc., 2014.
Antonio Barbalau, Adrian Cosma, Radu Tudor Ionescu, and Marius Popescu. Black-box ripper:
  Copying black-box models using generative evolutionary algorithms. Advances in Neural Infor-
  mation Processing Systems, 33:20120–20129, 2020.
Osbert Bastani, Carolyn Kim, and Hamsa Bastani. Interpretability via model extraction. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:1706.09773, 2017a.
Osbert Bastani, Carolyn Kim, and Hamsa Bastani. Interpreting blackbox models via model extrac-
  tion. arXiv preprint arXiv:1705.08504, 2017b.
James Beetham, Navid Kardan, Ajmal Mian, and Mubarak Shah. Detecting compromised archi-
  tecture/weights of a deep model. In 2022 26th International Conference on Pattern Recognition
  (ICPR), pp. 2843–2849. IEEE, 2022.
Kuluhan Binici, Shivam Aggarwal, Nam Trung Pham, Karianto Leman, and Tulika Mitra. Robust
  and resource-efficient data-free knowledge distillation by generative pseudo replay. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2201.03019, 2022.
Cristian Buciluǎ, Rich Caruana, and Alexandru Niculescu-Mizil. Model compression. In Pro-
  ceedings of the 12th ACM SIGKDD international conference on Knowledge discovery and data
  mining, pp. 535–541, 2006.
Gongfan Fang, Jie Song, Chengchao Shen, Xinchao Wang, Da Chen, and Mingli Song. Data-free
  adversarial distillation. arXiv preprint arXiv:1912.11006, 2019.
Ian J. Goodfellow, Jonathon Shlens, and Christian Szegedy. Explaining and harnessing adversarial
  examples. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2015.


                                                   10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Kaiming He, Xiangyu Zhang, Shaoqing Ren, and Jian Sun. Identity mappings in deep residual
  networks. In European conference on computer vision, pp. 630–645. Springer, 2016.
Geoffrey Hinton, Oriol Vinyals, Jeff Dean, et al. Distilling the knowledge in a neural network. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:1503.02531, 2(7), 2015.
Chi Hong, Jiyue Huang, and Lydia Y Chen. Mega: Model stealing via collaborative generator-
  substitute networks. arXiv preprint arXiv:2202.00008, 2022.
Navid Kardan and Kenneth O Stanley. Mitigating fooling with competitive overcomplete output
  layer neural networks. In 2017 International Joint Conference on Neural Networks (IJCNN), pp.
  518–525. IEEE, 2017.
Navid Kardan, Mubarak Shah, and Mitch Hill. Self-joint supervised learning. In International
  Conference on Learning Representations, 2021.
Sanjay Kariyappa, Atul Prakash, and Moinuddin K Qureshi. Maze: Data-free model stealing attack
  using zeroth-order gradient estimation. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer
  Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 13814–13823, 2021.
Manish Kesarwani, Bhaskar Mukhoty, Vijay Arya, and Sameep Mehta. Model extraction warning in
 mlaas paradigm. In Proceedings of the 34th Annual Computer Security Applications Conference,
 pp. 371–380, 2018.
Alex Krizhevsky, Geoffrey Hinton, et al. Learning multiple layers of features from tiny images.
  2009.
Tommy Li and Cory Merkel. Model extraction and adversarial attacks on neural networks using
  switching power information. In International Conference on Artificial Neural Networks, pp.
  91–101. Springer, 2021.
Aleksander Madry, Aleksandar Makelov, Ludwig Schmidt, Dimitris Tsipras, and Adrian Vladu.
  Towards deep learning models resistant to adversarial attacks. arXiv preprint arXiv:1706.06083,
  2017.
Yuval Netzer, Tao Wang, Adam Coates, Alessandro Bissacco, Bo Wu, and Andrew Y Ng. Reading
  digits in natural images with unsupervised feature learning. 2011.
Tribhuvanesh Orekondy, Bernt Schiele, and Mario Fritz. Knockoff nets: Stealing functionality of
  black-box models. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
  Recognition (CVPR), June 2019.
Xiaoyang Qu, Jianzong Wang, and Jing Xiao. Enhancing data-free adversarial distillation with ac-
  tivation regularization and virtual interpolation. In ICASSP 2021-2021 IEEE International Con-
  ference on Acoustics, Speech and Signal Processing (ICASSP), pp. 3340–3344. IEEE, 2021.
Adriana Romero, Nicolas Ballas, Samira Ebrahimi Kahou, Antoine Chassang, Carlo Gatta, and
  Yoshua Bengio. Fitnets: Hints for thin deep nets. arXiv preprint arXiv:1412.6550, 2014.
Sunandini Sanyal, Sravanti Addepalli, and R. Venkatesh Babu. Towards data-free model stealing in
  a hard label setting. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
  Recognition (CVPR), pp. 15284–15293, June 2022.
Abhinav Shrivastava, Abhinav Gupta, and Ross Girshick. Training region-based object detectors
  with online hard example mining. In Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and
  pattern recognition, pp. 761–769, 2016.
Johannes Stallkamp, Marc Schlipsing, Jan Salmen, and Christian Igel. The german traffic sign
  recognition benchmark: a multi-class classification competition. In The 2011 international joint
  conference on neural networks, pp. 1453–1460. IEEE, 2011.
Christian Szegedy, Wojciech Zaremba, Ilya Sutskever, Joan Bruna, Dumitru Erhan, Ian Goodfellow,
  and Rob Fergus. Intriguing properties of neural networks. arXiv preprint arXiv:1312.6199, 2013.


                                                 11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Florian Tramèr, Fan Zhang, Ari Juels, Michael K Reiter, and Thomas Ristenpart. Stealing machine
  learning models via prediction {APIs}. In 25th USENIX security symposium (USENIX Security
  16), pp. 601–618, 2016.
Jean-Baptiste Truong, Pratyush Maini, Robert J Walls, and Nicolas Papernot. Data-free model
  extraction. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recog-
  nition, pp. 4771–4780, 2021.
Gregor Urban, Krzysztof J Geras, Samira Ebrahimi Kahou, Ozlem Aslan, Shengjie Wang, Rich
  Caruana, Abdelrahman Mohamed, Matthai Philipose, and Matt Richardson. Do deep convolu-
  tional nets really need to be deep and convolutional? arXiv preprint arXiv:1603.05691, 2016.
Yixu Wang, Jie Li, Hong Liu, Yan Wang, Yongjian Wu, Feiyue Huang, and Rongrong Ji.
  Black-box dissector: Towards erasing-based hard-label model stealing attack. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2105.00623, 2021.
Zi Wang. Zero-shot knowledge distillation from a decision-based black-box model. In International
   Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 10675–10685. PMLR, 2021.
Han Xiao, Kashif Rasul, and Roland Vollgraf. Fashion-mnist: a novel image dataset for benchmark-
  ing machine learning algorithms. arXiv preprint arXiv:1708.07747, 2017.
Hongxu Yin, Pavlo Molchanov, Jose M Alvarez, Zhizhong Li, Arun Mallya, Derek Hoiem, Ni-
  raj K Jha, and Jan Kautz. Dreaming to distill: Data-free knowledge transfer via deepinversion.
  In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp.
  8715–8724, 2020.
Honggang Yu, Kaichen Yang, Teng Zhang, Yun-Yun Tsai, Tsung-Yi Ho, and Yier Jin. Cloudleak:
  Large-scale deep learning models stealing through adversarial examples. In NDSS, 2020.
Xiaoyong Yuan, Leah Ding, Lan Zhang, Xiaolin Li, and Dapeng Oliver Wu. Es attack: Model
  stealing against deep neural networks without data hurdles. IEEE Transactions on Emerging
  Topics in Computational Intelligence, 2022.
Zhenrui Yue, Zhankui He, Huimin Zeng, and Julian McAuley. Black-box attacks on sequential
  recommenders via data-free model extraction. In Fifteenth ACM Conference on Recommender
  Systems, pp. 44–54, 2021.
Chaoning Zhang, Philipp Benz, Adil Karjauv, and In So Kweon. Data-free universal adversarial
  perturbation and black-box attack. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on
  Computer Vision, pp. 7868–7877, 2021.
Jie Zhang, Bo Li, Jianghe Xu, Shuang Wu, Shouhong Ding, Lei Zhang, and Chao Wu. Towards
   efficient data free black-box adversarial attack. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on
   Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), pp. 15115–15125, June 2022.
Mingyi Zhou, Jing Wu, Yipeng Liu, Shuaicheng Liu, and Ce Zhu. Dast: Data-free substitute training
 for adversarial attacks. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and
 Pattern Recognition (CVPR), June 2020.


                                               12
