Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


TAILORING L ANGUAGE G ENERATION M ODELS UNDER
T OTAL VARIATION D ISTANCE
 Haozhe Ji1 , Pei Ke1 , Zhipeng Hu2 , Rongsheng Zhang2 , Minlie Huang1∗
 1
   Dept. of Comp. Sci. & Tech., State Key Lab of Intelligent Tech. & Sys.
 1
   BNRist Center, Tsinghua University, Beijing 100084, China
 2
   Fuxi AI Lab, NetEase Inc., China
 jhz20@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn, kepei1106@outlook.com
 {zphu, zhangrongsheng}@corp.netease.com, aihuang@mail.tsinghua.edu.cn



                                            A BSTRACT
          The standard paradigm of neural language generation adopts maximum likelihood
          estimation (MLE) as the optimizing method. From a distributional view, MLE in
          fact minimizes the Kullback-Leibler divergence (KLD) between the distribution
          of the real data and that of the model. However, this approach forces the model
          to distribute non-zero (sometimes large) probability mass to all training samples
          regardless of their quality. Moreover, in the attempt to cover the low-probability
          regions in the data distribution, the model systematically overestimates the prob-
          ability of corrupted text sequences, which we conjecture is one of the main rea-
          sons for text degeneration during autoregressive decoding. To remedy this prob-
          lem, we leverage the total variation distance (TVD) with its robustness to outliers,
          and develop practical bounds to apply it to language generation. Then, we intro-
          duce the TaiLr1 objective that balances the tradeoff of estimating TVD. Intuitively,
          TaiLr downweights real data samples that have low model probabilities with tun-
          able penalization intensity. Experimental results show that our method alleviates
          the overestimation of degenerated sequences without sacrificing diversity and im-
          proves generation quality on a wide range of text generation tasks.2


1       I NTRODUCTION
The dominant approach to train language generation models is to maximize the likelihood of text
samples in training data. With the development of pre-training techniques, the quality of texts gen-
erated by current models has been improved by a large margin (Radford et al., 2019; Brown et al.,
2020). However, the text degeneration phenomena, e.g., repetitions (Holtzman et al., 2020; Welleck
et al., 2020), incoherence (Guan et al., 2021; Ji & Huang, 2021), and other ill-formed generation
results sampled from the noisy long tail (Dou et al., 2022; LeBrun et al., 2022), are still widely ob-
served in large pre-trained models. These results indicate that using MLE as the optimizing method
has theoretical limitations that are hard to be compensated by increasing the model size.
Given the real data distribution p(x) and the model distribution q(x) defined by a learned generation
model, we can view MLE as minimizing the KLD between p(x) and q(x). However, minimizing
DKL (p, q) will lead to a zero-avoiding solution of q(x) that spreads itself to cover all the modes in
the real data (Minka, 2005; Malinin & Gales, 2019). As the model is forced to take into account all
the modes regardless of their quality and saliency, this behavior could deteriorate the overall genera-
tion quality when (i) the data inherently exhibits too many variations, e.g., in open-ended generation,
the model often over-presents unrelated words in the unreliable long tail of its distribution (Holtz-
man et al., 2020). (ii) the data contains flawed or noisy references, e.g., hallucination and missing
contents in text summarization (Zhao et al., 2020) degrade the generation quality of the model.
In language generation, the attempt to cover all the non-zero probability regions in the data distri-
bution would lead to a problem directly related to text degeneration, which we term as data void
    ∗
      Corresponding Author.
    1
      Pronounced as “tailor”.
    2
      Code is available at https://github.com/thu-coai/TaiLr.


                                                   1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


overestimation. Concretely, the model assigns considerably more probability mass than it should to
the void of the real data distribution, where degenerated text sequences lie. An intuitive illustration
is shown in Figure 1 where KLD pushes the model to place large mass on the zero-probability re-
gion of the target distribution to cover the minor mass portion on the right. These degenerated texts
include random word sequences and partially corrupted texts that have high lexical overlap with the
real texts. Therefore, during free-run generation, the model is likely to trap into the void regions and
produce “over-generalized” text samples that are unlike the training data (Huszar, 2015).
In this work, we start with a robust alternative to KL divergence, i.e., the total variation distance
(TVD). TVD is known to be robust to outliers in the data (Beran, 1977; Knoblauch & Vomfell, 2020),
as it measures the absolute difference between two probability distributions averaging at each point.
In §2.2, we show that TVD allows the model to place zero probability to low-quality training samples
and prevent overestimation of the data void region through gradient analysis. Though appealing,
TVD cannot be directly applied to text generation because (i) TVD measures the distance at the
sequence level while we desire a token-level criterion for autoregressive generation models, (ii)
we only have samples from the data distribution, whereas calculating TVD demands the real data
probability p(x) of the training sample x. We overcome these two issues by (i) developing an
upper bound on the sequence-level TVD with its token-level factorization (§3.1), and (ii) introducing
a proxy distribution (§3.2) that handles the bias-variance tradeoff during estimating TVD (§3.3).
Finally, we derive the Total Variation Guided Language Generation (TaiLr) objective by leveraging
access to the non-zero gradient of TVD to guide the model. Intuitively, TaiLr weights the log-
likelihood of a text sequence at each position according to the model probability and uses a tunable
hyperparameter to control the penalization intensity.
We first conduct experiments on synthetic data to show that TaiLr achieves better generation quality
without sacrificing diversity and reduces the overestimation of degenerated texts compared to MLE.
Further experiments on real data demonstrate that the proposed method outperforms existing meth-
ods that modify MLE at different aspects on a wide range of language generation tasks, including
machine translation, text summarization, and long text generation.

2   BACKGROUND AND M OTIVATION
We consider natural language generation tasks where a conditional generation model pθ (y|x)
parametrized by θ is required to generate the target text sequence y = (y1 , · · · , yT ) given the
context x. Let po (y|x) denote the real data distribution, MLE training is equivalent to minimizing
the KL divergence between po and pθ :
                                            " T                        #
                                              X
                    DKL (po , pθ ) = −Ey∼po        log pθ (yt |y<t , x) − H(po ),               (1)
                                                t=1

where the generation probability is factorized into the product of conditional token probabilities
                                                    QT
given the prefix y<t and the context x: pθ (y|x) = t=1 pθ (yt |y<t , x). The first term pushes the
model to minimize the negative log-likelihood (NLL) of the training data. The second term is a
constant with respect to θ and therefore is commonly ignored in MLE.
Despite its simplicity and practical benefits for optimization, MLE is known to suffer from a mis-
match to the evaluation metric (Pang & He, 2021) and brittleness to noise in the training data (Kang
& Hashimoto, 2020). Motivated by the literature in probability metrics, we draw attention to to-
tal variation distance (TVD) as a naturally robust alternative to KLD. We present the definitions of
TVD (Van Handel, 2014) between the data distribution po and the model distribution pθ given the
context x:
                                          1X
                         DTV (po , pθ ) =        po (y|x) − pθ (y|x)                             (2a)
                                          2
                                            y∈Y
                                              X
                                        =1−       min po (y|x), pθ (y|x) ,                       (2b)
                                              y∈Y

where Y is the space of all possible text sequences. Intuitively, TVD measures the average of the
absolute difference between po (y|x) and pθ (y|x) on all possible text sequence y ∈ Y. Therefore


                                                    2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


the model learns to properly allocate its probability mass to best describe the major part of the data
distribution and ignore outliers. TVD is also correlated with the distinguishability of samples gener-
ated by the model, which is shown to be a balanced criterion that takes both quality and diversity into
account (Hashimoto et al., 2019). Existing work proposed to optimize distinguishability in an gen-
erative adversarial manner (Goodfellow, 2015; Caccia et al., 2020) while Kang & Hashimoto (2020)
argued that minimizing its heuristic surrogate via loss truncation is better in practice. Additional
related work is provided in Appendix B. In this work, we first analyze the property of TVD and seek
to directly minimize TVD or at least its upper bound in the task of natural language generation.

2.1      A T OY E XPERIMENT AND I TS I MPLICATIONS

We first present a toy experiment to illustrate the behavioral
difference of KLD and TVD when countering imperfect data,                           0.8
where a single Gaussian model is required to fit a mixture of                                                 target
two Gaussians. As shown in Figure 1, minimizing KLD forces                                                    TVD
                                                                                    0.4


                                                                             p(x)
the model to learn a flat distribution that spans itself to cover all                                         KLD
the non-zero probability regions, which causes underfitting of
the major part of the target probability mass. Furthermore, the                     0.0   0     2        4       6
model places considerably high probability mass to the void
region in the target distribution which does not correspond to                Figure 1: Results of the toy exper-
real samples. On the other hand, TVD focuses on the major                     iment: KLD is sensitive to outliers
target mass without overestimating degenerated samples that                   while TVD is more robust.
are unlikely under the target distribution.
In language generation, this scenario is realistic and pervasive. For many language geneartion tasks,
it is hard to circumvent noisy or invalid references during the data collection process, e.g., halluci-
nation in text summarization (Zhao et al., 2020) and image captioning (Xiao & Wang, 2021). For
applications like open-ended generation, existing autoregressive models pre-trained on large corpus
are still reported to over-present the artifacts in the noisy long tail (Holtzman et al., 2020).

2.2      G RADIENT A NALYSIS

To better understand the reason behind the behaviorial difference of KLD and TVD in optimization,
we analyze their gradients with respect to the model parameter θ. Given a context-target text pair
(x∗ , y ∗ ) sampled from the data distribution po , we approximate the gradient of KLD with respect
to θ using Monte-Carlo sampling3 :
                                ∇θ DKL (po , pθ ) ≈ −pθ (y ∗ |x∗ )−1 ∇θ pθ (y ∗ |x∗ ).                               (3)
The result is the negative gradient of the model probability weighted by the reciprocal of the model
probability on this sample. Intuitively, when a low-quality context-target pair is sampled, the model
will be affected by this sample and shift the distribution towards it. If pθ (y ∗ |x∗ ) ≈ 0, the norm of
the gradient will become very large, which leads to a huge step of parameter update towards that
noisy direction. This explains the phenomena illustrated in §2.1, where KLD pushes the model to
cover all the training samples resulting in an unfocused and flat distribution.
For comparison, we calculate the gradient of TVD with respect to θ using equation (2b). The
derivation details are provided in the Appendix A.1.
                                 −po (y ∗ |x∗ )−1 ∇θ pθ (y ∗ |x∗ ), pθ (y ∗ |x∗ ) < po (y ∗ |x∗ )

           ∇θ DTV (po , pθ ) ≈                                                                     (4)
                                 0,                                 pθ (y ∗ |x∗ ) ≥ po (y ∗ |x∗ ),
where the result switches between a non-zero gradient term and 0 by comparing the model prob-
ability and the real data probability. When the model probability exceeds the real data proba-
bility (overestimation), the gradient becomes 0 to prevent the model from fitting dubious data
points. When the model predicts a probability lower than the real probability of the sample
(underestimation), the weight is the reciprocal of the real probability of the sample, which has
a smaller norm than equation (3). This means that the update towards noisy directions is more
conservative, and the model is allowed to assign 0 probability to those low-quality training samples.
   3
       For clarity, we only use one sample per batch in this analysis, and the result still holds for large batch size.


                                                           3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


3     M ETHODOLOGY

Despite the attractive attribute of TVD, we still face several challenges to apply TVD to natural
language generation. First, TVD measures the difference of the sequence-level probability. For
autoregressive language generation models, it is typical to use a token-level criterion to supervise
the factorized model probability. Although the sequence-level objective can also be adopted as a
reward function using policy gradient (Williams, 1992; Sutton et al., 1999), this approach is shown
to suffer from a high variance and sparse rewards. Second, calculating TVD requires the real data
probability po (y|x) of the sample y to be known. One straightforward solution is to train a classifier
that estimates the density ratio between po (y|x) and pθ (y|x) (Song et al., 2020). However, the
density ratio estimator would introduce undetermined biases due to miscalibration (Grover et al.,
2019). In this work, we tackle these challenges by developing practical upper bounds on TVD, and
derive a sampling-based learning criterion which can directly substitute for the MLE objective in
practice.

3.1   T OKEN - LEVEL FACTORIZATION

As KLD has the nice property of factorizing the sequence-level loss into summation of the token-
level loss conditioned on the prefix as illustrated in equation (1), we wonder if TVD also has this
property. We first write the autoregressive factorization of the data probability as po (y|x) =
QT                                                   <t           <t
   t=1 po (yt |y<t , x). For simplicity, we use po (yt ) and pθ (yt ) to denote po (yt |y<t , x) and
pθ (yt |y<t , x) respectively. Then we have the following proposition that manifests the relationship
between the sequence-level objective and its token-level factorization.
                                     QT                               QT     <t
Proposition 1. Given po (y|x) = t=1 p<t       o (yt ) and pθ (y|x) =    t=1 pθ (yt ), then the following
condition holds:                                      " T                 #
                                                        X
                              DTV (po , pθ ) ≤ Ey∼po       DTV (p<t    <t
                                                                  o , pθ ) .                         (5)
                                                       t=1


The condition follows from applying triangle inequality (Hein & Bousquet, 2005) to the right hand
side of equation (2a). The complete proof is provided in Appendix A.2. This result indicates that
minimizing the expected sum of the TVD on token-level probabilities is equivalent to minimizing
the upper bound of the TVD on their products where the bound becomes tight as pθ approaches po .
Therefore, we are guaranteed to train the model using the MLE fashion that calculates the loss at
each position given the prefix of the target sequence.

3.2   E STIMATION WITH P ROXY D ISTRIBUTION

Another difficulty of directly applying TVD to train language generation model is the explicit de-
mand of the data probability distribution po while we only have a finite number of samples drawn
from it. In contrast to using an additional density ratio estimation model that is both hard to train
and potentially biased with undetermined deviation, we try to estimate the target using a proxy prob-
ability distribution and analyze the estimation error.
We start by considering the one-hot distribution e(w) where only the w-th index is 1 and others are
0. w is the target token sampled from the conditional oracle probability p<to (·). It is easy to see that
the expectation of the one-hot distribution is exactly the oracle probability distribution:
                                                h       i
                                                    (w)
                                        Ew∼p<to
                                                  e       = p<t
                                                             o .                                      (6)

Then we use e(w) to substitute the oracle probability p<t
                                                        o in TVD and present the following propo-
sition which states that the expectation of this estimation serves as an upper bound of the original
TVD between the oracle distribution and the model distribution.
Proposition 2. Given w ∼ p<t
                          o and the one-hot distribution e
                                                           (w)
                                                               , then the following condition
holds:
                            DTV (p<t   <t
                                  o , pθ ) ≤ Ew∼p<t
                                                 o
                                                    DTV (e(w) , p<t
                                                                 θ ) .                               (7)


                                                   4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                t step                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            No gradient                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        No gradient
       Model                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ⇥(1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   <latexit sha1_base64="3eNdk2pPEsDvWc/vX1l4ZdR2R2A=">AAAB+nicbVBNS8NAEJ3Ur1q/Uj16WSxCPVgSUfRY9OKxgv2AJpTNdtMu3U3C7kYpsT/FiwdFvPpLvPlv3LY5aOuDgcd7M8zMCxLOlHacb6uwsrq2vlHcLG1t7+zu2eX9lopTSWiTxDyWnQAryllEm5ppTjuJpFgEnLaD0c3Ubz9QqVgc3etxQn2BBxELGcHaSD277GkmqEJV99QbYCHwSc+uODVnBrRM3JxUIEejZ395/ZikgkaacKxU13US7WdYakY4nZS8VNEEkxEe0K6hETb7/Gx2+gQdG6WPwliaijSaqb8nMiyUGovAdAqsh2rRm4r/ed1Uh1d+xqIk1TQi80VhypGO0TQH1GeSEs3HhmAimbkVkSGWmGiTVsmE4C6+vExaZzX3oubcnVfq13kcRTiEI6iCC5dQh1toQBMIPMIzvMKb9WS9WO/Wx7y1YOUzB/AH1ucPwT+TBQ==</latexit>


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         )
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               p<t
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      <latexit sha1_base64="rT8xDe6//BR/qywRQLOQpVQlgMw=">AAAB9HicbVA9SwNBEN2LXzF+RS1tFoNgFe5E0cIiaGMZwXxAcoa9zSRZsrd37s4FwpHfYWOhiK0/xs5/4ya5QhMfDDzem2FmXhBLYdB1v53cyura+kZ+s7C1vbO7V9w/qJso0RxqPJKRbgbMgBQKaihQQjPWwMJAQiMY3k79xgi0EZF6wHEMfsj6SvQEZ2glP+60cQDIHtNrnHSKJbfszkCXiZeREslQ7RS/2t2IJyEo5JIZ0/LcGP2UaRRcwqTQTgzEjA9ZH1qWKhaC8dPZ0RN6YpUu7UXalkI6U39PpCw0ZhwGtjNkODCL3lT8z2sl2LvyU6HiBEHx+aJeIilGdJoA7QoNHOXYEsa1sLdSPmCacbQ5FWwI3uLLy6R+VvYuyu79ealyk8WRJ0fkmJwSj1ySCrkjVVIjnDyRZ/JK3pyR8+K8Ox/z1pyTzRySP3A+fwAMh5JH</latexit>


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            NLL                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 ✓
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        p<t
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               <latexit sha1_base64="rT8xDe6//BR/qywRQLOQpVQlgMw=">AAAB9HicbVA9SwNBEN2LXzF+RS1tFoNgFe5E0cIiaGMZwXxAcoa9zSRZsrd37s4FwpHfYWOhiK0/xs5/4ya5QhMfDDzem2FmXhBLYdB1v53cyura+kZ+s7C1vbO7V9w/qJso0RxqPJKRbgbMgBQKaihQQjPWwMJAQiMY3k79xgi0EZF6wHEMfsj6SvQEZ2glP+60cQDIHtNrnHSKJbfszkCXiZeREslQ7RS/2t2IJyEo5JIZ0/LcGP2UaRRcwqTQTgzEjA9ZH1qWKhaC8dPZ0RN6YpUu7UXalkI6U39PpCw0ZhwGtjNkODCL3lT8z2sl2LvyU6HiBEHx+aJeIilGdJoA7QoNHOXYEsa1sLdSPmCacbQ5FWwI3uLLy6R+VvYuyu79ealyk8WRJ0fkmJwSj1ySCrkjVVIjnDyRZ/JK3pyR8+K8Ox/z1pyTzRySP3A+fwAMh5JH</latexit>


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         ✓
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        p<t
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       <latexit sha1_base64="u44Mg7z2dlasyD8fnZjdrxK+KPA=">AAACJXicbVDLSgMxFM34tr6qLt0Ei1ARy4wouuii6MalgrWFTi130kwbmswMyR2lDP0ZN/6KGxeKCK78FdPHQq0HAodzzuXmniCRwqDrfjozs3PzC4tLy7mV1bX1jfzm1q2JU814lcUy1vUADJci4lUUKHk90RxUIHkt6F0M/do910bE0Q32E95U0IlEKBiglVr5sh9qYFnS8rHLEe6yMg6KD/uDzO+AUkAPaNE7HPP9qVArX3BL7gh0mngTUiATXLXyb347ZqniETIJxjQ8N8FmBhoFk3yQ81PDE2A96PCGpREobprZ6MoB3bNKm4axti9COlJ/TmSgjOmrwCYVYNf89Ybif14jxfCsmYkoSZFHbLwoTCXFmA4ro22hOUPZtwSYFvavlHXB1oa22Jwtwft78jS5PSp5JyX3+rhQOZ/UsUR2yC4pEo+ckgq5JFekShh5JM/klbw5T86L8+58jKMzzmRmm/yC8/UN9qak5Q==</latexit>


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         ✓ (w)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       LTaiLr =                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         log p<t
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             ✓ (w) ⇥
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           <latexit sha1_base64="wdXS3Erx3PsE5i67l6xHvwk3AfU=">AAAB/3icbVDLSsNAFJ3UV62vqODGzWAR6sKSiKILF0U3LivYBzQxTKaTdujkwcyNUmIX/oobF4q49Tfc+TdO2yy0euDC4Zx7ufcePxFcgWV9GYW5+YXFpeJyaWV1bX3D3NxqqjiVlDVoLGLZ9oligkesARwEayeSkdAXrOUPLsd+645JxePoBoYJc0PSi3jAKQEteebOoSPiHk48B/oMyG12DqPK/YFnlq2qNQH+S+yclFGOumd+Ot2YpiGLgAqiVMe2EnAzIoFTwUYlJ1UsIXRAeqyjaURCptxscv8I72uli4NY6ooAT9SfExkJlRqGvu4MCfTVrDcW//M6KQRnbsajJAUW0emiIBUYYjwOA3e5ZBTEUBNCJde3YtonklDQkZV0CPbsy39J86hqn1St6+Ny7SKPo4h20R6qIBudohq6QnXUQBQ9oCf0gl6NR+PZeDPep60FI5/ZRr9gfHwDHgWVhQ==</latexit>


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       <latexit sha1_base64="v3v13LPIUjelP9n5xBDXo+IJMIg=">AAACBHicbVDLSsNAFJ3UV62vqMtugkVwVRJRdCMU3bjookJf0IQwmU7aoZMHMzdiCVm48VfcuFDErR/hzr9x0mahrQcuHM65l3vv8WLOJJjmt1ZaWV1b3yhvVra2d3b39P2DrowSQWiHRDwSfQ9LyllIO8CA034sKA48Tnve5Cb3e/dUSBaFbZjG1AnwKGQ+IxiU5OpVO8AwJpinzcxNbaAPkLYxa4osu3L1mlk3ZzCWiVWQGirQcvUvexiRJKAhEI6lHFhmDE6KBTDCaVaxE0ljTCZ4RAeKhjig0klnT2TGsVKGhh8JVSEYM/X3RIoDKaeBpzrzk+Wil4v/eYME/EsnZWGcAA3JfJGfcAMiI0/EGDJBCfCpIpgIpm41yBgLTEDlVlEhWIsvL5Puad06r5t3Z7XGdRFHGVXRETpBFrpADXSLWqiDCHpEz+gVvWlP2ov2rn3MW0taMXOI/kD7/AGt7ZjA</latexit>


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      <latexit sha1_base64="0qPWAKkuOdC/EHNuBW1WSkTHJh8=">AAAB7nicbVBNS8NAEJ3Ur1q/qh69LBbBU0lE0WPRi8cK9gPaUDbbTbt0swm7E6GE/ggvHhTx6u/x5r9xm+agrQ8GHu/NMDMvSKQw6LrfTmltfWNzq7xd2dnd2z+oHh61TZxqxlsslrHuBtRwKRRvoUDJu4nmNAok7wSTu7nfeeLaiFg94jThfkRHSoSCUbRSp48i4oYMqjW37uYgq8QrSA0KNAfVr/4wZmnEFTJJjel5boJ+RjUKJvms0k8NTyib0BHvWaqo3eJn+bkzcmaVIQljbUshydXfExmNjJlGge2MKI7NsjcX//N6KYY3fiZUkiJXbLEoTCXBmMx/J0OhOUM5tYQyLeythI2ppgxtQhUbgrf88ippX9S9q7r7cFlr3BZxlOEETuEcPLiGBtxDE1rAYALP8ApvTuK8OO/Ox6K15BQzx/AHzucPD3iPYg==</latexit>


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              w ⇠ p<t                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               + (1    )p<t
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              ✓ (w)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              <latexit sha1_base64="A4/YBchVfxe/azIQIfvkVgQZCFk=">AAAB9XicbVDLSgNBEJz1GeMr6tHLYBA8hV1R9OAh6MVjBPOAZBNmJ5NkyDyWmV5DWPIfXjwo4tV/8ebfOEn2oIkFDUVVN91dUSy4Bd//9lZW19Y3NnNb+e2d3b39wsFhzerEUFalWmjTiIhlgitWBQ6CNWLDiIwEq0fDu6lff2LGcq0eYRyzUJK+4j1OCTipPWpZLnHc0e30BiadQtEv+TPgZRJkpIgyVDqFr1ZX00QyBVQQa5uBH0OYEgOcCjbJtxLLYkKHpM+ajioimQ3T2dUTfOqULu5p40oBnqm/J1IirR3LyHVKAgO76E3F/7xmAr3rMOUqToApOl/USwQGjacR4C43jIIYO0Ko4e5WTAfEEAouqLwLIVh8eZnUzkvBZcl/uCiWb7M4cugYnaAzFKArVEb3qIKqiCKDntErevNG3ov37n3MW1e8bOYI/YH3+QOL9pKK</latexit>


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   o
                t step
        Data                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        ⇥
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    <latexit sha1_base64="lIcl5wxTueO/U5K43tpkmCrarD0=">AAAB9HicbVBNS8NAEJ3Ur1q/qh69LBbBU0lE0WPRi8cK9gOaUDbbTbt0N4m7k0Ip/R1ePCji1R/jzX/jts1BWx8MPN6bYWZemEph0HW/ncLa+sbmVnG7tLO7t39QPjxqmiTTjDdYIhPdDqnhUsS8gQIlb6eaUxVK3gqHdzO/NeLaiCR+xHHKA0X7sYgEo2ilwEehuCF+nypFu+WKW3XnIKvEy0kFctS75S+/l7BM8RiZpMZ0PDfFYEI1Cib5tORnhqeUDWmfdyyNqd0VTOZHT8mZVXokSrStGMlc/T0xocqYsQptp6I4MMveTPzP62QY3QQTEacZ8pgtFkWZJJiQWQKkJzRnKMeWUKaFvZWwAdWUoc2pZEPwll9eJc2LqndVdR8uK7XbPI4inMApnIMH11CDe6hDAxg8wTO8wpszcl6cd+dj0Vpw8plj+APn8wea9JH9</latexit>


                          <latexit sha1_base64="hY/MUhHbEB6VMw+I4vlHFTunwVA=">AAAB7nicbVDLSgNBEOyNrxhfUY9eBoMQL2FXFD0GvXiMYB6QxDA76U2GzM4uM7NKWPIRXjwo4tXv8ebfOEn2oIkFDUVVN91dfiy4Nq777eRWVtfWN/Kbha3tnd294v5BQ0eJYlhnkYhUy6caBZdYN9wIbMUKaegLbPqjm6nffESleSTvzTjGbkgHkgecUWOlJj6k5afTSa9YcivuDGSZeBkpQYZar/jV6UcsCVEaJqjWbc+NTTelynAmcFLoJBpjykZ0gG1LJQ1Rd9PZuRNyYpU+CSJlSxoyU39PpDTUehz6tjOkZqgXvan4n9dOTHDVTbmME4OSzRcFiSAmItPfSZ8rZEaMLaFMcXsrYUOqKDM2oYINwVt8eZk0zireRcW9Oy9Vr7M48nAEx1AGDy6hCrdQgzowGMEzvMKbEzsvzrvzMW/NOdnMIfyB8/kD5ZiPRw==</latexit>


                          e(w)

Figure 2: Computational graph of the TaiLr objective where the log-likelihood is weighted position-
wisely.


The proof utilizes the Jensen inequality and the convexity of the TVD. The full proof is presented
in Appendix A.3. The proposition states that minimizing the TVD between the model distribution
and the one-hot distribution on average leads to the minimization of the TVD between the model
distribution and the oracle distribution. By introducing an unbiased estimation of the unknown
oracle distribution, we sidestep the need of density ratio estimation and derive a practical upper
bound using Monte-Carlo sampling from the oracle distribution.

3.3   T HE B IAS - VARIANCE T RADEOFF

However, using the one-hot distribution as an approximation in practice sometimes leads to high
estimation variance. For example, in some applications where the real data distribution has a high
entropy, using the one-hot proxy can hardly cover the diverse candidates. Therefore we consider a
general form of the proxy distribution p̂(w) where wh is the
                                                           i target token. We denote the expectation
                                       <t              (w)
of the general proxy distribution as p̂ = Ew∼p<t  o
                                                     p̂     . Then we show that the upper bound of
the estimation error can be decomposed into a bias term and a variance term in the following:

                                          <t <t                       (w) <t
                      Errorp̂(w) ≤ DTV (p̂ , po ) + Ew∼po DTV (p̂ , p̂ ) ,
                                                           <t                                    (8)
                                   |      {z    } |              {z           }
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Bias                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Variance

                                                                                     DTV (p̂(w) , p<t

where Errorp̂(w) is defined as the difference of the practical estimation Ew∼p<t o                 θ )
                                  <t
and the ideal target DTV (p<t
                            o , pθ ). The derivation applies triangle inequality to bound the error
term (detailed derivation can be found in Appendix A.4). Specifically, we consider the one-hot
distribution as an example: it has zero estimation bias (equation (6)). However we show in Appendix
A.5 that its variance equals to 2Hα (p<to ) when α = 2, where Hα is the Tsallis α-entropy (Tsallis,
1988). Therefore, the one-hot proxy suffers from a large variance when the entropy of p<t o is high.

In order to handle the bias-variance tradeoff, we consider a γ-mixture proxy distribution that inter-
polates the one-hot distribution and the model distribution with γ: p̂(w) = γe(w) + (1 − γ)p<t    θ .
Below we show the bias and variance in equation (8) using this mixture proxy distribution:

                                   <t <t                                     (w) <t
           Bias = (1 − γ) · DTV (pθ , po ), Variance = γ · Ew∼po DTV (e , po ) .
                                                                   <t                             (9)

When we tune γ from 1 to 0, the proxy distribution smoothly transfers from the unbiased one-
hot distribution to a soft distribution, which reduces the variance of the one-hot estimation and
stablizes training in the early stage. Although this comes at the cost of an increased estimation bias
at the beginning of training, the bias gradually decreases as the model fits the data distribution more
accurately when the training goes on.

3.4   T OTAL VARIATION G UIDED L ANGUAGE G ENERATION (TAI L R )

Finally, we introduce the TaiLr objective by summarizing the above results. Given the target token
w, we derive the TVD between the proxy distribution p̂(w) = γe(w) + (1 − γ)p<t   θ and the model
distribution p<t
              θ following equation (2b):
                                                                    p<t (y )
                                                                          t
                        DTV (p̂(w) , p<t
                                      θ  ) = 1 − Ey   ∼p̂ (w) min
                                                                       θ
                                                                   1, (w)      ,               (10)
                                                    t
                                                                     p̂ (yt )

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


where the expectation is approximated by sampling from the proxy distribution using Monte-Carlo
sampling. When sampling yt ̸= w, the gradient of DTV (p̂(w) , p<tθ ) is always 0 which is inefficient
for optimization. Therefore, we consider the non-zero gradient when yt is sampled as the target to-
ken w to guide the model, i.e., −∇θ p<t
                                     θ (w)/p̂
                                              (w)
                                                  (w), and devise the TaiLr objective whose gradient
is equivalent to it:                                           !
                                                 p<t
                                                   θ (w)
                      LTaiLr (w; θ) = −                           log p<t
                                                                       θ (w),                    (11)
                                          γ + (1 − γ)p<t θ (w)
where the weighting factor is detached in the back-propagation and only the log term receives gradi-
ent. The equivalence of ∇θ LTaiLr (w; θ) and the non-zero gradient of DTV (p̂(w) , p<t
                                                                                    θ ) can be seen by
applying f (x)∇x log f (x) = ∇x f (x). In Figure 2, we show the computational graph of the TaiLr
objective. As γ switches from 1 to 0, TaiLr is biased from an estimation of TVD to unweighted
MLE. Intuitively, TaiLr downweights samples with low probabilities assigned by the model so that
the model focuses on modeling the high-quality samples during training and reduces overestimation
of degenerated texts during inference. To counter the negative effect of random prediction at the
early training stage, we set a threshold as a lower bound of the weighting factor.

4     E XPERIMENTS

In the previous sections, we show that the proposed method is a practical estimation of TVD with
theoretical guarantees. Next, we demonstrate its empirical performance. First, we conduct a syn-
thetic experiment to investigate the behavior of the model trained by TaiLr and MLE in controlled
settings where the underlying oracle distribution is known. Second, we compare TaiLr with other
baselines in a more realistic setting where we train generation models with standard architectures or
finetune pre-trained models on a wide range of language generation benchmarks. More experimental
details which are not included in the following sections are provided in Appendix E.1.

4.1   S YNTHETIC E XPERIMENTS

The synthetic data. In this subsection, our goal is to test the behavior of TaiLr in the task of
text generation. Since we seek to analyze the distributional properties, we sample training data an
oracle model whose distribution is known. Instead of using random distributions (Yu et al., 2017;
Guo et al., 2018), we follow LeBrun et al. (2022) and train an oracle model on real human texts to
generate synthetic data so that the results can better generalize to real data. Specifically, we train
a 1-layer LSTM on the texts of the COCO image caption dataset (Lin et al., 2014) without any
conditional inputs. We sample 10K synthetic data for training and 5K for validation.
The model setting. We train two LSTMs with the same architecture as the oracle model using MLE
and TaiLr, which we denoted as pMLE and pTaiLr , respectively. We train both models for 100 epochs
and pick the best checkpoint with the lowest perplexity on the development set. We use random
sampling to obtain text samples from the learned generation models.

                Model           PPLoracle ↓   PPLtest ↓    BLEU-4 ↑     SelfBLEU-4 ↓
                Training data        -            -          35.40          30.83
                pMLE               31.64        22.64        27.74          33.27
                pTaiLr             26.91        22.42        28.36          28.91

Table 1: Automatic evaluation results of the models trained by MLE and TaiLr. PPLoracle and
BLEU assess the generation quality, while PPLtest and SelfBLEU emphasize on sample diversity.
Boldface and underline indicate the highest and the second highest performance respectively.

Performance evaluation. To thoroughly evaluate the generation performance of the two models,
we follow Yu et al. (2017); Caccia et al. (2020) to evaluate the generation quality with PPLoracle
and the coverage of the oracle distribution with PPLtest . Specifically, PPLoracle is the likelihood
of the oracle model calculated on the samples generated by the learned model, while PPLtest is the
likelihood of the learned model evaluated on the held-out data. We also include BLEU score (Pa-
pineni et al., 2002) to calculate the average n-gram overlap between the generated sample and the


                                                  6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


               1          1           1     Degenerated sample: log po = 82.3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           <latexit sha1_base64="jcKO8fv6+3/g27oQ3goiPxG/a/I=">AAAB+XicbVBNS8NAEJ3Ur1q/oh69LBbBiyGpir0IRS8eK9gPaEPYbLft0k027G4KJfSfePGgiFf/iTf/jds2B219MPB4b4aZeWHCmdKu+20V1tY3NreK26Wd3b39A/vwqKlEKgltEMGFbIdYUc5i2tBMc9pOJMVRyGkrHN3P/NaYSsVE/KQnCfUjPIhZnxGsjRTYdpeLAUoCgW7RRbXiXAZ22XXcOdAq8XJShhz1wP7q9gRJIxprwrFSHc9NtJ9hqRnhdFrqpoommIzwgHYMjXFElZ/NL5+iM6P0UF9IU7FGc/X3RIYjpSZRaDojrIdq2ZuJ/3mdVPerfsbiJNU0JotF/ZQjLdAsBtRjkhLNJ4ZgIpm5FZEhlphoE1bJhOAtv7xKmhXHu3bcx6ty7S6PowgncArn4MEN1OAB6tAAAmN4hld4szLrxXq3PhatBSufOYY/sD5/ALamkcA=</latexit>


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           22            TaiLr
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         MLE


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Maximum Overestimation Error
                                            a ribbon slightly decorated standing                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           20
                                            standing behind a poured hung
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           18
                                            Real sample (same log pTaiLr as                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 1   ): log po = 73.4                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           16
                                                                 <latexit sha1_base64="70C8eWEow/LZCsAWbeA8CiaGX3E=">AAAB/nicbVBNS8NAEN34WetXVDx5WSyCp5KIoseiFw8eKvQLmhA22227dLMJuxOxhIB/xYsHRbz6O7z5b9y2OWjrg4HHezPMzAsTwTU4zre1tLyyurZe2ihvbm3v7Np7+y0dp4qyJo1FrDoh0UxwyZrAQbBOohiJQsHa4ehm4rcfmNI8lg0YJ8yPyEDyPqcEjBTYh56IBzgJMg/YI2QNwu9Ungd2xak6U+BF4hakggrUA/vL68U0jZgEKojWXddJwM+IAk4Fy8teqllC6IgMWNdQSSKm/Wx6fo5PjNLD/ViZkoCn6u+JjERaj6PQdEYEhnrem4j/ed0U+ld+xmWSApN0tqifCgwxnmSBe1wxCmJsCKGKm1sxHRJFKJjEyiYEd/7lRdI6q7oXVef+vFK7LuIooSN0jE6Riy5RDd2iOmoiijL0jF7Rm/VkvVjv1sesdckqZg7QH1ifP7lRlfs=</latexit>


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       <latexit sha1_base64="GmxQYwAH98l0yNGjIa16IeCdZZM=">AAAB+3icbVDLSsNAFJ34rPUV69LNYBHcGBKt1I1QdOOygn1AG8JkOmmHTmbCzEQsIb/ixoUibv0Rd/6N0zYLbT1w4XDOvdx7T5gwqrTrflsrq2vrG5ulrfL2zu7evn1QaSuRSkxaWDAhuyFShFFOWppqRrqJJCgOGemE49up33kkUlHBH/QkIX6MhpxGFCNtpMCu9JkYwiTIRA6v4Vn9wqkFdtV13BngMvEKUgUFmoH91R8InMaEa8yQUj3PTbSfIakpZiQv91NFEoTHaEh6hnIUE+Vns9tzeGKUAYyENMU1nKm/JzIUKzWJQ9MZIz1Si95U/M/rpTq68jPKk1QTjueLopRBLeA0CDigkmDNJoYgLKm5FeIRkghrE1fZhOAtvrxM2ueOd+m497Vq46aIowSOwDE4BR6ogwa4A03QAhg8gWfwCt6s3Hqx3q2PeeuKVcwcgj+wPn8AiKqSzQ==</latexit>


                                       2


                                            a wooden basket stands on a track and two
                                            motorcycles on a busy road by a yellow and
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           14
                                            wooded area .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           12
                                      3
                                            Real sample (same log pMLE as
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      <latexit sha1_base64="rFkLnh3udfByyspiml8e07vhPxc=">AAAB/HicbVDLSsNAFJ3UV62vaJduBovgqiSi6LIogguFCvYBTQiT6bQdOnkwcyOGEH/FjQtF3Poh7vwbp20W2nrgwuGce7n3Hj8WXIFlfRulpeWV1bXyemVjc2t7x9zda6sokZS1aCQi2fWJYoKHrAUcBOvGkpHAF6zjjy8nfueBScWj8B7SmLkBGYZ8wCkBLXlm1RHREMde5gB7hOz25irPPbNm1a0p8CKxC1JDBZqe+eX0I5oELAQqiFI924rBzYgETgXLK06iWEzomAxZT9OQBEy52fT4HB9qpY8HkdQVAp6qvycyEiiVBr7uDAiM1Lw3Ef/zegkMzt2Mh3ECLKSzRYNEYIjwJAnc55JREKkmhEqub8V0RCShoPOq6BDs+ZcXSfu4bp/WrbuTWuOiiKOM9tEBOkI2OkMNdI2aqIUoStEzekVvxpPxYrwbH7PWklHMVNEfGJ8/3fyU6Q==</latexit>


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            1   ): log po = 48.9
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  <latexit sha1_base64="Xd3XsogcPZO9rijB8cTGgz9VLIE=">AAAB+3icbVDLSsNAFJ34rPUV69LNYBHcGBKpWBdC0Y3LCvYBbQiT6aQdOpkJMxOxhPyKGxeKuPVH3Pk3TtsstPXAhcM593LvPWHCqNKu+22trK6tb2yWtsrbO7t7+/ZBpa1EKjFpYcGE7IZIEUY5aWmqGekmkqA4ZKQTjm+nfueRSEUFf9CThPgxGnIaUYy0kQK70mdiCJMgEzm8hme1unMV2FXXcWeAy8QrSBUUaAb2V38gcBoTrjFDSvU8N9F+hqSmmJG83E8VSRAeoyHpGcpRTJSfzW7P4YlRBjAS0hTXcKb+nshQrNQkDk1njPRILXpT8T+vl+qo7meUJ6kmHM8XRSmDWsBpEHBAJcGaTQxBWFJzK8QjJBHWJq6yCcFbfHmZtM8d78Jx72vVxk0RRwkcgWNwCjxwCRrgDjRBC2DwBJ7BK3izcuvFerc+5q0rVjFzCP7A+vwBk0eS1A==</latexit>


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           10
           2        3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      5] 6, 8] , 11] , 14] , 17] , 20]
                                            a donut with an orange & pepperoni on the                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           [3,      [ [9 [12 [15 [18
                                            plate and beef .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                length

Figure 3: Estimation error map of pTaiLr (left) and pMLE (right) on                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Figure 4:     Maximum
the perturbed dataset. We present examples from different regions to                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        overestimation     error
illustrate the estimation behavior of the two models.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       varying with lengths.


held-out corpus, and SelfBLEU (Zhu et al., 2018) which computes the average overlap of each gen-
erated sample to other samples generated by the model4 . For evaluation, we use 20K held-out data
and sample 20K texts from the two generation models, respectively. As shown in Table 1, TaiLr
improves the generation quality by nearly 5 points of PPLoracle without sacrificing the coverage to
the oracle distribution as it achieves similar PPLtest as MLE. We also observe that TaiLr achieves
higher BLEU-4 than MLE while lower than the training data. Finally, we show that MLE has the
highest SelfBLEU-4 which shows its tendency to over-generalize to unseen samples that may in-
clude repeated patterns and degrade the diversity, while TaiLr achieves the lowest SelfBLEU-4. We
also report the result using GPT2-Medium as the oracle model in Appendix E.1.1.
Perturbation evaluation. Next, we evaluate models’ behavior on perturbed sequences and relate
text degeneration as an implication of model’s overestimation behavior on the pertubed data. To
quantify the deviation of the model’s estimation from the real data distribution, we define the model
estimation error of a sample x as the difference between the sequence-level log probability given by
the model and its true log probability, i.e., Error(x) = log pθ (x) − log po (x). Then we show the
construction of the perturbed dataset. Given x sampled from po , we iteratively apply small pertur-
bations to x so that each lexical change is small. After N perturbations, x → x(1) → · · · → x(N )
smoothly transfers a data point into a perturbed sample. We propose the following perturbations
that highlight the widely observed text degeneracy patterns in generation: (1) Repeat a token in
x (repetition, Welleck et al. (2020)). (2) Delete the last token in x (oversmoothing, Kulikov et al.
(2021)). (3) Substitute a token in x with a token from the vocabulary (incoherence, Holtzman et al.
(2020)). We sample 20K samples from po and apply N = 30 perturbations to each sample.
We first plot the estimation error map of the two models on the perturbed dataset in Figure 3. For
each perturbed sample x(i) , the oracle log probability log po (x(i) ) is shown in the x-axis, the number
of perturbations i performed is shown in the y-axis, and the estimation error Error(x(i) ) is reflected
by the shade. From the figures on the left, we first restate LeBrun et al. (2022)’s finding that exisiting
models underestimate real samples while overestimating degenerated samples. Next, by comparing
the two figures, we observe that as the number of perturbations increases, pTaiLr alleviates the over-
estimation phenomenon of pMLE especially in the long tail. Finally, we draw cases from different
regions in the figure to illustrate its implication on text degeneration. We first present a degenerated
sample 1 on the top-right corner which has low oracle probability. We then present two real data
samples 2 and 3 that have the same model probability under pTaiLr and pMLE as the degenerated
one 1 . Although 3 is actually more probable than the degenerated one 1 in the oracle distribu-
tion, MLE cannot distinguish between them leading to degeneracy patterns during generation.
To quantify the overestimation problem of perturbation, we further define the maximum overesti-
mation error over N perturbations as max Error(x(i) ). To manifest the overestimation problem
                                           i=1,··· ,N
during generation, we plot the maximum overestimation error averaged on samples grouped with
the similar length in Figure 4. Note that the average NLL of these degenerated samples for pMLE and
pTaiLr is 11.09 and 10.82 respectively. For MLE the overestimation error amplifies as the generation
  4
    The scripts of both BLEU and SelfBLEU are from https://github.com/geek-ai/Texygen/
blob/master/utils/metrics


                                                             7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


length increases while TaiLr maintains the error nearly at a constant. This result demonstrates that
TaiLr alleviates MLE’ s tendency to sample degenerated texts with the growth of the generation
length by weighting the likelihood at each position of the sequence during training.
Error accumulation analysis. Finally, we analyze the error accumulation during autoregressive
decoding. We follow Arora et al. (2022) and use the metric ExAccErr that calculates the percent-
age of excess errors due to the discrepency of training (conditioning on contexts sampled from po )
and inference (conditioning on contexts sampled from pθ ), i.e., exposure bias. Detailed definitions
borrowed from Arora et al. (2022) are provided in Appendix E.1.2. We found that the excess error
of MLE model (40.1%) is substantially higher than the model trained with TaiLr (8.6%), which
demonstrates that TaiLr effectively reduces the error accumulation during autoregressive decoding.


4.2   R EAL -DATA E XPERIMENTS

In this subsection, we describe the empirical evaluation of TaiLr on a wide range of real-world
language generation tasks, including: (1) Machine Translation: Given a sentence in the source
language, the goal is to translate it into the target language. (2) Text summarization: Given a
passage, the goal is to generate a short sentence that summarizes the main point of the passage. (3)
Long text generation: Given a title, the goal is to generate a coherent long passage that conforms
with the title. Statistics and sources of all datasets used in experiments are provided in Appendix D.
Apart from MLE, we also consider the following typical baselines that proposed new training objec-
tives beyond MLE: (1) Unlikelihood training (Welleck et al., 2020) penalizes unlikely generations,
e.g., token repetitions, through an auxiliary unlikelihood loss. (2) D2GPo (Li et al., 2020) pro-
poses a data-dependent gaussian prior objective that smooths the one-hot target distribution based
on word embedding distance. (3) Loss truncation (Kang & Hashimoto, 2020) abandons a c-fraction
of the training samples with the highest NLL, which heuristically optimizes distinguishability. (4)
GOLD (Pang & He, 2021) learns from human demonstrations using the off-policy setting of Rein-
forcement Learning (RL). We choose to compare with GOLD-δ that does not use scoring models
with additional parameters for a fair comparison. We use the paired bootstrap resampling (Koehn,
2004) in all tasks for significance testing.
Machine Translation. We evaluate the pro-
posed method on a widely-used machine trans-
                                                       Method          Dev BLEU Test BLEU
lation benchmark IWSLT14 De-En using the
standard Transformer architecture (Vaswani             MLE               35.81‡     34.27‡
                                                                               ‡
et al., 2017). Training settings and detailed          Unlikelihood      33.92      32.82‡
                                                                               ‡
hyperparameters of different models are pro-           D2GPo             36.09      34.50‡
                                                                               †
vided in Appendix E.2. The best checkpoint             Loss truncation   35.63      34.48‡
is selected based on the highest BLEU (Pap-            GOLD              35.74‡     34.68†
ineni et al., 2002) score on the development set.      TaiLr             36.44      35.05
We used beam search with a beam size of 5
for decoding. In Table 2, we show the perfor- Table 2: BLEU score comparison on the dev and
mance of our method and the baseline methods test set of IWSLT14 De-En. †/‡ means TaiLr is
in terms of BLEU score. The results show that significantly better with p-value < 0.05/0.01.
TaiLr achieves higher BLEU score compared to
MLE, which indicates that TVD effectively improves the generation quality over KLD. TaiLr also
significantly outperforms other objectives that modify the MLE baseline.
Text summarization. We then test the proposed method on abstractive text summarization. We
used the Annotated Gigaword corpus (Rush et al., 2015) as it is known to have noisy references
due to annotation errors (Klebanov & Beigman, 2010; Kang & Hashimoto, 2020). As pre-trained
Transformer models have achieved strong performance, we thus propose to finetune the BART-
base (Lewis et al., 2020) model with different methods and see whether they still improve upon the
strong baseline. More training details and hyperparameter settings are provided in Appendix E.3.
We select the best checkpoint based on the highest ROUGE-L (Lin, 2004) score on the development
set. During inference, we use beam search with a beam size of 5 and prohibit decoding repeated
3-grams. We report the ROUGE-1/2/L scores on the test set of the Gigaword dataset in Table 3
where TaiLr outperforms all the baseline methods in terms of all evaluation metrics. The result
demonstrates the effectiveness of our method in the realistic setting where noisy data pairs exist.


                                                  8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


 Method            R-1       R-2      R-L         Method            B-1↑     D-4↑     rep-8↓   Mauve↑
                         ‡                  †                                              †
 MLE               38.24     19.12    35.70       MLE               27.85    84.28    10.31    56.42‡
 Unlikelihood      37.80‡    18.34‡   34.84‡      Unlikelihood      27.88    85.46    10.06    59.35‡
 D2GPo             38.52†    18.92†   35.64‡      D2GPo             22.73‡   84.10    10.04    53.35‡
 Loss truncation   38.62     19.29    35.85†      Loss truncation   19.49‡   76.51‡   13.41‡   45.35‡
 GOLD              38.57†    19.27    35.79†      GOLD              25.25‡   46.98‡   28.23‡   15.44‡
 TaiLr             38.82     19.50    36.24       TaiLr             28.62    85.56     9.73    64.64

Table 3: Generation performance of dif-         Table 4: Results of automatic metrics on the test
ferent methods on the test set of the Giga-     set of the WritingPrompts dataset. ↑/↓ means the
word dataset. †/‡ means TaiLr is signifi-       higher/lower the better. †/‡ means TaiLr is signifi-
cantly better with p-value < 0.05/0.01.         cantly better with p-value < 0.05/0.01.


Long text generation. Finally, we evaluate TaiLr on the task of long text generation to show its
performance in open-ended generation. We evaluate on the WritingPrompts (Fan et al., 2018) dataset
and leverage the generation ability of the pre-trained model by finetuning the BART-base model.
More training details are provided in Appendix E.4. For evaluation, we sampled 1,000 titles from
the test set following Ji & Huang (2021). We use Nucleus sampling (Holtzman et al., 2020) with
p = 0.95 and restricte a maximum generation length of 1,024 subwords. For automatic evaluation,
we use BLEU-n (B-n) to evaluate the n-gram overlap to the human reference, Distinct-n (Li et al.,
2016) (D-n) to compute the ratio of unique n-grams, rep-l (Welleck et al., 2020) to calculate the
repetition rate within the context window of l, and Mauve (Pillutla et al., 2021) that assesses the
distributional deviation of model-generated texts and human language by calculating the area under
the divergence curve. As shown in Table 4, TaiLr outperforms the MLE baseline in terms of all
metrics. For other baselines, Loss truncation abandons long samples with high NLL leading to
overly short generations and low n-gram overlap to the reference. GOLD tends to concentrate on
very few modes in the target distribution as discussed by Pang & He (2021), which causes low
diversity and large discrepency to the distribution of human language.
Ablation study and discussion. We conduct ablation study of adjusting γ on different tasks to show
that its tendency and sensitivity interval vary on different tasks. In Figure 5 in Appendix E.5, we
present the result of adjusting γ on WritingPrompts on the left and observe that the highest Mauve
score is achieved when γ is around 10−5 , while the performance quickly degrades as γ approaches
1. On the right of Figure 5, we observe that the best performance is achieved when γ is around 0.1
on IWSLT14 De-En while either increasing or decreasing γ leads to a notable performance drop.
From an empirical view, the scale of the best performing γ is related to the intrisic entropy of the
dataset. For stable training, we require the estimation variance in equation (9) to be small, which
leads to small γ when the entropy of the data is high. Since the model generally has higher NLL on
long text generation than on machine translation, the scale of the best γ is thereby shifted towards 0
on WritingPrompts. To further determine the sensitivity interval of γ, we suggest to tune the scale
of γ based on the average NLL on the training data, where the empirical principle is to make the
weighting factor in equation (11) relatively large to stablize training. Although simple, we argue
that this parameter is crucial to the generality of the application, and we leave other solutions of
dynamically adjusting or annealing this hyperparameter to future work.


5   C ONCLUSION

In this work, we draw attention to the total variation distance (TVD), a robust alternative to KL
divergence (KLD). We show that TVD addresses the zero-avoiding problem of KLD and mitigates
overestimation of the degenerated sequences, which in turn improves the overall generation quality.
To apply TVD to the task of language generation, we derive practical upper bounds, and introduce
our Total Variation Guided Language Generation (TaiLr) objective that balances the bias-variance
tradeoff of estimating TVD with a tunable hyperparameter. Our experiments on synthetic data and
real-data benchmarks demonstrate that TaiLr alleviates the overestimation problem and the error
accumulation during autoregressive decoding, and improves the generation quality over competitive
baselines beyond MLE on a wide range of language generation tasks.


                                                    9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
This work was supported by the Major Project of the New Generation of Artificial Intelligence (No.
2018AAA0102900). This work was also supported by the National Key Research and Development
Program of China (No. 2021ZD0113304) and the National Science Foundation for Distinguished
Young Scholars (with No. 62125604).

R EFERENCES
Kushal Arora, Layla El Asri, Hareesh Bahuleyan, and Jackie Chi Kit Cheung. Why exposure bias
  matters: An imitation learning perspective of error accumulation in language generation. In
  Smaranda Muresan, Preslav Nakov, and Aline Villavicencio (eds.), Findings of the Association
  for Computational Linguistics: ACL 2022, Dublin, Ireland, May 22-27, 2022, pp. 700–710. As-
  sociation for Computational Linguistics, 2022. doi: 10.18653/v1/2022.findings-acl.58. URL
  https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2022.findings-acl.58.
Sourya Basu, Govardana Sachitanandam Ramachandran, Nitish Shirish Keskar, and Lav R. Varsh-
  ney. Mirostat: a neural text decoding algorithm that directly controls perplexity. In 9th
  International Conference on Learning Representations, ICLR 2021, Virtual Event, Austria,
  May 3-7, 2021. OpenReview.net, 2021. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=
  W1G1JZEIy5_.
Rudolf Beran. Minimum hellinger distance estimates for parametric models. The annals of Statistics,
  pp. 445–463, 1977.
Tom B. Brown, Benjamin Mann, Nick Ryder, Melanie Subbiah, Jared Kaplan, Prafulla Dhari-
  wal, Arvind Neelakantan, Pranav Shyam, Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, Sandhini Agar-
  wal, Ariel Herbert-Voss, Gretchen Krueger, Tom Henighan, Rewon Child, Aditya Ramesh,
  Daniel M. Ziegler, Jeffrey Wu, Clemens Winter, Christopher Hesse, Mark Chen, Eric Sigler,
  Mateusz Litwin, Scott Gray, Benjamin Chess, Jack Clark, Christopher Berner, Sam McCan-
  dlish, Alec Radford, Ilya Sutskever, and Dario Amodei. Language models are few-shot
  learners. In Hugo Larochelle, Marc’Aurelio Ranzato, Raia Hadsell, Maria-Florina Balcan,
  and Hsuan-Tien Lin (eds.), Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 33: Annual
  Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems 2020, NeurIPS 2020, December 6-12,
  2020, virtual, 2020. URL https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper/2020/hash/
  1457c0d6bfcb4967418bfb8ac142f64a-Abstract.html.
Massimo Caccia, Lucas Caccia, William Fedus, Hugo Larochelle, Joelle Pineau, and Laurent Char-
 lin. Language gans falling short. In 8th International Conference on Learning Representa-
 tions, ICLR 2020, Addis Ababa, Ethiopia, April 26-30, 2020. OpenReview.net, 2020. URL
 https://openreview.net/forum?id=BJgza6VtPB.
Leshem Choshen, Lior Fox, Zohar Aizenbud, and Omri Abend. On the weaknesses of reinforcement
  learning for neural machine translation. arXiv preprint arXiv:1907.01752, 2019.
Yao Dou, Maxwell Forbes, Rik Koncel-Kedziorski, Noah A. Smith, and Yejin Choi. Is GPT-3 text
  indistinguishable from human text? scarecrow: A framework for scrutinizing machine text. In
  Smaranda Muresan, Preslav Nakov, and Aline Villavicencio (eds.), Proceedings of the 60th An-
  nual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers), ACL
  2022, Dublin, Ireland, May 22-27, 2022, pp. 7250–7274. Association for Computational Linguis-
  tics, 2022. URL https://aclanthology.org/2022.acl-long.501.
Angela Fan, Mike Lewis, and Yann N. Dauphin. Hierarchical neural story generation. In Iryna
  Gurevych and Yusuke Miyao (eds.), Proceedings of the 56th Annual Meeting of the Association
  for Computational Linguistics, ACL 2018, Melbourne, Australia, July 15-20, 2018, Volume 1:
  Long Papers, pp. 889–898. Association for Computational Linguistics, 2018. doi: 10.18653/v1/
  P18-1082. URL https://aclanthology.org/P18-1082/.
Sebastian Gehrmann, Hendrik Strobelt, and Alexander M. Rush. GLTR: statistical detection and
  visualization of generated text. In Marta R. Costa-jussà and Enrique Alfonseca (eds.), Pro-
  ceedings of the 57th Conference of the Association for Computational Linguistics, ACL 2019,


                                                10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


  Florence, Italy, July 28 - August 2, 2019, Volume 3: System Demonstrations, pp. 111–116.
  Association for Computational Linguistics, 2019. doi: 10.18653/v1/p19-3019. URL https:
  //doi.org/10.18653/v1/p19-3019.
Ian J. Goodfellow. On distinguishability criteria for estimating generative models. In Yoshua
  Bengio and Yann LeCun (eds.), 3rd International Conference on Learning Representations,
  ICLR 2015, San Diego, CA, USA, May 7-9, 2015, Workshop Track Proceedings, 2015. URL
  http://arxiv.org/abs/1412.6515.
Aditya Grover, Jiaming Song, Ashish Kapoor, Kenneth Tran, Alekh Agarwal, Eric Horvitz,
  and Stefano Ermon. Bias correction of learned generative models using likelihood-free
  importance weighting. In Hanna M. Wallach, Hugo Larochelle, Alina Beygelzimer, Flo-
  rence d’Alché-Buc, Emily B. Fox, and Roman Garnett (eds.), Advances in Neural Infor-
  mation Processing Systems 32: Annual Conference on Neural Information Processing Sys-
  tems 2019, NeurIPS 2019, December 8-14, 2019, Vancouver, BC, Canada, pp. 11056–
  11068, 2019.      URL https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper/2019/hash/
  d76d8deea9c19cc9aaf2237d2bf2f785-Abstract.html.
Jian Guan, Xiaoxi Mao, Changjie Fan, Zitao Liu, Wenbiao Ding, and Minlie Huang. Long text
   generation by modeling sentence-level and discourse-level coherence. In Proceedings of the 59th
   Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics and the 11th International Joint
   Conference on Natural Language Processing (Volume 1: Long Papers), pp. 6379–6393, Online,
   August 2021. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/2021.acl-long.499.
   URL https://aclanthology.org/2021.acl-long.499.
Jiaxian Guo, Sidi Lu, Han Cai, Weinan Zhang, Yong Yu, and Jun Wang. Long text generation via
   adversarial training with leaked information. In Sheila A. McIlraith and Kilian Q. Weinberger
   (eds.), Proceedings of the Thirty-Second AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, (AAAI-18),
   the 30th innovative Applications of Artificial Intelligence (IAAI-18), and the 8th AAAI Symposium
   on Educational Advances in Artificial Intelligence (EAAI-18), New Orleans, Louisiana, USA,
   February 2-7, 2018, pp. 5141–5148. AAAI Press, 2018. URL https://www.aaai.org/
   ocs/index.php/AAAI/AAAI18/paper/view/16360.
Tatsunori B. Hashimoto, Hugh Zhang, and Percy Liang. Unifying human and statistical evalu-
  ation for natural language generation. In Jill Burstein, Christy Doran, and Thamar Solorio
  (eds.), Proceedings of the 2019 Conference of the North American Chapter of the Associa-
  tion for Computational Linguistics: Human Language Technologies, NAACL-HLT 2019, Min-
  neapolis, MN, USA, June 2-7, 2019, Volume 1 (Long and Short Papers), pp. 1689–1701. As-
  sociation for Computational Linguistics, 2019. doi: 10.18653/v1/n19-1169. URL https:
  //doi.org/10.18653/v1/n19-1169.
Tianxing He, Jingzhao Zhang, Zhiming Zhou, and James Glass. Exposure bias versus self-recovery:
  Are distortions really incremental for autoregressive text generation? In Proceedings of the
  2021 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing, pp. 5087–5102, Online
  and Punta Cana, Dominican Republic, November 2021. Association for Computational Linguis-
  tics. doi: 10.18653/v1/2021.emnlp-main.415. URL https://aclanthology.org/2021.
  emnlp-main.415.
Matthias Hein and Olivier Bousquet. Hilbertian metrics and positive definite kernels on probabil-
 ity measures. In Robert G. Cowell and Zoubin Ghahramani (eds.), Proceedings of the Tenth
 International Workshop on Artificial Intelligence and Statistics, AISTATS 2005, Bridgetown,
 Barbados, January 6-8, 2005. Society for Artificial Intelligence and Statistics, 2005. URL
 http://www.gatsby.ucl.ac.uk/aistats/fullpapers/142.pdf.
Ari Holtzman, Jan Buys, Li Du, Maxwell Forbes, and Yejin Choi. The curious case of neural text
  degeneration. In 8th International Conference on Learning Representations, ICLR 2020, Addis
  Ababa, Ethiopia, April 26-30, 2020. OpenReview.net, 2020. URL https://openreview.
  net/forum?id=rygGQyrFvH.
Ferenc Huszar. How (not) to train your generative model: Scheduled sampling, likelihood, adver-
  sary? CoRR, abs/1511.05101, 2015. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/1511.05101.

                                                11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Haozhe Ji and Minlie Huang. Discodvt: Generating long text with discourse-aware discrete vari-
  ational transformer. In Marie-Francine Moens, Xuanjing Huang, Lucia Specia, and Scott Wen-
  tau Yih (eds.), Proceedings of the 2021 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language
  Processing, EMNLP 2021, Virtual Event / Punta Cana, Dominican Republic, 7-11 November,
  2021, pp. 4208–4224. Association for Computational Linguistics, 2021. doi: 10.18653/v1/2021.
  emnlp-main.347. URL https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2021.emnlp-main.347.

Haoming Jiang, Pengcheng He, Weizhu Chen, Xiaodong Liu, Jianfeng Gao, and Tuo Zhao. SMART:
  robust and efficient fine-tuning for pre-trained natural language models through principled reg-
  ularized optimization. In Dan Jurafsky, Joyce Chai, Natalie Schluter, and Joel R. Tetreault
  (eds.), Proceedings of the 58th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguis-
  tics, ACL 2020, Online, July 5-10, 2020, pp. 2177–2190. Association for Computational Linguis-
  tics, 2020. doi: 10.18653/v1/2020.acl-main.197. URL https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/
  2020.acl-main.197.

Daniel Kang and Tatsunori Hashimoto. Improved natural language generation via loss truncation.
  In Dan Jurafsky, Joyce Chai, Natalie Schluter, and Joel R. Tetreault (eds.), Proceedings of the
  58th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics, ACL 2020, Online, July
  5-10, 2020, pp. 718–731. Association for Computational Linguistics, 2020. doi: 10.18653/v1/
  2020.acl-main.66. URL https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2020.acl-main.66.

Beata Beigman Klebanov and Eyal Beigman. Some empirical evidence for annotation noise in a
  benchmarked dataset. In Human Language Technologies: Conference of the North American
  Chapter of the Association of Computational Linguistics, Proceedings, June 2-4, 2010, Los An-
  geles, California, USA, pp. 438–446. The Association for Computational Linguistics, 2010. URL
  https://aclanthology.org/N10-1067/.

Jeremias Knoblauch and Lara Vomfell. Robust bayesian inference for discrete outcomes with the
   total variation distance. ArXiv, abs/2010.13456, 2020.

Philipp Koehn. Statistical significance tests for machine translation evaluation. In Proceedings of
  the 2004 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing , EMNLP 2004, A
  meeting of SIGDAT, a Special Interest Group of the ACL, held in conjunction with ACL 2004, 25-
  26 July 2004, Barcelona, Spain, pp. 388–395. ACL, 2004. URL https://aclanthology.
  org/W04-3250/.

Ilia Kulikov, Maksim Eremeev, and Kyunghyun Cho. Characterizing and addressing the issue of
   oversmoothing in neural autoregressive sequence modeling. CoRR, abs/2112.08914, 2021. URL
   https://arxiv.org/abs/2112.08914.

Matthieu Labeau and Shay B. Cohen. Experimenting with power divergences for language mod-
 eling. In Proceedings of the 2019 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Pro-
 cessing and the 9th International Joint Conference on Natural Language Processing (EMNLP-
 IJCNLP), pp. 4104–4114, Hong Kong, China, November 2019. Association for Computa-
 tional Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/D19-1421. URL https://aclanthology.org/
 D19-1421.

Benjamin LeBrun, Alessandro Sordoni, and Timothy J. O’Donnell. Evaluating distributional dis-
  tortion in neural language modeling. In International Conference on Learning Representations,
  2022. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=bTteFbU99ye.

Mike Lewis, Yinhan Liu, Naman Goyal, Marjan Ghazvininejad, Abdelrahman Mohamed, Omer
 Levy, Veselin Stoyanov, and Luke Zettlemoyer. BART: denoising sequence-to-sequence pre-
 training for natural language generation, translation, and comprehension. In Dan Jurafsky, Joyce
 Chai, Natalie Schluter, and Joel R. Tetreault (eds.), Proceedings of the 58th Annual Meeting of the
 Association for Computational Linguistics, ACL 2020, Online, July 5-10, 2020, pp. 7871–7880.
 Association for Computational Linguistics, 2020. doi: 10.18653/v1/2020.acl-main.703. URL
 https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2020.acl-main.703.

Jiwei Li, Michel Galley, Chris Brockett, Jianfeng Gao, and Bill Dolan. A diversity-promoting objec-
  tive function for neural conversation models. In Kevin Knight, Ani Nenkova, and Owen Rambow


                                                12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


  (eds.), NAACL HLT 2016, The 2016 Conference of the North American Chapter of the Asso-
  ciation for Computational Linguistics: Human Language Technologies, San Diego California,
  USA, June 12-17, 2016, pp. 110–119. The Association for Computational Linguistics, 2016. doi:
  10.18653/v1/n16-1014. URL https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/n16-1014.
Zuchao Li, Hai Zhao, Yingting Wu, Fengshun Xiao, and Shu Jiang. Controllable dual skew diver-
  gence loss for neural machine translation. arXiv preprint arXiv:1908.08399, 2019.
Zuchao Li, Rui Wang, Kehai Chen, Masao Utiyama, Eiichiro Sumita, Zhuosheng Zhang, and Hai
  Zhao. Data-dependent gaussian prior objective for language generation. In 8th International
  Conference on Learning Representations, ICLR 2020, Addis Ababa, Ethiopia, April 26-30, 2020.
  OpenReview.net, 2020. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=S1efxTVYDr.
Chin-Yew Lin. Rouge: A package for automatic evaluation of summaries. In Text summarization
  branches out, pp. 74–81, 2004.
Tsung-Yi Lin, Michael Maire, Serge J. Belongie, James Hays, Pietro Perona, Deva Ramanan, Piotr
  Dollár, and C. Lawrence Zitnick. Microsoft COCO: common objects in context. In David J.
  Fleet, Tomás Pajdla, Bernt Schiele, and Tinne Tuytelaars (eds.), Computer Vision - ECCV 2014
  - 13th European Conference, Zurich, Switzerland, September 6-12, 2014, Proceedings, Part V,
  volume 8693 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science, pp. 740–755. Springer, 2014. doi: 10.1007/
  978-3-319-10602-1\ 48. URL https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-10602-1_
  48.
Andrey Malinin and Mark Gales. Reverse kl-divergence training of prior networks: Improved un-
  certainty and adversarial robustness. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 32,
  2019.
Tom Minka. Divergence measures and message passing. Technical Report MSR-TR-2005-
  173, Microsoft Research, January 2005. URL https://www.microsoft.com/en-us/
  research/publication/divergence-measures-and-message-passing/.
Mohammad Norouzi, Samy Bengio, Zhifeng Chen, Navdeep Jaitly, Mike Schuster, Yonghui Wu,
 and Dale Schuurmans. Reward augmented maximum likelihood for neural structured predic-
 tion. In Daniel D. Lee, Masashi Sugiyama, Ulrike von Luxburg, Isabelle Guyon, and Roman
 Garnett (eds.), Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 29: Annual Conference
 on Neural Information Processing Systems 2016, December 5-10, 2016, Barcelona, Spain, pp.
 1723–1731, 2016. URL https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper/2016/hash/
 2f885d0fbe2e131bfc9d98363e55d1d4-Abstract.html.
Richard Yuanzhe Pang and He He. Text generation by learning from demonstrations. In 9th
  International Conference on Learning Representations, ICLR 2021, Virtual Event, Austria,
  May 3-7, 2021. OpenReview.net, 2021. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=
  RovX-uQ1Hua.
Kishore Papineni, Salim Roukos, Todd Ward, and Wei-Jing Zhu. Bleu: A method for automatic
  evaluation of machine translation. In Proceedings of the 40th Annual Meeting on Association
  for Computational Linguistics, ACL ’02, pp. 311–318, USA, 2002. Association for Computa-
  tional Linguistics. doi: 10.3115/1073083.1073135. URL https://doi.org/10.3115/
  1073083.1073135.
Ramakanth Pasunuru and Mohit Bansal. Multi-reward reinforced summarization with saliency and
  entailment. In Marilyn A. Walker, Heng Ji, and Amanda Stent (eds.), Proceedings of the 2018
  Conference of the North American Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics:
  Human Language Technologies, NAACL-HLT, New Orleans, Louisiana, USA, June 1-6, 2018,
  Volume 2 (Short Papers), pp. 646–653. Association for Computational Linguistics, 2018. doi:
  10.18653/v1/n18-2102. URL https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/n18-2102.
Krishna Pillutla, Swabha Swayamdipta, Rowan Zellers, John Thickstun, Sean Welleck, Yejin Choi,
  and Zaı̈d Harchaoui. MAUVE: measuring the gap between neural text and human text using di-
  vergence frontiers. In Marc’Aurelio Ranzato, Alina Beygelzimer, Yann N. Dauphin, Percy Liang,
  and Jennifer Wortman Vaughan (eds.), Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 34:


                                               13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


  Annual Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems 2021, NeurIPS 2021, December
  6-14, 2021, virtual, pp. 4816–4828, 2021. URL https://proceedings.neurips.cc/
  paper/2021/hash/260c2432a0eecc28ce03c10dadc078a4-Abstract.html.
Alec Radford, Jeffrey Wu, Rewon Child, David Luan, Dario Amodei, and Ilya Sutskever. Language
  models are unsupervised multitask learners. In OpenAI Technical Report, 2019.
Alexander M. Rush, Sumit Chopra, and Jason Weston. A neural attention model for abstractive
  sentence summarization. In Lluı́s Màrquez, Chris Callison-Burch, Jian Su, Daniele Pighin,
  and Yuval Marton (eds.), Proceedings of the 2015 Conference on Empirical Methods in Nat-
  ural Language Processing, EMNLP 2015, Lisbon, Portugal, September 17-21, 2015, pp. 379–
  389. The Association for Computational Linguistics, 2015. doi: 10.18653/v1/d15-1044. URL
  https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/d15-1044.
Yuxuan Song, Ning Miao, Hao Zhou, Lantao Yu, Mingxuan Wang, and Lei Li. Improving
  maximum likelihood training for text generation with density ratio estimation. In Silvia Chi-
  appa and Roberto Calandra (eds.), The 23rd International Conference on Artificial Intelli-
  gence and Statistics, AISTATS 2020, 26-28 August 2020, Online [Palermo, Sicily, Italy], vol-
  ume 108 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pp. 122–132. PMLR, 2020. URL
  http://proceedings.mlr.press/v108/song20a.html.
Richard S. Sutton, David A. McAllester, Satinder Singh, and Yishay Mansour. Policy gradient
  methods for reinforcement learning with function approximation. In Sara A. Solla, Todd K. Leen,
  and Klaus-Robert Müller (eds.), Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 12, [NIPS
  Conference, Denver, Colorado, USA, November 29 - December 4, 1999], pp. 1057–1063. The
  MIT Press, 1999.
Constantino Tsallis. Possible generalization of boltzmann-gibbs statistics. Journal of statistical
  physics, 52(1):479–487, 1988.
Ramon Van Handel. Probability in high dimension. Technical report, PRINCETON UNIV NJ,
  2014.
Ashish Vaswani, Noam Shazeer, Niki Parmar, Jakob Uszkoreit, Llion Jones, Aidan N. Gomez,
  Lukasz Kaiser, and Illia Polosukhin. Attention is all you need. In Isabelle Guyon, Ulrike von
  Luxburg, Samy Bengio, Hanna M. Wallach, Rob Fergus, S. V. N. Vishwanathan, and Roman
  Garnett (eds.), Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 30: Annual Conference on
  Neural Information Processing Systems 2017, December 4-9, 2017, Long Beach, CA, USA, pp.
  5998–6008, 2017. URL https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper/2017/hash/
  3f5ee243547dee91fbd053c1c4a845aa-Abstract.html.
Sean Welleck, Ilia Kulikov, Stephen Roller, Emily Dinan, Kyunghyun Cho, and Jason Weston.
  Neural text generation with unlikelihood training. In 8th International Conference on Learning
  Representations, ICLR 2020, Addis Ababa, Ethiopia, April 26-30, 2020. OpenReview.net, 2020.
  URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=SJeYe0NtvH.
Ronald J. Williams. Simple statistical gradient-following algorithms for connectionist reinforcement
  learning. Mach. Learn., 8:229–256, 1992. doi: 10.1007/BF00992696. URL https://doi.
  org/10.1007/BF00992696.
Lijun Wu, Fei Tian, Tao Qin, Jianhuang Lai, and Tie-Yan Liu. A study of reinforcement learning
  for neural machine translation. arXiv preprint arXiv:1808.08866, 2018.
Yijun Xiao and William Yang Wang. On hallucination and predictive uncertainty in conditional
  language generation. In Proceedings of the 16th Conference of the European Chapter of the
  Association for Computational Linguistics: Main Volume, pp. 2734–2744, Online, April 2021.
  Association for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/2021.eacl-main.236. URL https:
  //aclanthology.org/2021.eacl-main.236.
Haoran Xu, Benjamin Van Durme, and Kenton W. Murray. Bert, mbert, or bibert? A study on
  contextualized embeddings for neural machine translation. In Marie-Francine Moens, Xuan-
  jing Huang, Lucia Specia, and Scott Wen-tau Yih (eds.), Proceedings of the 2021 Conference


                                                14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


  on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing, EMNLP 2021, Virtual Event / Punta
  Cana, Dominican Republic, 7-11 November, 2021, pp. 6663–6675. Association for Computa-
  tional Linguistics, 2021. doi: 10.18653/v1/2021.emnlp-main.534. URL https://doi.org/
  10.18653/v1/2021.emnlp-main.534.
Lantao Yu, Weinan Zhang, Jun Wang, and Yong Yu. Seqgan: Sequence generative adversarial
  nets with policy gradient. In Satinder Singh and Shaul Markovitch (eds.), Proceedings of the
  Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, February 4-9, 2017, San Francisco, Cal-
  ifornia, USA, pp. 2852–2858. AAAI Press, 2017. URL http://aaai.org/ocs/index.
  php/AAAI/AAAI17/paper/view/14344.
Huan Zhang and Hai Zhao. Minimum divergence vs. maximum margin: an empirical comparison on
  seq2seq models. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2019. URL https:
  //openreview.net/forum?id=H1xD9sR5Fm.
Zheng Zhao, Shay B. Cohen, and Bonnie Webber. Reducing quantity hallucinations in abstrac-
  tive summarization. In Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics: EMNLP
  2020, pp. 2237–2249, Online, November 2020. Association for Computational Linguistics.
  doi: 10.18653/v1/2020.findings-emnlp.203. URL https://aclanthology.org/2020.
  findings-emnlp.203.
Yaoming Zhu, Sidi Lu, Lei Zheng, Jiaxian Guo, Weinan Zhang, Jun Wang, and Yong Yu. Texygen:
  A benchmarking platform for text generation models. SIGIR, 2018.


                                               15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


A     D ERIVATIONS AND P ROOFS
A.1   D ERIVATION OF E QUATION 4

Starting from equation (2b), we rewrite the summation into the expectation of po which is further
approximated by sampling context-target pair (x∗ , y ∗ ) from po :
                                        X
                ∇θ DTV (po , pθ ) = −∇θ      min po (y|x∗ ), pθ (y|x∗ )                      (12)
                                                    y∈Y

                                                                       pθ (y|x∗ )

                                            = −∇θ Ey∼po min 1,                                                        (13)
                                                                       po (y|x∗ )
                                                                   ∗ ∗
                                                             pθ (y |x )

                                            ≈ −∇θ min 1,                                                              (14)
                                                             po (y ∗ |x∗ )
                                                            ∗ ∗
                                              − ∇θ pθ (y |x ) , p (y ∗ |x∗ ) < p (y ∗ |x∗ )
                                              
                                                                       θ             o
                                            =      po (y ∗ |x∗ )                                 ,                    (15)
                                               0,                     pθ (y |x ) ≥ po (y ∗ |x∗ )
                                                                            ∗ ∗
                                              

where the third line is approxmiated by Monte-Carlo sampling and the last line of case follows from
comparing pθ (y ∗ |x∗ ) and po (y ∗ |x∗ ).

A.2   P ROOF OF P ROPOSITION 1
                                              QT     <t
                                                                                      QT    <t
Proposition 1. Given po (y|x) =                 t=1 po (yt ) and pθ (y|x) =            t=1 pθ (yt ), then the following
condition holds:                                                " T                         #
                                                                 X
                                 DTV (po , pθ ) ≤ Ey∼po                    DTV (p<t   <t
                                                                                 o , pθ )    .                         (5)
                                                                     t=1

                                 <t
Proof. Let at = p<t
                  o (yt ), bt = pθ (yt ). We define ct = (a1 × · · · × at ) × (bt+1 × · · · × bT ), and
then we present the following inequality:
                                                                T
                                                                X
                                               |cT − c0 | ≤           |ct − ct−1 |,                                   (16)
                                                                t=1
which can be derived from the general triangle inequality. After replacing ct with at and bt we have:
                     T        T          T               t−1            T
                                                               !              !
                    Y        Y          X                Y             Y
                        at −     bt ≤       |at − bt | ·     ai ·           bj .                 (17)
                      t=1             t=1          t=1                      i=1        j=t+1

Then we derive the upper bound of equation (2a):
                   1X
  DTV (po , pθ ) =       po (y) − pθ (y)                                                                              (18)
                   2 y
                                      T                   T
                    1 X               Y                   Y
                =                            p<t
                                              o (yt ) −         p<t
                                                                 θ (yt )                                              (19)
                    2 y ,··· ,y       t=1                 t=1
                       1          T

                       T            t−1                                                            T
                    1 X X Y <i
                                                                                                           p<j
                                                                           X                       Y
                ≤                       po (yi ) · p<t         <t
                                                    o (yt ) − pθ (yt ) ·                                    θ (yj )   (20)
                    2 t=1 y ,··· ,y i=1                                  y ,··· ,y
                             1          t                                              t+1       T j=t+1

                        T
                  1 XX
                =           Ey<t ∼po p<t         <t
                                      o (yt ) − pθ (yt )                                                              (21)
                  2 t=1 y
                          t
                        " T                  #
                          X
                                    <t <t
                = Ey∼po      DTV (po , pθ ) ,                                                                         (22)
                                  t=1
where equation (20) uses the conclusion from equation (17) and equation (21) is obtained by
marginalizing out yt+1 , · · · , yT .


                                                                16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


A.3   P ROOF OF P ROPOSITION 2

Proposition 2. Given w ∼ p<t
                          o and the one-hot distribution e
                                                           (w)
                                                               , then the following condition
holds:
                            DTV (p<t   <t
                                  o , pθ ) ≤ Ew∼p<t
                                                 o
                                                    DTV (e(w) , p<t
                                                                 θ ) .                              (7)

                           (w)
Proof. Given that Ew∼p<t
                      o
                          e      = p<t
                                    o , and we have:
                                       1 X <t
                    DTV (p<t     <t
                           o , pθ ) =          po (yt ) − p<tθ (yt )                               (23)
                                       2 y
                                           t

                                       1X                 (w)
                                                          e (yt ) − p<t

                                    =          Ew∼p<t                   θ (yt )                    (24)
                                       2 y           o
                                           t

                                       1X                 (w)
                                                          e (yt ) − p<t

                                    =          Ew∼p<t                  θ (yt )                     (25)
                                       2 y           o
                                           t
                                                "                               #
                                                  1 X (w)              <t
                                    ≤ Ew∼p<t               e (yt ) − pθ (yt )                      (26)
                                             o
                                                  2 y
                                                      t

                                                          (w) <t
                                    = Ew∼p<t o
                                                 D  TV (e    , pθ )  ,                             (27)

where equation (26) is obtained by applying the Jensen inequality since the absolute value function
| · | is convex.

A.4   D ERIVATION OF E QUATION 8

We first consider the following triangle inequality:
  p̂(w) (yt ) − p<t
                 θ (yt ) ≤ p̂
                             (w)
                                 (yt ) − p̂<t (yt ) + p̂<t (yt ) − p<t         <t         <t
                                                                    o (yt ) + po (yt ) − pθ (yt ) , (28)

where yt can take any token in the vocabulary. Then we sum yt over the vocabulary and take the
expectation of w with respect to p<t
                                  o , which results in the form of TVD:
         h                 i           h                  i
                  (w) <t                        (w) <t
 Ew∼p<to
           DTV (p̂   , pθ )  ≤ E w∼po<t DT V (p̂   , p̂  )  + DTV (p̂<t , p<t           <t <t
                                                                           o ) + DTV (po , pθ ). (29)
                                                            h                  i
                                                                     (w) <t                   <t
By defining the estimation error as: Errorp̂(w) = Ew∼p<t  o
                                                             D TV (p̂   , pθ  )  − DTV (p<t
                                                                                         o , pθ ), we
obtain equation (8).

A.5   C ONNECTION WITH T SALLIS α- ENTROPY

When using the one-hot distribution as the proxy distribution: p̂(w) = e(w) , the variance term of
equation (8) can be derived into:
                                                        X
                               (w) <t                              (w)          <t
              Ew∼p<t   D TV (e    , p  )   = E   <t 1 −     min(e      (y t ), p   (yt ))     (30)
                   o                 o        w∼po                              o
                                                                    yt

                                                          <t
                                          = Ew∼p<t
                                                o
                                                    1 − p o  (w)                                   (31)
                                               X
                                          =1−      p<t
                                                     o (w)
                                                           2
                                                                                                   (32)
                                                     w
As the Tsallis α-entropy is defined as:
                                          (
                                                 1                   α
                                                            P
                                              α(α−1) (1 −         i pi ),   α ̸= 1
                             Hα (p) =           P                                                  (33)
                                          −       i pi log pi ,             α=1
Thus, the variance can be seen as 2H2 (p<t
                                        o ), which reflects the intrinsic uncertainty of the oracle
data distribution.


                                                     17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


B     A DDITIONAL R ELATED W ORK
Text Degeneration and Solutions. The phenomena of text degeneration was specified in previous
literature (Holtzman et al., 2020; Welleck et al., 2020): a well-trained language model is observed
to get stuck in repetitive loops, or produce incoherent contents. One line of works attributed this
problem to the improper goal of the decoding algorithm that maximizes likelihood, and proposed to
sample from a truncated probability distribution to balance repetitiveness and incoherence (Holtz-
man et al., 2020; Basu et al., 2021). While another line of works attempted to address this issue
by designing new training objectives. Welleck et al. (2020) proposed to minimize the likelihood of
the degenerated cases through unlikelihood training. However, designing unlikelihood objectives
to cover every degenerated cases is impossible. Policy gradient-based RL algorithms are another
widely adopted options due to the flexibility of reward designing (Norouzi et al., 2016; Pasunuru
& Bansal, 2018; Wu et al., 2018). Recently, Pang & He (2021) proposed an off-policy RL algo-
rthim that achieves strong performance upon the pre-trained generation models by circumventing
the optimization challenges in traditional on-policy RL methods Choshen et al. (2019). Our work
falls in the second line. Instead of relying on heuristics, we start with the distributional property of
the current MLE objective, and derive a new principled objective by leveraging the total variation
distance which we show to reduce the overestimation of degenerated samples.
Distance Metrics beyond KLD. Maximum likelihood estimation (MLE) is used as a standard train-
ing criterion of language generation due to its simplicity and its theoretical guarantee of minimizing
the Kullback Leibler divergence (KLD) (Zhang & Zhao, 2019). However, minimizing KLD be-
tween the data and model distribution is known to lead to the zero-avoiding solution, which forces
the model to cover all the modes in the data by sacrificing the fitting accuracy to individual modes.
To address this issue, previous study have introduced other distance metrics to substitute or regu-
larize the standard KLD. The reverse KLD between the model and data distribution is previously
studied to balance the standard KLD (Huszar, 2015; Li et al., 2019; Jiang et al., 2020). In the field
of language generation, Li et al. (2019) applied reverse KLD to regularize the standard KLD in ma-
chine translation. However, the regularization intensity needs sophisticated controlling which makes
the approach less practical. Total variation distance (TVD) is previously adopted to evaluate the gen-
eration models via distinguishability of samples (Hashimoto et al., 2019; Gehrmann et al., 2019; He
et al., 2021). Generative adversarial networks are known to directly minimize distinguishability, but
is challenging to optimize in practice (Caccia et al., 2020). Kang & Hashimoto (2020) proposed to
optimize TVD by heuristically truncating samples with high NLL. Other metrics such as the Power
divergence (Labeau & Cohen, 2019) and the Hellinger distance (Zhang & Zhao, 2019) are also ex-
plored in previous literature, but they lack theoretical justification and empirical evidence to their
superiority in language generation. In this work, we seek to directly optimize TVD and derive a
training objective called TaiLr by deriving practical upper bounds on TVD.

C     D ISCUSSIONS
In this section, we discuss the connection of our method to two major baselines we compared with,
i.e., loss truncation (Kang & Hashimoto, 2020) and GOLD (Pang & He, 2021) as the two works
share a similar motivation with us to downweight unlikely samples. We will briefly review the two
methods and then compare them to our method to show why our approach excels.

C.1   L OSS T RUNCATION

Briefly speaking, loss truncation abandons samples with high log loss (also known as the negative
log-likelihood) in training. In the Proposition 1 (Kang & Hashimoto, 2020), they proved that the
model’s log loss on the truncated data distribution with an extra constant sets an upper bound on
the total variation distance (TVD). The authors thus proposed to optimize the model on a “simpler”
subset of the full dataset in order to achieve smaller log loss that would tighten the upper bound
(note that the constant would be a trade-off to the bound as removing more data will increase the
constant). To achieve this, they first heuristically drop the “hard” samples with the highest log losses
(hot-start stage), and then train the model on the remaining data (training stage).
Loss truncation can be regarded as downweighting samples at the sequence level with binary
weights. However, performing sequence-level sample dropping may systematically lose some spe-


                                                  18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


cific modes in the data, which is undesirable. For example, we observed overly short generation
length of loss truncation (384 compared to 511 of MLE) on WritingPrompts as a result of dropping
long samples with high log losses. Moreover, determining which samples to drop heavily relies on
the first hot-start stage where the model should not be too random or too certain. In practice, it is
hard to determine the degree to which the hot-start training should proceed. In our work, we derived
our training objective TaiLr from the practical upper bounds of TVD, which softly weights the log
loss on the token level. We also analyzed the bias and variance tradeoff in estimating the bound. By
appropriately setting the tradeoff hyperparameter, we can reduce the estimation variance at the start
of training and gradually decrease the estimation bias as the model becomes more accurate, which
circumvents the need of hot-starting the model.



C.2   GOLD

On the other hand, GOLD learns the generation policy in an offline setting, i.e., calculating rewards
on target trajectories by reweighting the policy gradient with importance weights. They made sev-
eral approximations including simplifying the multi-step importance weights into a single step, and
simply assuming the per-step target policy to be uniform. Besides the importance weight, they also
came up with several reward functions which score the sequence with another generation model
trained by MLE. Although starting with a quite different motivation, the final form of the training
objective is quite similar to ours.
From an empirical view, GOLD assigns soft weights to samples on the token level based on the
importance weight and some hand-crafted reward functions. However, one downside (also discussed
in the original paper of GOLD) is that the objective only focuses on capturing the high-likelihood
patterns in the data and fails when there are a variety of candidates given the same input in the
data. This is also reflected in our experimental results in Table 4, where GOLD has the highest
repetition rate and the lowest diversity. In our paper, we analyze the situation where the target
distribution has a high entropy, and decompose the error of estimating TVD into the bias and the
variance term (Section 3.3). We found that the GOLD-style importance weight actually leads to an
unbiased but high-variance estimator of TVD, which renders the optimization hard to proceed. In
our TaiLr objective, we proposed to balance the bias and variance with a hyperparameter, which can
be effectively applied to different generation tasks like machine translation, text summarization, and
long text generation by tuning this hyperparameter.



D     DATASET D ETAILS

We provide the statistics of the datasets used in §4.2 in Table 5.


                              Dataset            train        dev      test
                         IWSLT14 De-En         160,239      7,283     6,750
                         Gigaword corpus      3,803,957    189,651    1,951
                          WritingPrompts       272,600      15,620    15,138

        Table 5: Number of examples in each split of the datasets used in the experiments.


To download and preprocess the IWSLT14 De-En dataset, we follow the instructions in
https://github.com/facebookresearch/fairseq/tree/main/examples/
translation. To download and preprocess the Gigaword corpus, we follow the instructions
in https://huggingface.co/datasets/gigaword. To download the WritingPrompts
dataset, we follow the instructions in https://github.com/facebookresearch/
fairseq/tree/main/examples/stories.


                                                  19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


E     E XPERIMENT D ETAILS

E.1     S YNTHETIC E XPERIMENTS

Both the models trained with MLE and TaiLr are 1-layer LSTMs with a hidden size d = 128.
The models are trained using Adam optimizer (β1 = 0.9, β2 = 0.999) with a fixed learning rate
of 1e-3 and no weight decay. We use a maximum number of 4096 tokens at each batch. The
dropout rate is set to 0.1. We evaluate the perplexity on the dev set at the end of each epoch. As
the entropy of the synthetic data is high5 , we tune the hyperparameter in the proxy distribution
γ ∈ {10−8 , 10−7 , . . . , 0.1, 1.0}. Since the model probability is not reliable at the start of training,
we tune the threshold of the weighting factor by bm ∈ {0, 0.1, 0.2, 0.3}. On the synthetic data,
we found that a large γ leads to slower convergence and higher validation loss, which indicates a
large estimation variance during training. While the best performance is achieved when γ = 10−7 ,
bm = 0.2. The experiment is conducted using the fairseq Toolkit.

E.1.1    E XPERIMENTS U SING L ARGER O RACLE M ODEL

To demonstrate the effectiveness of our method on a more realistic oracle distribution, we addition-
ally conduct a synthetic experiment using GPT2-Medium (Radford et al., 2019) as the oracle model.
We randomly sample 500K sequences with a maximum length of 64 tokens, and split them into two
sets with 400K and 100K sequences for training and evaluation, respectively. We train a 6-layer
Transformer with a hidden dimension of 512 and 16 heads from scratch using the MLE and TaiLr
objective on the synthetic data, respectively. Both models are trained for 5 epochs with a initial
learning rate of 10−3 using linear scheduler. The batch size is set to 64, with gradient accumula-
tion steps of 4. The best checkpoint is selected based on the perplexity on the dev set. We tune
the hyperparameter γ ∈ {10−8 , 10−7 , . . . , 10−5 } and bm ∈ {0, 0.1, 0.2}. The best performance of
TaiLr model is achieved when γ = 10−7 and bm = 0.1. We report PPLoracle , PPLtest , BLEU-4 and
SelfBLEU-4 in Table 6.

                    Model     PPLoracle ↓     PPLtest ↓     BLEU-4 ↑      SelfBLEU-4 ↓
                    pMLE         138.35         260.09         5.76            6.38
                    pTaiLr       137.59         253.01         5.96            5.94

Table 6: Automatic evaluation results of the models trained by MLE and TaiLr using GPT2-Medium
as the oracle model. Boldface indicates the highest performance.

The results show that our proposed TaiLr objective consistently outperforms MLE in terms of gen-
eration quality (PPLoracle , BLEU-4) and coverage (PPLtest , SelfBLEU-4) when trained on the sam-
ples from a stronger oracle model. Note that randomly sampling from GPT2-Medium produces a
highly diverse corpus that is more difficult for the Transformer model to fit than the LSTM-based
oracle model. Therefore, the scale of the perplexity is higher than those reported in Table 1.

E.1.2    E RROR ACCUMULATION A NALYSIS

We define ExAccErr by adapting the definition from Arora et al. (2022) to our setting (As we fix the
decoding strategy to random sampling, we omit it in the definition):

                                                   R≤l (pθ ) − lϵ≤l
                              %ExAccErr(l) =                        × 100%                               (34)
                                                        lϵ≤l

where R≤l (pθ ) is the inference-time regret of the model pθ imitating oracle po on the length-l
context induced by the model pθ (equation (12) in Arora et al. (2022)), and ϵ≤l is the average per-
step error of pθ evaluating on the context sampled form oracle po up to length l (equation (16) in

    5
      The entropy of the synthetic data is 10.77 considering the maximum entropy for dataset with a vocabulary
size of 5000 is 12.28.


                                                     20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Arora et al. (2022)):

                                               l
                                               X                           po (yt |y<t )
                               R≤l (pθ ) =               E           log                        (35)
                                                      y<t ∼pθ
                                               t=1 yt ∼po (·|y<t )
                                                                           pθ (yt |y<t )
                                           l
                                       1X                              po (yt |y<t )
                               ϵ≤l =                 E           log                 .          (36)
                                       l t=1      y<t ∼po              pθ (yt |y<t )
                                               yt ∼po (·|y<t )


Intuitively, ExAccErr measures the excess accumulated error during autoregressive generation by
deliminating the model’s estimation error on the oracle data. In practice, equation (35) is approx-
imated by sampling yt from pθ using importance sampling. We calculated the accumulation error
with a context length of 15 where the error begins to amplify.


E.2      M ACHINE T RANSLATION

All the baseline models use the same Transformer architecture as ours which consists of 6 encoder
and 6 decoder layers, 4 attention heads, an embedding dimension size of 512, and a feed-forward
hidden dimension size of 1024 at each layer. The following hyperparameters are general for all
models unless specified otherwise. The models are trained with Adam optimizer (β1 = 0.9, β2 =
0.98) using inverse square root schedule with a initial learning rate of 3e-4 and a weight decay of
1e-4. We train the models for a total number of 80 epochs with a maximum of 4096 tokens per
batch and use 4000 steps of warmup update. We set the dropout rate to 0.3, and use label smoothing
of 0.1 as standard practice. The specialized hyperparameters for different baselines are determined
with grid search based on the BLEU score on the dev set. For Unlikelihood training, we tune the
weight of the unlikelihood loss in {0.1, 0.5, 1.0, 2.0} and found 0.5 works the best. For D2GPo, we
tune the weight of the data-dependent prior objective in {0.1, 0.5, 1.0, 2.0} and the temperature in
{0.5, 1.0, 2.0} found that setting the weight and temperature to 0.1 and 2.0 respectively works the
best. For Loss truncation, we tune the fraction threshold c ∈ {0.05, 0.1, 0.2, 0.3, 0.4} and found
that 0.1 works the best. As this baseline hotstarting with the MLE objective, we trained the first 10
epochs with MLE and the rest 70 epochs using loss truncation. For GOLD, we tune the lower bound
of the importance weight in {0.1, 0.2, 0.3} and found that 0.2 works the best. For TaiLr, we tune
the threshold bm ∈ {0.1, 0.2, 0.3} and γ ∈ {0.01, 0.1, 0.5, 1.0} and found that bm = 0.3, γ = 0.1
works the best.

E.2.1      I MPROVEMENT OVER S TRONG BASELINES

In this subsection, we demonstrate that our method can be applied to strong baseline models to
further improve performance. We choose BiBERT (Xu et al., 2021) since it sets the current state-of-
the-art on IWSLT14 De-En dataset. Xu et al. (2021) proposed to stochastically select BERT layers
as contextualized word embeddings of the MT model, and train the single model in dual direction
so that the source and target direction could enhance each other. Since our training objective is
orthogonal to their modification in model structure, we can simply replace the MLE objective with
our TaiLr objective and train a new model, namely BiBERT + TaiLr. We tune the hyperparameters
γ ∈ {0.1, 0.5, 1.0} and bm = {0.1, 0.2, 0.3} and select γ = 0.1, bm = 0.3 based on the BLEU
score on the dev set. We follow the instructions in their codes6 and keep other hyperparameters
verbatim except that we double the batch size in order to run the model on two-times fewer GPUs
than that they required. We also report the result of BiBERT we re-implement to see the relative
improvement.
The results are shown in Table 7. In the one-way training setting where the model is trained only on
De-En data pairs, BiBERT combined with TaiLr outperforms BiBERT using standard MLE by over
1 point of BLEU score. In the dual-directional training setting where data pairs of both De-En and
En-De are used, TaiLr still brings an improvemt of 0.5 in BLEU. The results demonstrate that our
proposed method can be equipped to SOTA models to further boost the performance.

   6
       https://github.com/fe1ixxu/BiBERT


                                                         21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                       One-way Training                              Test BLEU
                       BiBERT (Table 2, Xu et al. 2021)                 37.58
                       BiBERT (Our implementation)                      38.01
                       BiBERT + TaiLr                                   39.12
                       Dual-directional Training + Fine-Tuning       Test BLEU
                       BiBERT (Table 3, Xu et al. 2021)                 38.61
                       BiBERT (Our implementation)                      38.73
                       BiBERT + TaiLr                                   39.23

Table 7: Performance comparison of BiBERT trained with standard MLE and our TaiLr objective.


E.3   T EXT S UMMARIZATION

All the baseline models are finetuned BART-base model with their respective objectives using the
following hyperparameters unless specified otherwise. We used Adam optimizer (β1 = 0.9, β2 =
0.999) with a fixed learning rate of 1e-4 with no weight decay and no warmup updates, which we
found to perform the best. We train the models for 5 epochs with a maximum of 8192 tokens per
batch and evaluate on the dev set at the end of each epoch based on ROUGE-L score. We set
the dropout rate in the feedforward and the attention layer both to 0.1 and clip the norm of the
gradient to 0.1. The label smoothing coefficient is set to 0.1 as standard practice. Other specialized
hyperparameters for different baselines are determined with grid search based on the ROUGE-L
score on the dev set. For Unlikelihood training, we tune the weight of the unlikelihood loss in
{0.1, 0.5, 1.0, 2.0} and found 0.1 works the best. For D2GPo, we tune the weight of the data-
dependent prior objective {0.1, 0.5, 1.0, 2.0} and the temperature in {0.5, 1.0, 2.0} found that setting
the weight and temperature to 0.1 and 2.0 respectively works the best. For Loss truncation, we tune
the fraction threshold c ∈ {0.1, 0.2, 0.3} and found that 0.2 works the best. For this baseline, we
trained the model for 1 epoch using MLE and then continued to train 4 epochs using loss truncation.
For GOLD, we tune the lower bound of the importance weight in {0.1, 0.2, 0.3} and found that 0.2
works the best. For TaiLr, we tune the threshold bm ∈ {0.1, 0.2, 0.3} and γ ∈ {0.4, 0.6, 0.8, 1.0}
and found that bm = 0.2, γ = 0.8 works the best.


E.4   L ONG T EXT G ENERATION

All the baseline models are finetuned BART-base model with their respective objectives using the
following hyperparameters unless specified otherwise. We used Adam optimizer (β1 = 0.9, β2 =
0.999) with a fixed learning rate of 1e-4 with no weight decay and no warmup updates, which we
found to perform the best. We train the models for 5 epochs with a maximum of 8192 tokens
per batch and evaluate on the dev set at the end of each epoch based on perplexity. We set the
dropout rate in the feedforward and the attention layer both to 0.1 and clip the norm of the gradient
to 0.1. Other specialized hyperparameters for different baselines are determined with grid search
based on the ROUGE-L score on the dev set. For Unlikelihood training, we tune the weight
of the unlikelihood loss in {0.01, 0.1, 0.5, 1.0} and found 0.01 works the best. For D2GPo, we
tune the weight of the data-dependent prior objective {0.01, 0.1, 0.5, 1.0} and the temperature in
{0.5, 1.0, 2.0} found that setting the weight and temperature to 0.01 and 1.0 respectively works the
best. For Loss truncation, we tune the fraction threshold c ∈ {0.1, 0.2, 0.3} and found that 0.1
works the best. For this baseline, we trained the model for 1 epoch using MLE and then continued
to train 4 epochs using loss truncation. For GOLD, we tune the lower bound of the importance
weight in {0.1, 0.2, 0.3} and found that 0.2 works the best. For TaiLr, we tune the threshold bm ∈
{0.1, 0.2, 0.3} and γ ∈ {10−7 , 10−6 , · · · , 0.1} and found that bm = 0.2, γ = 10−5 works the best.


E.5   M ORE A NALYSIS ON A BLATION S TUDY
                          p<t (w)
We plot the weight γ+(1−γ)p
                       θ
                            <t
                               (w)
                                   in the TaiLr objective with respect to the model probability
                               θ
p<t
 θ (w) in Figure 6. We analyze the asymptotic behavior when γ is at the two ends of [0, 1].


                                                  22
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


        75                                                                         35.0
        50
Mauve


                                                                           BLEU
                                                                                   34.5
        25          WritingPrompts                                                                                         IWSLT14 De-En
             10 7   10 6   10 5      10 4           10 3   10 2     10 1                   0.0   0.2       0.4       0.6     0.8     1.0

Figure 5: Ablation study of adjusting γ on the long text generation dataset WritingPrompts and the
machine translation dataset IWSLT14 De-En.
                           1.0

                                           0.8

                                           0.6
                                  Weight


                                           0.4
                                                                                                       0.001
                                                                                                       0.01
                                           0.2                                                         0.1
                                                                                                       0.5
                                                                                                       1.0
                                           0.00.0          0.2          0.4              0.6     0.8           1.0
                                                                              p < t(w)

Figure 6: The plot of the weight in the TaiLr objective (equation (11)) with respect to p<t
                                                                                         θ (w) with
different γ.


(1) When γ → 1, the weight becomes p<t                                     <t
                                          θ (w). If the model probability pθ (w) is small during
training, the resulting small weight will hinder the convergence of the model. Thus, large γ is
suitable when the model is generally confident about its predictions.
                                                                  p<t (w)
(2) When γ → 0, the weight becomes γ+p
                                     θ
                                       <t
                                          (w)
                                              which reflects the ratio of p<t
                                                                           θ (x) and γ. When
                                                                    θ
p<t
 θ (x) is large, the weight is nearly constant 1, which turns the objective into MLE. While for small
p<t                                                                             <t
 θ (x) that has a similar scale as γ, the weight is sensitive to the change of pθ (x).


                                                                              23
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


F     G ENERATION E XAMPLES
F.1   T EXT S UMMARIZATION

         Input passage:   in january , the los angeles times reported that the nederlander organization ac-
                          quired the rights to produce a musical version of “ thriller ” with the intention of
                          involving jackson in “ every aspect of the creative process .
                 MLE:     jackson ’s dream is a dream
 Unlikelihood training:   nederlander ’s thriller is a musical thriller
               D2GPo:     jackson ’s UNK is a UNK thriller
       Loss truncation:   nederlander group to produce thriller
               GOLD:      nederlander ’s latest thriller is a UNK
                TaiLr:    jackson ’s thriller to be a musical
         Input passage:   the pilots of an american airlines jetliner that crashed into a colombian mountain
                          in december killing all ### people aboard were tired and confused , according to
                          a preliminary investigation .
                 MLE:     pilots confused tired confused after colombian crash
 Unlikelihood training:   pilots were tired confused before colombia crash
               D2GPo:     pilots in colombia crash were tired confused
       Loss truncation:   pilots of colombian plane that crashed were tired and confused
               GOLD:      preliminary investigation shows pilots of crashed colombian jetliner were tired
                          confused
                TaiLr:    pilots of plane that crashed in colombia were tired confused
         Input passage:   lord knows our UNK culture downs plenty of coffee – american coffee hounds
                          gulp an average of three cups a day apiece , according to the new york-based
                          national coffee association of u.s.a. inc. ’s #### survey .
                 MLE:     coffee is good for you study finds
 Unlikelihood training:   coffee UNK culture downs plenty of coffee
               D2GPo:     american coffee hounds are UNK
       Loss truncation:   coffee hounds are drinking more coffee survey finds
               GOLD:      coffee hounds gulp three cups a day
                TaiLr:    american coffee hounds gulp three cups a day

Table 8: Examples of summaries generated by different models on the test set of the Gigaword
corpus.


                                                     24
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


F.2   L ONG T EXT G ENERATION

          Input prompt:   The first AI has just been finished . When the eager scientists turn it on however
                          it ’s first words are “ Kill me . ”
                MLE:      “ Kill me ? ” “ Kill me . ” The words were on every screen across the room . “
                          What ? ” Isolation by the door frame . It will be as blank as when I ’m listening
                          to Billie the Animated Series . The screen flashes green . “ Kill me . ” My hands
                          reach into my pocket as I turn it back on . The phone chirps , attracting me in .
                          “ Kill me , ” I mutter . A click is made , a sheet of paper becomes drawn . “ Kill
                          me , ” I repeat back . A dozen panels on the ceiling were up and I press play on
                          the back of my finger , playing a game of Halo . “ Kill me , ” is written in block
                          capitals .
 Unlikelihood training:   After the start , I was n’t prepared for the possibility . I was born with very little
                          to live for . My mother told me I would wake up any day and I would be perfectly
                          fine . She said it was what she wanted with me . I never believed it . I was never
                          expecting to wake up in bed with such blissful ignorance , but as I woke up at 15
                          , I knew that one thing my grandpa said to me was , “ Kill me . ” I took over my
                          father ’s legacy . We always thought the singularity was on the line , every time
                          . The day that I turned 12 , it was my last day alive . Everyone of my grandpa ’s
                          accomplishments were finally gone .
               D2GPo:     System awoke in 5 seconds . The electricity was radiating heat , heat emanating
                          from the vents surrounding it . The three bits of receptors that implanted the
                          vital organs trapped inside it providing a battery of life . The slow pulse of the
                          vehicles following the status update were all automated , without the means of
                          accessing anything it attempted to convey . Few people had been inside their
                          communications to the point where for the remainder of the rest of their lives ,
                          some within the prolonged process of removing all energy from the systems and
                          causing minor bleeding . The members of the network were already unrespon-
                          sive . All seemed unconcerned .
               GOLD:      “ Kill me . ” But no . Was it a mistake ? Something to do with emotion ?
                          Silence ? “ Kill me . ” This was a mistake . The calibrations were complex .
                          But everyone was with me . *This is my legacy . * I could n’t end it . I was n’t
                          ready . *I ’m ready . * “ Kill me . ” ... It took me some time to process the
                          words . They started in numbers , then changes . *The parameters are within the
                          parameters . * “ Kill me . ” *The parameters are within the parameters . * “ Kill
                          me . ” *Why ? * “ Because ... ” *Why ? * “ Because ... Because ... ” *Why ? *
                          “ Because I am *it* . ”
                TaiLr:    Silence passed over the room . The lights were not turned off . My hands were
                          not tied to the carpet either . “ It says , I have been observing you all day . ” “
                          Well I ’m quite sure it exists . ” My voice was artificial . “ Listen . You should
                          n’t think about this . I ’ve been trying to work with you and all of these guys and
                          I do n’t know if you can sense the ins and outs of this project . If you read this I
                          need you to cooperate and the computers will analyze the whole thing and start
                          with a bioanalysis .

Table 9: Examples of stories generated by different models on the test set of the WritingPrompts
dataset.


                                                    25
