Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


A RTIFICIAL R EPLAY: A M ETA -A LGORITHM
FOR H ARNESSING H ISTORICAL DATA IN BANDITS

 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                            A BSTRACT

         While standard bandit algorithms sometimes incur high regret, their performance
         can be greatly improved by “warm starting” with historical data. Unfortunately,
         how best to incorporate historical data is unclear: naively initializing reward esti-
         mates using all historical samples can suffer from spurious data and imbalanced
         data coverage, leading to computational and storage issues—particularly in con-
         tinuous action spaces. We address these two challenges by proposing A RTIFICIAL
         R EPLAY, a meta-algorithm for incorporating historical data into any arbitrary
         base bandit algorithm. A RTIFICIAL R EPLAY uses only a subset of the histori-
         cal data as needed to reduce computation and storage. We provide guarantees that
         our method achieves equal regret as a full warm-start approach while potentially
         using only a fraction of the historical data for a broad class of base algorithms that
         satisfy independence of irrelevant data (IIData), a novel property that we intro-
         duce. We complement these theoretical results with a case study of K-armed and
         continuous combinatorial bandit algorithms, including on a green security domain
         using real poaching data, to show the practical benefits of A RTIFICIAL R EPLAY in
         achieving optimal regret alongside low computational and storage costs. Across
         these experiments, we show that A RTIFICIAL R EPLAY performs well for all set-
         tings that we consider, even for base algorithms that do not satisfy IIData.


1   I NTRODUCTION
Multi-armed bandits and their variants are robust models for many real-world problems. Resulting
algorithms have been applied to wireless networks (Zuo & Joe-Wong, 2021), COVID testing regu-
lations (Bastani et al., 2021), and conservation efforts to protect wildlife from poaching (Xu et al.,
2021). Typical bandit algorithms assume no prior knowledge of the expected rewards of each ac-
tion, simply taking actions online to address the exploration–exploitation trade-off. However, many
real-world applications offer access to historical data. For example, in the wildlife conservation
setting, we may have access to years of historical patrol records that should be incorporated to learn
poaching risk before deploying any bandit algorithm.
There is no consensus on how to optimally incorporate this historical data into online learning al-
gorithms. The naive approach uses the full historical dataset to initialize reward estimates (Shiv-
aswamy & Joachims, 2012), possibly incurring unnecessary and onerous computation and storage
costs. These costs are particularly salient in continuous action settings with adaptive discretization,
where the number of discretized regions is a direct function of the number of historical samples. If
excessive data was collected on poor-performing actions, this spurious data with imbalanced data
coverage would lead us to unnecessarily process and store an extremely large number of fine dis-
cretizations in low-performing areas of the action space, even when a significantly coarser discretiza-
tion would be sufficient to inform us that region is not worth exploring. These two key challenges
highlight that the value of information of the historical dataset may not be a direct function of its
size. Real-world decision makers echo this sentiment: Martin et al. (2017) note that for conservation
decisions, more information does not always translate into better actions; time is the resource which
matters most.
A natural question one can ask is: Is there an efficient way (in terms of space, computational, and
sample complexity) to use historical data to achieve regret-optimal performance? For example,
many real-world applications of bandit algorithms, such as online recommender systems, may con-


                                                   1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


tain historical datasets with millions of data points. Processing these millions of points would require
an exceptional amount of upfront computation and storage cost, especially if many of those histori-
cal points are no longer relevant; many samples may encode out-of-date data such as old movies or
discontinued products.
To this end, we propose A RTIFICIAL R EPLAY, a meta-algorithm that modifies any base bandit
algorithm to harness historical data. A RTIFICIAL R EPLAY reduces computation and storage costs
by only using historical data on an as needed basis. The key intuition is if we could choose which
samples to include in the historical dataset, a natural approach would be to use a regret-optimal
bandit algorithm to guide the sampling. A RTIFICIAL R EPLAY builds on this intuition by using
historical data as a replay buffer to artificially simulate online actions. Every time the base algorithm
picks an action, we first check the historical data for any unused samples from the chosen action.
If an unused sample exists, update the reward estimates and continue without advancing to the next
timestep. Otherwise, sample from the environment, update the estimates using the observion, and
continue to the next timestep. While this idea is easiest to understand in the context of the standard
K-armed bandit problem, we discuss later how this framework naturally extends to other structure
and information models, including continuous action spaces with semi-bandit feedback.
Although A RTIFICIAL R EPLAY seems to be a natural heuristic to minimize use of historical data, it
is not clear how to analyze its regret—specifically how much it loses compared to “full warm-start”
(i.e., where the base algorithm is initialized with the full dataset). Surprisingly, however, we prove
that under a widely applicable condition, the regret of A RTIFICIAL R EPLAY (as a random variable) is
distributionally identical to that of a full warm-start approach, while also guaranteeing significantly
better time and storage complexity. Specifically, we show a sample-path coupling1 between our A R -
TIFICIAL R EPLAY approach and the full warm start approach with the same base algorithm, as long
as the base algorithm satisfies a novel independence of irrelevant data (IIData) assumption. While
our goal is not to show regret improvements, this result highlights how A RTIFICIAL R EPLAY is a
simple approach for incorporating historical data with identical regret to full warm start (approach
done in practice) with significantly smaller computational overhead.
Finally, we show the practical benefits of our method by instantiating A RTIFICIAL R EPLAY for
several broad classes of bandits and evaluating on real-world data. To highlight the breadth of
algorithms that satisfy the IIData property, we provide examples of regret-optimal IIData polices
for K-armed and continuous combinatorial bandits. We use these examples to prove that A RTIFI -
CIAL R EPLAY can lead to arbitrary better storage and computational complexity requirements. We
close with a case study of combinatorial bandit algorithms for continuous resource allocation in the
context of green security domains, using a novel adaptive discretization technique. Across the ex-
periments, we observe concrete gains in storage and runtime using real-world poaching data from
the A RTIFICIAL R EPLAY framework over a range of base algorithms, including algorithms that do
not satisfy IIData such as Thompson sampling and Information Directed Sampling (IDS).


1.1   R ELATED W ORK

Multi-armed bandit problems have a long history in the online learning literature. We highlight the
most closely related works below; for more extensive references please see our detailed discussion
in Appendix B and Bubeck et al. (2012); Slivkins (2019); Lattimore & Szepesvári (2020).
Multi-Armed Bandit Algorithms. The design and analysis of bandit algorithms have been con-
sidered under a wide range of models. These algorithms were first studied in the K-armed bandit
model in Lai & Robbins (1985), where the decision maker has access to a finite set of K possible
actions at each timestep. However, numerous follow-up works have considered similar approaches
when designing algorithms in continuous action spaces (Kleinberg et al., 2019) and with combina-
torial constraints (Chen et al., 2013; Xu et al., 2021; Zuo & Joe-Wong, 2021). Our work provides
a framework to modify existing algorithms to harness historical data. Moreover, we also propose
a novel algorithm to incorporate adaptive discretization for combinatorial multi-armed bandits for
continuous resource allocation, extending the discrete model from Zuo & Joe-Wong (2021).

   1
     That is, we construct the regret process for both algorithms simultaneously on a joint probability space
such that each individual process has the correct marginal, but both processes are equal over each sample path.


                                                      2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Incorporating Historical Data. Several papers have started to investigate how to incorporate
historical data into bandit algorithms, starting with Shivaswamy & Joachims (2012) who consider
a K-armed bandit model where each arm has a dataset of historical pulls. The authors develop
a “warm start” UCB algorithm to initialize the confidence bound of each arm based on the full
historical data—prior to learning. Bouneffouf et al. (2019) extended similar techniques to models
with pre-clustered arms. These techniques were later extended to Bayesian and frequentist linear
contextual bandits, where the linear feature vector is initialized based on standard regression over the
historical data (Oetomo et al., 2021; Wang et al., 2017). Our work provides a contrasting approach
to harnessing historical data in algorithm design: our meta-algorithm can be applied to any standard
bandit framework and uses the historical data only as needed, leading to improved computation and
storage gains.

2     P RELIMINARIES
We now define the general bandit model and specify the finite-armed and online combinatorial
allocation settings that we study in our experiments. See Appendix C for details.

2.1   G ENERAL S TOCHASTIC BANDIT M ODEL

We consider a stochastic bandit problem with a fixed action set A. Let < : A ! ([0, 1]) be a
collection of independent and unknown reward distributions over A. Our goal is to pick an action
a 2 A to maximize E[<(a)], the expected reward, which we denote µ(a). The optimal reward is:
                                         O PT = max µ(a) .                                          (1)
                                                  a2A

For now, we do not impose any additional structure on A, which could potentially be discrete,
continuous, or encode combinatorial constraints.
Historical Data. We assume that the algorithm designer has access to a historical dataset Hhist =
  j , Rj }j2[H] containing H historical points with actions {aj }j2[H] and rewards Rj sampled
{aH     H                                                         H                         H

according to <(aj ). We do not make any assumptions on how the historical actions aj are chosen
                 H                                                                       H

and view them as deterministic and fixed upfront. Our goal is to efficiently incorporate this historical
data to improve the performance of a bandit algorithm.
Online Structure. Since the mean reward function µ(a) is initially unknown, we consider settings
where the algorithm interacts with the environment sequentially over T timesteps. At timestep
t 2 [T ], the decision maker picks an action At 2 A according to their policy ⇡. The environment
then reveals a reward Rt sampled from the distribution <(At ). The optimal reward O PT would be
achieved using a policy with full knowledge of the true distribution. We thus define regret as:
                                                              PT
                         R EGRET(T, ⇡, Hhist ) = T · O PT       t=1 µ(At ) .                    (2)
where the dependence on Hhist highlights that At can additionally depend on the historical dataset.

2.2   F INITE , C ONTINUOUS , AND C OMBINATORIAL ACTION S PACES

Finite-Armed Bandit. The finite-armed bandit model can be viewed in this framework by consid-
ering K discrete actions A = [K] = {1, . . . , K}.
Combinatorial Multi-Armed Bandit for Continuous Resource Allocation (CMAB-CRA). A central
planner has access to a metric space S of resources with metric dS . They are tasked with splitting
a total amount of B divisible budget across N different resources within S. An action consists of
choosing N resources, i.e., N points in S, and allocating the budget among that chosen subset. The
feasible space of allocations is B = [0, 1] and the feasible action space is:
                                         PN (i)
           A = (~p, ~ ) 2 S N ⇥ B N         i=1       B, dS (p(i) , p(j) ) ✏ 8i 6= j .           (3)
                                                                P (i)
The chosen action must satisfy the budgetary constraint (i.e., i          B), and the resources must
be distinct (aka ✏-away from each other according to dS for some ✏ > 0) to ensure the “same”
resource is not chosen at multiple allocations. We additionally assume that < decomposes indepen-
                                                               PN
dently over the (resource, allocation) pairs, in that µ(a) = i=1 µ(p(i) , (i) ). Lastly, we assume


                                                   3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Algorithm 1 A RTIFICIAL R EPLAY
Require: Historical dataset Hhist = {(aH    j , Rj )}j2[H] , base algorithm ⇧
                                                 H

 1: Initialize set of used historical data points H1on = ;, and set of online data H1 = ;
 2: for t = {1, 2, . . .} do
 3:     Initialize flag to be True
 4:     while flag is True do
 5:          Pick action Ãt ⇠ ⇧(Hton [ Ht )
 6:          if Ãt is not contained in Hhist \ Hton then
 7:               Update flag to be False                                        . Finish a full timestep
 8:               Set online action At = Ãt
 9:               Execute action At and observe reward Rt ⇠ <(At )                 . Take online sample
                                                             on
10:               Update Ht+1 = Ht [ {(At , Rt )} and Ht+1       = Hton
11:          else
12:               Update Hton to include one sample for Ãt from historical dataset Hhist


                                                                 (i)   (i)  (i)
the algorithm observes semi-bandit feedback of the form (pt ,          t , Rt )i2[N ] for each resource
                                               (i)       (i)
and allocation pair sampled according to <(pt , t ). Zuo & Joe-Wong (2021) proposed a discrete
model of this problem as a generalization of the works in Dagan & Koby (2018); Lattimore et al.
(2014; 2015) specialize it to consider scheduling a finite set of resources to maximize the expected
number of jobs finished.
Extension to Green Security. The CMAB-CRA model can be used to specify green security do-
mains from Xu et al. (2021) by letting the space S represent a protected area and letting B represent
the discrete set of patrol resources to allocate, such as number of ranger hours per week, with the
total budget B being 40 hours. This formulation generalizes to a more realistic continuous space
model of the landscape, instead of the artificial fixed discretization that was considered in prior work
consisting of 1 ⇥ 1 sq. km regions of the park. This also highlights the practical necessity that the
chosen resources (here, the patrol locations) are ✏-far away to ensure sufficient spread. In Section 5,
we show that enabling patrol planning at a continuous level can help park rangers more precisely
identify poaching hotspots.

3     A RTIFICIAL R EPLAY FOR H ARNESSING H ISTORICAL DATA
We propose A RTIFICIAL R EPLAY, a meta-algorithm that can be integrated with any base algorithm
to incorporate historical data. We later prove that for any base algorithm satisfying independence of
irrelevant data (IIData), a novel property we introduce, A RTIFICIAL R EPLAY has identical regret to
an approach which uses the full historical data upfront—showing that our approach reduces com-
putation costs without trading off performance. Additionally, in Appendix E we discuss empirical
improvements of A RTIFICIAL R EPLAY applied to Thompson Sampling and Information Directed
Sampling, two algorithms which do not satisfy IIData.
Algorithm Formulation. Any algorithm for online stochastic bandits can be thought of as a func-
tion mapping arbitrary ordered histories (i.e., collections of observed (a, R) pairs) to a distribution
over actions in A. More specifically, let ⇧ : D ! (A) be an arbitrary base algorithm where D
denotes the collection of possible histories (i.e., D = [i 0 (A ⇥ R+ )). The policy obtained by a
base algorithm ⇧ without incorporating historical data simply takes the action sampled according
                I GNORANT(⇧)
to the policy ⇡t              = ⇧(Ht ) where Ht is the data observed by timestep t. In comparison,
                          F ULL S TART(⇧)
consider an algorithm ⇡t                  which follows the same policy but uses the full historical data
upfront, so takes the action sampled according to ⇧(Hhist [ Ht ).

3.1   A RTIFICIAL R EPLAY

The A RTIFICIAL R EPLAY meta-algorithm incorporates the historical data Hhist into an arbitrary
base algorithm ⇧, resulting in a policy we denote by ⇡ A RTIFICIAL R EPLAY(⇧) . See Algorithm 1 for the
pseudocode. We let Hton be the set of historical datapoints used by the start of time t. Initially,
H1on = ;. For an arbitrary timestep t, the A RTIFICIAL R EPLAY approach works as follows:


                                                     4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Let Ãt ⇠ ⇧(Hton [ Ht ) be the proposed action at the start of time t. Since we are focused on
simulating the algorithm with historical data, we break into cases whether or not the current set of
unused historical datapoints (i.e., Hhist \ Hton ) contains any additional information about Ãt .

       • No historical data available: If Ãt is not contained in Hhist \ Hton , then the selected action
                                                                                   on
         is At = Ãt , and we advance to timestep t + 1. We additionally set Ht+1       = Hton .
       • Historical data available: If Ãt is contained in Hhist \ Hton , add that data point to Hton and
         repeat by picking another proposed action. We remain at time t.

Strikingly, our framework imposes minimal computational and storage overhead on top of exist-
ing algorithms, simply requiring a data structure to verify whether Ã 2 Hhist \ Hton , which can be
performed with hashing techniques. It is clear that the runtime and storage complexity of A RTIFI -
CIAL R EPLAY is no worse than F ULL S TART . We also note that most practical bandit applications
incorporate historical data obtained from database systems (e.g. content recommendation systems,
wildlife poaching model discussed). This historical data will be stored regardless of the algorithm
being employed, and so the key consideration is around computational requirements and not storage.
Additionally, our approach extends naturally to the following different models:
Continuous Spaces. The A RTIFICIAL R EPLAY framework can be applied in continuous action
spaces with discretization-based algorithms. For example, suppose that ⇧ wants to select an action
a 2 A, but the historical data has a sample from a + ✏, a slightly perturbed point. Discretization-
based algorithms avoid precision issues since they map the continuous space to a series of regions
which together cover the action set, and run algorithms or subroutines over the discretization. Check-
ing for historical data simply checks for data within the bounds of the chosen discretized action.
Semi-Bandit Feedback.              A RTIFICIAL R EPLAY also naturally extends to combinatorial action
sets with semi-bandit feedback where actions are decomposable, that is, they can be written as
a = (a1 , . . . , aN ) with independent rewards. Suppose that ⇧ wants to select an action a =
(a1 , a2 , . . . , aN ) but the historical data has a sample from (a01 , a2 , . . . a0N ). Even if the combina-
torial action a does not appear in its entirety in the historical data, as long as there exists some
subcomponent aH        i (sometimes referred to as “subarm” in combinatorial bandits) in the historical
                                                              on
data (e.g., a2 ) , we can add that subcomponent aH      i to Ht to update the base algorithm.


3.2   I NDEPENDENCE OF I RRELEVANT DATA AND R EGRET C OUPLING

It is not immediately clear how to analyze the regret of A RTIFICIAL R EPLAY. To enable regret
analysis, we introduce a new property for bandit algorithms, independence of irrelevant data, which
essentially requires that when an algorithm is about to take an action, providing additional data about
other actions (i.e., those not selected by the algorithm) will not influence the algorithm’s decision.
Definition 3.1 (Independence of irrelevant data). A deterministic base algorithm ⇧ satisfies the
independence of irrelevant data (IIData) property if whenever A = ⇧(H) then
                                            ⇧(H) = ⇧(H [ H0 )                                              (4)
for any H0 containing data from any actions a0 other than A (that is, a0 6= A).

IIData is a natural robustness property for an algorithm to satisfy, highlighting that the algorithm
evaluates actions independently when making decisions. IIData is conceptually analogous to the
independence of irrelevant alternatives (IIA) axiom in computational social choice as a desiderata
used to evaluate voting rules (Arrow, 1951). In Theorem 3.2 we show that for any base algorithm
satisfying IIData, the regret of ⇡ F ULL S TART(⇧) and ⇡ A RTIFICIAL R EPLAY(⇧) will be equal.
Theorem 3.2. Suppose that algorithm ⇧ satisfies the independence of irrelevant data property. Then
for any problem instance, horizon T , and historical dataset Hhist we have the following:
                                   A RTIFICIAL R EPLAY(⇧) d    F ULL S TART(⇧)
                                  ⇡t                       = ⇡t
                                                           d
            R EGRET(T, ⇡ A RTIFICIAL R EPLAY(⇧) , Hhist ) = R EGRET(T, ⇡ F ULL S TART(⇧) , Hhist ) .



                                                       5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Algorithm 2 Monotone UCB (M ON UCB)
 1: Initialize n1 (a) = 0, µ1 (a) = 1, and UCB1 (a) = 1 for each a 2 [K]
 2: for t = {1, 2, . . .} do
 3:     Let At = arg maxa2[K] UCBt (a)
 4:     Receive reward Rt sampled from <(At )
 5:     Update nt+1 (At ) = nt (At ) + 1, nt+1 (a) = nt (a) for a 6= At
 6:     Update µt+1 (At ) = (nt (At )µt (At ) + Rt )/nt+1 (At ), µt+1 (a) = µt (a) for a 6= At
 7:     Update UCBt+1 (a) = UCBt (a) for a 6= At andp
          UCBt+1 (At ) = min{UCBt (At ), µt+1 (At ) + 2 log(T )/nt+1 (At )}


This theorem shows that A RTIFICIAL R EPLAY allows us to achieve identical regret guarantees as
F ULL S TART while simultaneously using data more efficiently. In the subsequent section, we show
three example regret-optimal algorithms which satisfy this property, even in the complex CMAB-
CRA setting. The algorithms we modify are all UCB-based algorithms. In fact, it is easy to modify
most UCB-based algorithms to satisfy IIData by simply imposing monotonicity of the confidence
bound estimates for an action rewards. This is easily implementable and preserves all regret guaran-
tees. While for brevity we only discuss IIData algorithms in the K-Armed and CMAB-CRA set-up,
it is easy to see how to modify other UCB-based algoriths (e.g. LinUCB for linear bandits (Abbasi-
Yadkori et al., 2011)) to satisfy IIData. In the existing bandit literature, there has been a narrow focus
on only finding regret-optimal algorithms. We propose that IIData is another desirable property that
implies ease and robustness for optimally and efficiently incorporating historical data.

4     IIDATA A LGORITHMS
In this section, we provide IIData algorithms with optimal regret guarantees for two settings: the
K-armed and CMAB-CRA models. We show that IIData is easy to guarantee for UCB algorithms
requiring only a minor modification to existing algorithms while not impacting confidence bounds
guarantees.
We defer algorithm details to Appendix D and proofs to Appendix F. We’ll show in Appendix E that
in practice, A RTIFICIAL R EPLAY still performs nearly optimally even with algorithms that do not
satisfy IIData.

4.1   K-A RMED BANDITS

The first algorithm we propose, named Monotone UCB (denoted as M ON UCB), is derived from
the UCB1 algorithm introduced in Auer et al. (2002). At every timestep t, the algorithm tracks the
following: (i) µt (a) for the estimated mean reward of action a 2 [K], (ii) nt (a) for the number of
times the action a has been selected by the algorithm prior to timestep t, and (iii) UCBt (a) for an
upper confidence bound estimate for the reward of action a. At every timestep t, the algorithm picks
the action At which maximizes UCBt (a) (breaking ties deterministically). After observing Rt , we
increment nt+1 (At ) = nt (At ) + 1, update µt+1 (At ), and set:
                                        ⇢                          q
                   UCBt+1 (At ) = min UCBt (At ), µt+1 (At ) + n2t+1    log(T )
                                                                           (At )  .              (5)

The only modification of Monotone UCB from standard UCB is the additional step forcing the UCB
estimates to be monotone decreasing over t. It is clear that this modification has no affect on the
regret guarantees. Under the “good event” analysis, if UCBt (a)          µ(a) with high probability,
then the condition still holds at time t + 1, even after observing a new data point. In the following
theorem, we show that M ON UCB satisfies IIData and is regret-optimal, achieving the same instance-
dependent regret bound as the standard UCB algorithm.
Theorem 4.1. Monotone UCB satisfies the IIData property and has for (a) = maxa0 µ(a0 ) µ(a):
                                                                 X
                 R EGRET(T, ⇡ I GNORANT(M ON UCB) , Hhist ) = O(     log(T )/ (a)).               (6)
                                                                     a

This guarantee allows us to use Theorem 3.2 to establish that A RTIFICIAL R EPLAY and
F ULL S TART have identical regret with M ON UCB as a base algorithm. In the next theorem, we


                                                    6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


show that A RTIFICIAL R EPLAY is robust to spurious data, where the historical data has excess sam-
ples aH
      j coming from poor performing actions. Spurious data imposes computational challenges,
since the F ULL S TART approach will pre-process the full historical dataset regardless of the ob-
served rewards or the inherent value of the historical data. In contrast, A RTIFICIAL R EPLAY will
only use the amount of data useful for learning.
Theorem 4.2. For every H 2 N there exists a historical dataset Hhist with |Hhist | = H where the
runtime of ⇡ Fp
              ULL S TART (M ON UCB)
                                    = ⌦(H + T ) whereas the runtime of ⇡ A RTIFICIAL R EPLAY(M ON UCB) =
O(T + min{ T , log(T )/ mina (a)2 }).

This highlights that the computational overhead of A RTIFICIAL R EPLAY in comparison to F ULL
S TART can be arbitrarily better. For storage requirements, the F ULL S TART algorithm requires
O(K) storage for maintaining estimates for each arm. In contrast, a naive implementation of A R -
TIFICIAL R EPLAY requires O(K + H) storage since the entire historical dataset needs to be stored.
However, using hashing techniques can address the extra H factor. In Section 4.2 we will see an
example where IIData additionally has strong storage benefits over F ULL S TART.
Lastly, to complement the computational improvements of A RTIFICIAL R EPLAY applied to
M ON UCB, we can also show an improvement of regret. This analysis crucially uses the regret
coupling, since F ULL S TART(M ON UCB) is much easier to reason about than its A RTIFICIAL R E -
PLAY counterpart.
Theorem 4.3. Let Ha be the number of datapoints in Hhist for each action a 2 [K]. Then the regret
of Monotone UCB with historical dataset Hhist is:
                                                            ⇣ X                             ⌘
   R EGRET(T, ⇡ A RTIFICIAL R EPLAY(M ON UCB) , Hhist )  O     max 0, log(T(a)
                                                                               )
                                                                                  Ha (a) .
                                                          a2[K]:   a 6=0


Theorem 4.2 together with Theorem 4.3 helps highlight the advantage of using A RTIFICIAL R EPLAY
over F ULL S TART in terms of improving computational complexity while maintaining an equally
improved regret guarantee. This reduces to the standard UCB guarantee when Hhist = ;. Moreover,
it highlights the impact historical data can have on the regret. If |Ha |     log(T )/ (a)2 for each
a then the regret of the algorithm will be constant not scaling with T . We note that there are no
existing regret lower bounds for incorporating historical data in bandit algorithms. Our main goal is
not to improve regret guarantees (although Theorem 4.3 highlights the advantage of historical data),
but instead highlight a simple, intuitive, and implementable approach through A RTIFICIAL R EPLAY
which matches the performance of F ULL S TART while simultaneously having smaller compute.
We close with an example of a K-armed bandit algorithm which does not satisfy the IIData as-
sumption. Thompson Sampling (Russo et al., 2018), which samples arms according to the posterior
probability that they are optimal, does not satisfy IIData. Data from other actions other than the one
chosen will adjust the posterior distribution, and hence will adjust the selection probabilities as well.
While we do not obtain a regret coupling, in Fig. 8 (appendix) we show that there are still empirical
gains for using A RTIFICIAL R EPLAY over F ULL S TART across a variety of base algorithms.

4.2   CMAB-CRA

Incorporating historical data optimally and efficiently is difficult in continuous action settings. Two
natural approaches are to (i) discretize the action space A based on the data using nearest neighbor
estimates, or (ii) learn a regression of the mean reward using available data. Consider a setting
where excessive data is collected from poor-performing actions. Discretization-based algorithms
will unnecessarily process and store a large number of discretizations in low-performing regions of
the space. Regression-based methods will use compute resources to learn an accurate predictor of the
mean reward in irrelevant regions. The key issues are that the computational and storage cost grows
with the size of the historical dataset, and the estimation and discretization is done independent of
the quality of the reward.
To contrast this approach, we present two discretization-based algorithms that satisfy IIData
with strong performance guarantees. In particular, we detail fixed and adaptive discretization
(A DA M ON UCB in Algorithm 3) algorithms that only use the historical dataset to update estimates


                                                   7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


of the reward. Due to space, we describe the algorithms only at a high level and defer details to
Appendix D.
Our algorithms are Upper Confidence Bound (UCB) style as the selection rule maximizes Eq. (1)
over the combinatorial action set (Eq. (3)) through a discretization of S. For each allocation 2 B,
the algorithm maintains a collection of regions Pt of S which covers S. For the fixed discretization
variant, Pt is fixed at the start of learning, and in the adaptive discretization version it is refined over
the course of learning based on observed data. At every timestep t and region R 2 Pt , the algo-
rithm tracks the following: (i) µt (R, ) for the estimated mean reward of region R at allocation ,
(ii) nt (R, ) for the number of times R has been selected at allocation prior to timestep t, and
(iii) UCBt (R, ) for an upper confidence bound estimate. At a high level, our algorithm performs
three steps in each iteration t:
1. Action selection: Greedily select at most N regions in Pt to maximize UCBt (R, ) subject to
   the budget constraints (see Eq. (10) in the appendix). Note that we must additionally ensure that
   each region is selected at only a single allocation value.
2. Update parameters: For each of the selected regions, increment nt (R, ) by one, update
   µt (R, ) based on observed data, and set UCBt+1 (R, ) = min{UCBt (R, ), µt (R, ) +
   b(nt (R, ))} for some appropriate bonus term b(·). This enforces monotonicity in the UCB
   estimates similar to M ON UCB and is required for the IIData property.
3. Re-partition: This step differentiates the adaptive discretization algorithm from fixed discretiza-
   tion, which maintains the same partition across all timesteps. We split a region when the confi-
   dence in its estimate (i.e., b(nt (R, ))) is smaller than the diameter of the region. This condition
   may seem independent of the quality of a region, but since it is incorporated into a learning al-
   gorithm, the number of samples in a region is correlated with its reward. In Fig. 4 (appendix) we
   highlight how the adaptive discretization algorithm hones in on regions with large reward without
   knowing the reward function before learning.
These algorithms modify existing approaches applied to CMAB-CRA in the bandit and reinforce-
ment learning literature, which have been shown to be regret-optimal (Xu et al., 2021; Sinclair et al.,
2021). We additionally note that these approaches are IIData.
Theorem 4.4. The fixed and adaptive discretization algorithms when using a “greedy” solution to
solve Eq. (1) have property IIData.
Here we require the algorithm to use the standard “greedy approximation” to Eq. (1), which is
a knapsack problem in the CMAB-CRA set-up (Williamson & Shmoys, 2011). This introduces
additional approximation ratio limitations in general. However, under additional assumptions on the
mean reward function µ(p, ), the greedy solution is provably optimal. For example, optimality of
the greedy approximation holds when µ(p, ) is piecewise linear and monotone, or more broadly
when µ(a) is submodular. See Appendix D for more discussion.
Finally, we comment that the F ULL S TART implementation of these adaptive discretization algo-
rithms will have storage and computational costs proportional to the size of the historical dataset
(since the algorithms ensure that the discretization scales with respect to the number of samples).
In contrast, A RTIFICIAL R EPLAY uses only a fraction of the historical dataset and so again has
improved computation and storage complexity. This is validated in the experimental results in Ap-
pendix E.

5    E XPERIMENTS
We show the benefits of A RTIFICIAL R EPLAY by showing that our meta-algorithm achieves identical
performance to F ULL S TART while offering significant practical advantages in reducing runtime
and storage. We consider two classes of bandit domains: K-armed and CMAB-CRA. As part of
our evaluation on combinatorial bandits, we introduce a new model for green security games with
continuous actions by adaptively discretizing the landscape of a large protected area of Murchison
Falls National Park in Uganda.
All of the code to reproduce the experiments is available at https://github.com/lily-x/
artificial-replay. Results are averaged over 60 iterations with random seeds, with standard
error plotted; experiment details and additional results are available in Appendix E.


                                                     8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                         Piecewise-linear                                Quadratic                              Wildlife conservation
                                                                                                     200
               150                                        150



      Regret
               100                                        100
                                                                                                     100
                50                                         50
                 0                                          0                                          0
  Fixed              0   250      500       750   1,000         0   250      500       750   1,000         0      250      500       750    1,000

               200                                                                                   200
               150                                        100
      Regret


               100                                                                                   100
                                                           50
                50
                 0                                          0                                          0
Adaptive             0   250      500       750   1,000         0   250      500       750   1,000         0      250      500       750    1,000
                               Timestep t                                 Timestep t                                    Timestep t
               A RTIFICIAL R EPLAY                  F ULL S TART                I GNORANT                      R EGRESSOR                  O PTIMAL



Figure 1: (CMAB-CRA) Cumulative regret (y-axis; lower is better) across time t 2 [T ]. A RTIFICIAL
R EPLAY performs equally as well as F ULL S TART across all domain settings, including both fixed
discretization (top row) and adaptive discretization (bottom). R EGRESSOR performs quite poorly.


Domains. We conduct experiments on the two bandit models described in Section 2.2: finite
K-armed bandits and CMAB-CRA, using both fixed and adaptive discretization. For the contin-
uous combinatorial setting, we provide two stylized domains: a piecewise-linear and a quadratic
reward function. To emphasize the practical benefit of A RTIFICIAL R EPLAY, we evaluate on a real-
world resource allocation setting for biodiversity conservation. We study real ranger patrol data
from Murchison Falls National Park, shared as part of a collaboration with the Uganda Wildlife
Authority and the Wildlife Conservation Society. We use historical patrol observations to build the
history Hhist ; we analyze these historical observations in detail in Appendix E to show that this
dataset exhibits both spurious data and imbalanced coverage as discussed in Section 4.
Baselines. We compare A RTIFICIAL R EPLAY against I GNORANT and F ULL S TART approaches
for each setting. In the K-armed model, we use M ON UCB as the base algorithm. In CMAB-CRA
we use fixed and adaptive discretization as well as R EGRESSOR, a neural network learner that is a
regression-based approach analogue to F ULL S TART. R EGRESSOR is initially trained on the entire
historical dataset, then iteratively retrained after 128 new samples are collected. We also compute
for each setting the performance of an O PTIMAL action based on the true rewards and a R ANDOM
baseline that acts randomly while satisfying the budget constraint.
Results. The results in Fig. 1 empirically validate our theoretical result from Theorem 3.2: the
performance of A RTIFICIAL R EPLAY is identical to that of F ULL S TART, and reduces regret consid-
erably compared to the naive I GNORANT approach. We evaluate the regret (compared to O PTIMAL)
of each approach across time t 2 [T ]. Concretely, we consider the three domains of piecewise-linear
reward, quadratic reward, and green security with continuous space S = [0, 1]2 , N = 5 possible
action components, a budget B = 2, and 3 levels of effort. We include H = 300 historical data
points. See Fig. 9 (appendix) for regret and analysis of historical data use on the K-armed bandit.
Not only does A RTIFICIAL R EPLAY achieve equal performance, but its computational benefits over
F ULL S TART are clear even on practical problem sizes. As we increase historical data from H =
{10; 100; 1,000; 10,000} in Fig. 2, the proportion of irrelevant data increases. Our method achieves
equal performance, overcoming the previously unresolved challenge of spurious data, while F ULL
S TART suffers from arbitrarily worse storage complexity (Theorem 4.2). With 10,000 historical
samples and a time horizon of 1,000, we see that 58.2% of historical samples are irrelevant to
producing the most effective policy.
When faced with imbalanced data coverage, the benefits of A RTIFICIAL R EPLAY become clear—
most notably in the continuous action setting with adaptive discretization. In Fig. 3, as we increase
the number of historical samples on bad regions (bottom 20th percentile of reward), the additional
data require finer discretization, leading to arbitrarily worse storage and computational complexity
for F ULL S TART with equal regret. In Fig. 3(c), we see that with 10% of data on bad arms, A R -


                                                                     9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                        (a) Regret                      (b) % unused of Hhist                       (c) Samples used over time
200                                                                                  1,000
                                                  100
150
100                                                50                                 500
    50
                                                                                           0
     0                                              0
             10        100      1000    10000             10 100 1000 10000                    0         200   400    600      800   1,000
                   Historical samples H                   Historical samples H                                  Timestep t


                          A RTIFICIAL R EPLAY                  F ULL S TART          I GNORANT                     R ANDOM



Figure 2: (K-Armed) Increasing the number of historical samples H leads F ULL S TART to use un-
necessary data, particularly as H gets very large. A RTIFICIAL R EPLAY achieves equal performance
in terms of regret (plot a) while using less than half the historical data (plot b). In plot c we see that
with H = 1,000 historical samples, A RTIFICIAL R EPLAY uses (on average) 117 historical samples
before taking its first online action. The number of historical samples used increases at a decreasing
rate, using only 396 of 1,000 total samples by the horizon T . Results are shown on the K-armed
bandit setting with K = 10 and horizon T = 1,000.

                          (a) Regret                         (b) % unused of Hhist                 (c) Number of regions R
     600
                                                    100
                                                                                     600
     400
                                                        50                           400
     200                                                                             200
         0                                               0                             0
                  0.1     0.5       0.7     0.9                0.1 0.5 0.7 0.9                     0.1       0.5       0.7     0.9
                        Fraction bad arms                       Fraction bad arms                          Fraction bad arms

                         A RTIFICIAL R EPLAY                   F ULL S TART          I GNORANT                     R EGRESSOR

Figure 3: (CMAB-CRA) Holding H = 10,000 constant, we increase the fraction of historical data
samples on bad arms (bottom 20% of rewards). The plots show (a) regret, (b) % of unused historical
data and (c) number of discretized regions in partition P. A RTIFICIAL R EPLAY enables significantly
improved runtime and reduced storage while matching the performance of F ULL S TART. Results on
the CMAB-CRA setting with adaptive discretization on the quadratic domain.


TIFICIAL R EPLAY requires only 446 regions R compared to 688 used by F ULL S TART; as we get
more spurious data and that fraction increases to 90%, then A RTIFICIAL R EPLAY requires only 356
regions while F ULL S TART still stores 614 regions.

6        C ONCLUSION
We present A RTIFICIAL R EPLAY, a meta-algorithm that modifies any base bandit algorithm to effi-
ciently harness historical data. We show that under a widely applicable IIData condition, the regret
of A RTIFICIAL R EPLAY (as a random variable) is distributionally identical to that of a full warm-
start approach, while also guaranteeing significantly better time complexity. We additionally give
examples of regret-optimal IIData algorithms in the K-armed and CMAB-CRA settings. Our ex-
perimental results highlight the advantage of using A RTIFICIAL R EPLAY over F ULL S TART via a
variety of base algorithms, applied to K-armed and continuous combinatorial bandit models, in-
cluding for algorithms such as Thompson sampling and Information Directed Sampling (IDS) that
do not exhibit IIData. Directions for future work include (i) find IIData algorithms in other bandit
domains such as linear contextual bandits, (ii) incorporate the A RTIFICIAL R EPLAY approach into
reinforcement learning, and (iii) provide theoretical bounds showing that A RTIFICIAL R EPLAY has
optimal data usage when incorporating historical data.


                                                                     10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


R EFERENCES
Yasin Abbasi-Yadkori, Dávid Pál, and Csaba Szepesvári. Improved algorithms for linear stochastic
  bandits. Advances in neural information processing systems, 24, 2011.
Kenneth J Arrow. Social choice and individual values. John Wiley & Sons, 1951.
Peter Auer, Nicolo Cesa-Bianchi, and Paul Fischer. Finite-time analysis of the multi-armed bandit
  problem. Machine learning, 47(2):235–256, 2002.
Hamsa Bastani, Kimon Drakopoulos, Vishal Gupta, Ioannis Vlachogiannis, Christos Hadji-
  cristodoulou, Pagona Lagiou, Gkikas Magiorkinis, Dimitrios Paraskevis, and Sotirios Tsiodras.
  Efficient and targeted COVID-19 border testing via reinforcement learning. Nature, 599(7883):
  108–113, 2021.
Djallel Bouneffouf, Srinivasan Parthasarathy, Horst Samulowitz, and Martin Wistuba. Optimal ex-
  ploitation of clustering and history information in multi-armed bandit. In Proceedings of the
  Twenty-Eighth International Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence, (IJCAI), pp. 2016–2022,
  2019.
Sébastien Bubeck, Nicolo Cesa-Bianchi, et al. Regret analysis of stochastic and nonstochastic multi-
   armed bandit problems. Foundations and Trends in Machine Learning, 5(1):1–122, 2012.
Stefano Canessa, Gurutzeta Guillera-Arroita, José J Lahoz-Monfort, Darren M Southwell, Doug P
  Armstrong, Iadine Chadès, Robert C Lacy, and Sarah J Converse. When do we need more data?
  a primer on calculating the value of information for applied ecologists. Methods in Ecology and
  Evolution, 6(10):1219–1228, 2015.
Wei Chen, Yajun Wang, and Yang Yuan. Combinatorial multi-armed bandit: General framework
 and applications. In Proceedings of the Thirtieth International Conference on Machine Learning
 (ICML), volume 28, pp. 151–159. PMLR, 2013.
Wei Chu, Lihong Li, Lev Reyzin, and Robert Schapire. Contextual bandits with linear payoff func-
 tions. In Proceedings of the Fourteenth International Conference on Artificial Intelligence and
 Statistics (AISTATS), pp. 208–214, 2011.
Yuval Dagan and Crammer Koby. A better resource allocation algorithm with semi-bandit feedback.
  In Algorithmic Learning Theory, pp. 268–320. PMLR, 2018.
Adam N Elmachtoub, Ryan McNellis, Sechan Oh, and Marek Petrik. A practical method for solving
  contextual bandit problems using decision trees. In Proceedings of the Thirty-Third Conference
  on Uncertainty in Artificial Intelligence (UAI), 2017.
Fei Fang, Peter Stone, and Milind Tambe. When security games go green: Designing defender
  strategies to prevent poaching and illegal fishing. In Proceedings of the Twenty-fourth Interna-
  tional Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence (IJCAI), 2015.
Shahrzad Gholami, Amulya Yadav, Long Tran-Thanh, Bistra Dilkina, and Milind Tambe. Don’t put
  all your strategies in one basket: Playing green security games with imperfect prior knowledge. In
  Proceedings of the 18th International Conference on Autonomous Agents and Multiagent Systems
  (AAMAS), pp. 395–403, 2019.
Debarun Kar, Benjamin Ford, Shahrzad Gholami, Fei Fang, Andrew Plumptre, Milind Tambe, Mar-
  garet Driciru, Fred Wanyama, Aggrey Rwetsiba, Mustapha Nsubaga, et al. Cloudy with a chance
  of poaching: Adversary behavior modeling and forecasting with real-world poaching data. In
  Proceedings of the 16th International Conference on Autonomous Agents and Multiagent Systems
  (AAMAS), 2017.
Robert Kleinberg and Nicole Immorlica. Recharging bandits. In 2018 IEEE 59th Annual Symposium
  on Foundations of Computer Science (FOCS), pp. 309–319. IEEE, 2018.
Robert Kleinberg, Alexandru Niculescu-Mizil, and Yogeshwer Sharma. Regret bounds for sleeping
  experts and bandits. Machine Learning, 80(2):245–272, 2010.


                                                 11
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Robert Kleinberg, Aleksandrs Slivkins, and Eli Upfal. Bandits and experts in metric spaces. Journal
  of the ACM (JACM), 66(4):1–77, 2019.
Tze Leung Lai and Herbert Robbins. Asymptotically efficient adaptive allocation rules. Advances
  in Applied Mathematics, 6(1):4–22, 1985.
Tor Lattimore and Csaba Szepesvári. Bandit Algorithms. Cambridge University Press, 2020.
Tor Lattimore, Koby Crammer, and Csaba Szepesvári. Optimal resource allocation with semi-bandit
  feedback. UAI, 2014.
Tor Lattimore, Koby Crammer, and Csaba Szepesvári. Linear multi-resource allocation with semi-
  bandit feedback. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 28, 2015.
Tara G Martin, Abbey E Camaclang, Hugh P Possingham, Lynn A Maguire, and Iadine Chadès.
  Timing of protection of critical habitat matters. Conservation Letters, 10(3):308–316, 2017.
Volodymyr Mnih, Koray Kavukcuoglu, David Silver, Alex Graves, Ioannis Antonoglou, Daan Wier-
  stra, and Martin Riedmiller. Playing Atari with deep reinforcement learning. In Proceedings of
  the Twenty-Seventh Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS), 2013.
Thanh H Nguyen, Arunesh Sinha, Shahrzad Gholami, Andrew Plumptre, Lucas Joppa, Milind
  Tambe, Margaret Driciru, Fred Wanyama, Aggrey Rwetsiba, and Rob Critchlow. CAPTURE:
  A new predictive anti-poaching tool for wildlife protection. In Proceedings of the 2016 Interna-
  tional Conference on Autonomous Agents & Multiagent Systems (AAMAS), 2016.
Bastian Oetomo, R Malinga Perera, Renata Borovica-Gajic, and Benjamin IP Rubinstein. Cutting
  to the chase with warm-start contextual bandits. In 2021 IEEE International Conference on Data
  Mining (ICDM), pp. 459–468. IEEE, 2021.
Andrew J Plumptre, Richard A Fuller, Aggrey Rwetsiba, Fredrick Wanyama, Deo Kujirakwinja,
  Margaret Driciru, Grace Nangendo, James EM Watson, and Hugh P Possingham. Efficiently
  targeting resources to deter illegal activities in protected areas. Journal of Applied Ecology, 51
  (3):714–725, 2014.
Larry D Pyeatt and Adele E Howe. Decision tree function approximation in reinforcement learn-
  ing. In Proceedings of the Third International Symposium on Adaptive Systems: Evolutionary
  Computation and Probabilistic Graphical Models, volume 2, pp. 70–77, 2001.
Yundi Qian, Chao Zhang, Bhaskar Krishnamachari, and Milind Tambe. Restless poachers: Handling
  exploration-exploitation tradeoffs in security domains. In Proceedings of the 2016 International
  Conference on Autonomous Agents & Multiagent Systems (AAMAS), pp. 123–131, 2016.
Daniel Russo and Benjamin Van Roy. Learning to optimize via information-directed sampling.
  Operations Research, 66(1):230–252, 2018.
Daniel J Russo, Benjamin Van Roy, Abbas Kazerouni, Ian Osband, Zheng Wen, et al. A tutorial on
  Thompson sampling. Foundations and Trends in Machine Learning, 11(1):1–96, 2018.
Tom Schaul, John Quan, Ioannis Antonoglou, and David Silver. Prioritized experience replay. In
  Proceedings of the Fourth International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR), 2017.
Pannagadatta Shivaswamy and Thorsten Joachims. Multi-armed bandit problems with history. In
  Proceedings of the Fifteenth International Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Statistics
  (AISTATS), pp. 1046–1054. PMLR, 2012.
Sean R Sinclair, Siddhartha Banerjee, and Christina Lee Yu. Adaptive discretization in online rein-
  forcement learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2110.15843, 2021.
Aleksandrs Slivkins. Contextual bandits with similarity information. In Proceedings of the Twenty-
  Fourth Annual Conference On Learning Theory (COLT), pp. 679–702, 2011.
Aleksandrs Slivkins. Introduction to multi-armed bandits. Foundations and Trends in Machine
  Learning, 12(1-2):1–286, 2019. ISSN 1935-8237.


                                                12
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Adith Swaminathan and Thorsten Joachims. Batch learning from logged bandit feedback through
  counterfactual risk minimization. Journal of Machine Learning Research, 16(52):1731–1755,
  2015.
William TB Uther and Manuela M Veloso. Tree based discretization for continuous state space rein-
 forcement learning. In Proceedings of the Fifteenth National Conference on Artificial Intelligence
 (AAAI), 1998.
Lu Wang, Chengyu Wang, Keqiang Wang, and Xiaofeng He. BiUCB: A contextual bandit algorithm
  for cold-start and diversified recommendation. In 2017 IEEE International Conference on Big
  Knowledge (ICBK), pp. 248–253, 2017.
David P Williamson and David B Shmoys. The design of approximation algorithms. Cambridge
  university press, 2011.
Lily Xu, Shahrzad Gholami, Sara Mc Carthy, Bistra Dilkina, Andrew Plumptre, Milind Tambe, Ro-
  hit Singh, Mustapha Nsubuga, Joshua Mabonga, Margaret Driciru, et al. Stay ahead of poachers:
  Illegal wildlife poaching prediction and patrol planning under uncertainty with field test evalua-
  tions. In Proceedings of the IEEE 36th International Conference on Data Engineering (ICDE),
  2020.
Lily Xu, Elizabeth Bondi, Fei Fang, Andrew Perrault, Kai Wang, and Milind Tambe. Dual-mandate
  patrols: Multi-armed bandits for green security. In Proceedings of the 35th AAAI Conference on
  Artificial Intelligence (AAAI), 2021.
Rong Yang, Benjamin J Ford, Milind Tambe, and Andrew Lemieux. Adaptive resource allocation for
  wildlife protection against illegal poachers. In Proceedings of the 13th International Conference
  on Autonomous Agents and Multiagent Systems (AAMAS), pp. 453–460, 2014.
Chicheng Zhang, Alekh Agarwal, Hal Daumé Iii, John Langford, and Sahand Negahban. Warm-
  starting contextual bandits: Robustly combining supervised and bandit feedback. In Proceedings
  of the 36th International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML), volume 97, pp. 7335–7344,
  2019.
Jinhang Zuo and Carlee Joe-Wong. Combinatorial multi-armed bandits for resource allocation. In
   55th Annual Conference on Information Sciences and Systems (CISS), pp. 1–4. IEEE, 2021.
Jinhang Zuo, Xiaoxi Zhang, and Carlee Joe-Wong. Observe before play: Multi-armed bandit with
   pre-observations. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI), vol-
   ume 34, pp. 7023–7030, 2020.


                                                13
