Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


O RACLES & F OLLOWERS : S TACKELBERG E QUILIBRIA
IN D EEP M ULTI -AGENT R EINFORCEMENT L EARNING

 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                           A BSTRACT
         Stackelberg equilibria arise naturally in a range of popular learning problems, such
         as in security games or indirect mechanism design, and have received increasing
         attention in the reinforcement learning literature. We present a general framework
         for implementing Stackelberg equilibria search as a multi-agent RL problem, al-
         lowing a wide range of algorithmic design choices. We discuss how previous
         approaches can be seen as specific instantiations of this framework. As a key
         insight, we note that the design space allows for approaches not previously seen
         in the literature, for instance by leveraging multitask and meta-RL techniques for
         follower convergence. We propose one such approach using contextual policies
         and evaluate it experimentally on standard and novel benchmark domains, show-
         ing greatly improved sample efficiency compared to previous approaches. Finally,
         we explore the effect of adopting designs outside the borders of our framework.


1   I NTRODUCTION
Stackelberg equilibria are an important concept in economics, and in recent years have received
increasing attention in computer science and specifically in the multiagent learning community. In
these equilibria, we have an asymmetric setting: A leader who commits to a strategy, and one or
more followers who respond. The leader aims to maximize their reward, knowing that followers in
turn will best-respond to the leader’s choice of strategy. These equilibria appear in a wide range of
settings. In security games, a defender wishes to choose an optimal strategy considering attackers
will adapt to it (An et al., 2017; Sinha et al., 2018). In mechanism design, we aim to design a
mechanism that allocates resources in an efficient manner, knowing that participants may strategize
(Nisan & Ronen, 1999; Swamy, 2007; Brero et al., 2021a). More broadly, many multi-agent system
design problems can be viewed as Stackelberg equilibrium problems: we as the designer take on the
role of the Stackelberg leader, wishing to design a system that is robust to agent behavior.
We are particularly interested in Stackelberg equilibria in sequential decision making settings, i.e.
stochastic Markov games, and using multi-agent reinforcement learning techniques to learn these
equilibria. In this paper we:

     1. Introduce a new theoretical framework for framing Stackelberg equilibria as a multi-agent
        reinforcement learning problem,
     2. Discuss how a range of existing approaches fit into this paradigm, as well as where there
        remain large unexplored areas in the design space,
     3. Reveal a novel approach to accelerating follower best-response convergence, borrowing
        ideas from multitask and meta-RL, including an experimental evaluation, and
     4. Elaborate on several important conditions for Stackelberg convergence, and demonstrate
        how things can fail when these conditions are not met.

Our main theorem (Theorem 1) allows a black-box reduction from learning Stackelberg equilibria
into separate leader and follower learning problems. This framing encompasses and generalizes
several prior approaches from the literature, in particular Brero et al. (2022), and gives a large
design space beyond what has been explored previously. Our second main technical contribution
is applying contextual policies, a common tool in multitask and meta-RL (Wang et al., 2016), to
the follower learning problem. In doing so, followers can generalize, and quickly adapt to leader


                                                  1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


policies. We validate this approach in experiments and show greatly reduced sample complexity
compared to previous inner loop-outer loop approaches. We also show how violating the conditions
of our theorem can lead to complete failure of the learning process, consistently across underlying
algorithms.
In the remainder of the paper, we will introduce Stackelberg equilibria and Markov games in Sec-
tion 2. In Section 3, we motivate and define our framework for learning Stackelberg equilibria using
multi-agent RL and discuss its scope and limitations. We define our novel contextual policy oracle
in 4 and empirically evaluate it in Section 5 on existing and novel benchmark domains.

1.1   P RIOR W ORK

Learning Stackelberg Equilibria. Most prior work on Stackelberg equilibria focus on single-
shot settings such as normal-form games, a significantly simpler setting than Markov games, often
in security games. A broad line of work focuses on computing Stackelberg equilibria, such as
Paruchuri et al. (2008); Xu et al. (2014); Blum et al. (2014); Li et al. (2022). Among the first works
on learning Stackelberg equilibria was Letchford et al. (2009), who focus on Bayesian games. Peng
et al. (2019) give results for matrix games with sample access only. Wang et al. (2022) show an
approach differentiating through the so-called KKT conditions, again for normal-form games. Bai
et al. (2021) give lower and upper bounds on learning Stackelberg equilibria in general-sum games,
including “bandit RL” games with one step for the leader, and sequential decision-making for the
followers. Few works in this area consider Markov games: Zhong et al. (2021) show algorithms that
find Stackelberg equilibria in Markov games, but assume myopic followers, a significant limitation
compared to the general case. Brero et al. (2021a;b; 2022) use an inner-outer loop approach, which
they call the Stackelberg POMDP, primarily aimed at indirect mechanism design.

Mechanism Design. One of the first works specifically discussing Stackelberg equilibria in a
learning context is Swamy (2007), who design interventions in traffic patterns. More recently, sev-
eral strands of work have focused on using multi-agent RL techniques to learn optimal mechanism
design, often framing this is a bi-level or inner-outer-loop optimization problem. Zheng et al. (2022)
use a bi-level RL approach to design optimal tax policies in a simulated world but without provably
Stackelberg properties. Yang et al. (2022) use a meta-gradient approach in a specific incentive de-
sign setting. Shu & Tian (2018) and Shi et al. (2019) learn leader policies in a similar “Stackelberg
Markov games” setting. Both use a form of modeling other agents coupled with rule-based follow-
ers. Balaguer et al. (2022) use an inner-loop outer-loop gradient descent approach for mechanism
design on iterated matrix games (which we also use as an experimental testbed). They mainly focus
on the case where both the environment transition as well as the follower learning behavior is dif-
ferentiable, and otherwise fall back to evolutionary strategies for the leader. Interestingly, none of
these recent works explicitly mention Stackelberg equilibria. As a direct corollary of our own work,
we show that Balaguer et al. (2022) and Zheng et al. (2022) may not give Stackelberg equilibria, but
Balaguer et al. (2022) could do so with minor modifications.


2     P RELIMINARIES

Markov games. We consider partially observable stochastic Markov games, essentially a multi-
agent generalization of a partially observable Markov Decision Process (POMDP).
Definition 1 (Markov Game). A Markov Game M with n agents is a tuple (S, A, T, r, Ω, O, γ),
consisting of a state space S, an action space A = (A1 , ..., An ), a (stochastic) transition function
T : S × A → S, a (stochastic) reward function r : S × A → Rn , an observation space Ω =
(Ω1 , ..., Ωn ), a (stochastic) observation function O : S × A → Ω, and a discount factor γ.

At each step t of the game, every agent i chooses an action ai,t from their action space Ai , the game
state evolves according to the joint action (a1,t , . . . , an,t ) and the transition function T , and agents
receive observations and reward according to O and R. An agent’s behavior in the game is charac-
terized by its policy πi : oi 7→ ai , which maps observations to actions.1 Each agent in a Markov
   1
     To keep notation concise we discuss here the memory-less case, but all our results generalize to a stateful
leader policy in a straightforward manner, as we discuss in Appendix B.


                                                       2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Game individually seeks to maximize its own (discounted) total return t γ t ri (st , ai,t , a−i,t ). This
                                                                          P
gives rise to the usual definitions of Nash equilibria (NE), correlated equilibria (CE), and coarse cor-
related equilibria (CCE), which we do not repeat in full here, as well as their Bayesian counterparts.
Note that strategies in Markov games and in each of these equilibrium definitions are policies, not
actions: A pair of policies π1 , π2 in a two-player Markov game is a Nash equilibrium if neither agent
                                                                                           ′
can increase their expected total reward by unilaterally deviating to a different policy πi .

Stackelberg Equilibria. Unlike all the above equilibrium concepts, a Stackelberg equi-
librium is not symmetric: There is a special player, the leader, who commits to their
strategy first; the other player (the follower) then chooses their best strategy given
the leader’s choice of strategy.     This makes the leader potentially more powerful.

Example 1. In a game often called the “battle of the sexes,” you and I wish
to have dinner together, but you prefer restaurant A (deriving happiness 2, Table 1: “Battle of
but I only get happiness 1), and I prefer restaurant B (I get happiness 2, you the Sexes” game.
get happiness 1)—but we would both rather eat together at our less-preferred          2,1 0,0
venue, than to eat separately (we both get happiness 0). Table 1 shows the            0,0 1,2
payoff matrix of this game. There are two pure Nash equilibria in this game:
We both go to restaurant A, or we both go to restaurant B. But there is only a
single Stackelberg equilibrium (per leader): If you commit to going to restau-
rant A, then my only best response is to also go to restaurant A. In doing so I receive happiness 1,
whereas my only alternative would be to eat alone at restaurant B for happiness 0. Notice that this
hinges on the leader strictly committing to their choice of restaurant.

This Stackelberg concept again also extends to Markov games: Here a leader agent L decides on
their policy (i.e. strategy), and the remaining (follower) agents — knowing the leader’s choice of
policy — best-respond to this. The leader seeks to maximize their own reward, considering that
followers will always best-respond to their choice of policy. For instance, in an iterated prisoner’s
dilemma (Robinson & Goforth, 2005), a leader might commit to a tit-for-tat strategy, in turn leading
the follower to cooperate.
We are interested in multi-follower settings, where Stackelberg equilibria have also been defined
Nakamura (2015); Zhang et al. (2016); Liu (1998); Solis et al. (2016); Sinha et al. (2014); Wang
et al. (2022); Brero et al. (2021a). With multiple followers, the “best response” of the followers
can be an ambiguous term. Any choice of leader strategy πL induces a Markov game between FπL
between the followers, which could feature multiple equilibria and equilibria of different types, such
as Nash, correlated and coarse correlated equilibria, each giving rise to a corresponding Stackelberg-
Nash, Stackelberg-CE and Stackelberg-CCE concept. We handle this in our definition through an
oracle (see also e.g. Wang et al. (2022): For any choice of leader strategy, we assume we are given
a follower equilibrium (or a probability distribution over equilibria), E(FπL ), by an oracle E.
Definition 2 (Stackelberg equilibrium). Given a Markov Game M and a follower best-response
oracle E, a leader strategy πL together with a tuple of follower strategies πF is a Stackelberg equi-
librium, if πL maximizes the leaders expected reward under the condition that follower strategies
are drawn from E(FπL ):
                                                 hX                          i
                       πL ∈ arg max       E            E[rL st , aL,t , aF,t ] ,                  (1)
                                 πL    πF ∼E(FπL )
                                                         t

where the second expectation is drawing actions and state transitions from their respective policies
πL , πF and transition function T , and the reward function is r, all as in Definition 1. If the fol-
lower oracle E gives a Nash equilibrium in the induced game FπL , we call this a Stackelberg-Nash
equilibrium, and similar for CE and CCE.

This use of an oracle is convenient not only for the multiple-follower definition, but also a crucially
useful abstraction for any number of followers. What we have in mind for practical purposes is an
algorithm that computes or learns the follower best-response equilibrium, E(FπL ), given the leader
strategy πL , often using RL. In the remainder of the paper, when we say “oracle” this is what we
mean.


                                                     3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


3   A G ENERAL F RAMEWORK FOR S TACKELBERG E QUILIBRIA IN
    M ULTI -AGENT RL
Several approaches have been proposed to learning Stackelberg equilibria in Markov games, or to
use multi-agent RL for mechanism design in such settings. A main aim of our work is to elucidate
commonalities between these approaches, and to delineate what is required to guarantee Stackelberg
equilibria. For instance, most of the existing approaches use (reinforcement or no-regret) learning
to implement the follower best-response, effectively arriving at an “inner-loop-outer-loop system”:
The leader performs one update to their policy, then the followers perform many updates to theirs
until they converge to a best response, then this repeats. Is this the only possible approach? Can
you mix-and-match leader and follower approaches at will? One approach for leader learning is
reinforcement learning, where the gradient of the leader policy is estimated from sampled trajecto-
ries (Brero et al., 2021a)—this is in contrast to global approaches such as direct differentiation of the
leader policy in a world where everything is differentiable or evolutionary strategies (Balaguer et al.,
2022), which modify the leader policy as a whole based on total episode reward, without looking at
what happens at each step. Some RL approaches (Brero et al., 2021a; 2022) incorporate the follow-
ers’ learning dynamics into the leader’s view of the environment. Is it necessary that the leader can
see this adaption process? Or could we also have follower best-respond to the leader immediately on
the first step it takes? Some approaches for mechanism design do not explicitly mention Stackelberg
equilibria (Zheng et al., 2022; Balaguer et al., 2022), but seem very similar to approaches that do;
do those approaches converge to a Stackelberg equilibrium? In this section we develop a common
framework that answers these questions, and provide a common language to categorize the various
strands of research in this area.
A key idea is that we can separate the problem into a leader’s learning problem, and an imple-
mentation of the follower oracle. Our framework informally, provides two insights. One, for any
follower oracle implementation and any construction of the leader problem, a solution is a Stackel-
berg equilibrium as long as the reward given to the leader is that from the original Markov game with
best-responding followers. A key insight following from this is that follower oracles need not be im-
plemented using learning algorithms, leading to a new approach which we will outline in Section 4.
This also encompasses a wide range of leader learning approaches, including direct gradient de-
scent, optimization, and evolutionary strategies. At the same time it gives very simple conditions to
ensure Stackelberg solutions, and delineates approaches that do and do not give these. Two, for any
query-based oracle implementation, we can construct the leader problem as a POMDP, amenable
to solving through RL methods. Since most follower oracle implementations are query-based (or
can be approximated through queries), this again encompasses a wide range of possible approaches.
Together, these simple conditions open a wide design space, which includes existing approaches but
also provides a much wider field of possibilities, one of which we demonstrate in Section 4.
We now make this formal. The general case of the following theorem is intentionally kept close to
the definition of a Stackelberg equilibrium, and we will discuss implications of this after the theorem
statement.
Theorem 1. Given a Markov Game M and a follower equilibrium oracle E, then:
[General Case] If
      1. the leader locally aims to solve a single-agent optimization problem L(πL ), and
      2. for each choice of leader policy πL , L computes the follower best-response E(πL ), and
      3. L(πL ) evaluates the leader policy πL against the follower best-response E(πL ) in M, i.e.
         the value of L(πL ) is rL (πL , E(πL )) in M,
                          ∗                                                  ∗
then an optimal solution πL to L together with the follower best-response E(πL ) form a Stackelberg
equilibrium in M.
[Query-Oracle Special Case] Furthermore, if additionally
      4. the follower oracle implementation E only requires query access to πL , i.e. values πL (o)
         for one or more observations o ∈ ΩL from M,
then L can be constructed as a POMDP.


                                                   4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Proof. See Appendix A. We briefly note for the following discussion that the construction in the
query-oracle case constructs episodes in L by using an initial segment in which the oracle queries
πL , and a final segment in which an episode of M is played by πL and the E(πL ) computed in the
initial segment. This is formalized in the proof in the Appendix.

Theorem 1 unifies several approaches from the literature. The main theorem of Brero et al. (2021a)
can be seen as a special case of the query-oracle case. However, even the query-oracle special case
of our theorem significantly generalizes that result to allow for any query-based follower oracle.
Furthermore, the general case of the theorem extends this to approaches that do not require the
leader problem to be a POMDP. While the general case follows very easily from Definition 2, it
still provides a very powerful insight. For instance, the “good shepherd” approach (Balaguer et al.,
2022) performs gradient descent directly on the leader policy, either by differentiating through the
environment and followers, or by estimating the gradient using evolutionary strategies. Neither
requires the problem to be a POMDP. At the same time, the general case of Theorem 1 applies, and
it tells us that the “good shepherd” approach in its current form may not give Stackelberg equilibria:
it accumulates leader reward even during follower learning, i.e., when followers are not (yet) playing
E(πL ). This may be intentional: In the “good shepherd” approach the leader optimizes its expected
return over a longer horizon during which followers adapt from scratch. This is a subtly different
optimization target than a Stackelberg equilibrium, which optimizes steady-state return (see also
Appendix C.3). Further, the theorem does not make any assumptions about the type of access to the
environment and follower oracle, and can thereby encompass approaches that only require sample
access as well as those that have access to a description, and approaches where followers or the
environment are differentiable.

3.1   S OLVING THE L EADER P ROBLEM

Theorem 1 does not assume a specific approach to solve the leader problem L; rather, it gives us
a broad array of tools to solve Stackelberg problems in practice. One particular set of tools lie in
the query-oracle special case: by constructing L as a POMDP, the entire suite of existing (deep) RL
algorithms become available. We later show experimental results using PG, PPO and DQN, but this
is by no means exhaustive.
A reasonable question to ask is whether the POMDP property is actually required for RL algorithms
to solve these problems. For instance, if we implemented the follower oracle E in a way that is not
part of the leader problem L, essentially skipping the “initial segment” used in the construction of
L in the special case of Theorem 1, would RL still be able to solve the leader problem? Theorem 2
in Appendix D shows that the POMDP property of the query-oracle construction is meaningful
in practice: There are Markov games where an RL algorithm provably cannot learn the optimal
leader policy if the follower best-response oracle is not implemented in this manner. This is further
demonstrated experimentally in Appendix C.1.
Appendix B further details how to extend Theorem 1 to leader policies with memory, and details
a crucial condition of leader invariance which we would like to draw particular attention to. This
condition requires that the leader policy act the same during oracle queries as it does during real
play. In the memory-less case this follows immediately in theory, but is an important implementation
detail in practice. In Appendix C.4 we show an example where a seemingly innocuous step counter
being made part of the leader’s observation leads to learning failure.

3.2   I MPLEMENTING THE F OLLOWER O RACLE

A key insight is that Theorem 1 works for any implementation of a follower oracle. Some of the
prior literature focuses entirely on the leader problem and assumes a literal oracle for follower best-
response, sometimes also requiring this be differentiable. Practical follower oracle implementations
in the literature can broadly be grouped into two categories.
Optimization-based approaches, which have access to a description of the environment (e.g. a
payoff matrix), have been used in simple one-shot settings such as (non-iterated) matrix games,
where a description of the leader policy and environment can be used to compute an optimal follower
response. This is often coupled with optimization for the leader policy, for instance in Paruchuri et al.
(2008); Xu et al. (2014).


                                                   5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Learning-based approaches, which require only sample access to the environment, and potentially
the leader policy. This approach is taken in some of the single-shot Stackelberg literature and most
of the RL-based Stackelberg literature: every time the leader policy is updated to a new policy,
πL,new , followers use a standard learning algorithm, for instance RL or regret minimization in the
Markov game case, to learn in the induced game FπL,new . Any convergence guarantee for the
follower algorithm (e.g., CCE in no-regret, or Nash in V-Learning in some conditions) translates
to the equivalent Stackelberg-CCE or Stackelberg-Nash equilibrium. Follower weights can be re-
initialized randomly after each leader update, which makes the environment stationary, or trained
without this (possibly requiring less training, in the case the leader policy only changed a little, but
see Appendix C.4). It is worth noting that our framework using an RL oracle “looks like” leader
and follower are simultaneously learning to act in a typical multi-agent RL system, just at different
timescales. However we find it useful to think of this setup in terms of leader learning as separate
from follower oracle, and there are important differences from standard multi-agent RL: The leader
should receive reward only when followers are playing their best-response equilibrium, and the
entire follower learning process should be one episode for the leader.

4   M ETA -RL FOR S TACKELBERG RL

Going beyond this, Theorem 1 suggests a wide design space for implementing the follower oracle.
As a key contribution, we explore using multi-task and meta-RL as a means of implementing the
follower oracle. This is both to illustrate the power of Theorem 1 as a way to think about Stackelberg
learning, as well as due to the advantages of the approach over existing ones.
We can recognize that the follower games, FπL , are in fact a family of related problems. For this
reason, the follower oracle problem can be seen as a multitask or meta-RL problem, and solved
using techniques from those fields. We make use of contextual policies (Wang et al., 2016), where
a context ω describes the task an agent is supposed to solve. In our case, the context provides the
specific MDP among a family of MDPs a follower finds itself in, and ω is a description of the leader
policy. This context, ω, is concatenated to the follower agent’s observation oi,t , and agent i observes
(oi,t , ω) at timestep t.
We focus on settings where the leader policy’s effect on the follower can be fully understood with
a small number of queries, and we directly use the leader’s response to a fixed set of queries as
the context ω. For instance, in an iterated prisoner’s dilemma, we ask the leader three questions:
“How do you act on the initial step of the game?”, “How do you act if the opponent cooperated in
the previous step?” and “How do you act if the opponent defected in the previous step?” Clearly,
if these are the only three possible states, this is sufficient to characterize the leader policy. We
further use a two-stage training approach. In Phase 1, we train a follower meta-policy against a
different, randomized leader policy in each episode. By the end of this phase, the meta-policy is
able to best-respond to all possible leader policies. In Phase 2, we train a leader policy against this
follower, where the leader is queried at the beginning of each episode. In our current experiments
we explicitly define the context ω in the above way. For settings where this is not possible, the
multitask and meta-RL literature provides a range of approaches that infer context, often using
recurrent networks (Wang et al., 2016; Mishra et al., 2017; Duan et al., 2016; Rakelly et al., 2019;
Zintgraf et al., 2019; Humplik et al., 2019).

Relation to existing approaches in the literature Previous approaches for Markov games have
largely focused on no-regret and policy gradient learning to implement follower oracles, coupled
with either RL or direct gradient descent methods for the leader. Brero et al. (2021a; 2022) use
no-regret dynamics or Q-learning to implement the follower oracle inside the leader’s episode roll-
out, and standard RL techniques to solve the resulting leader POMDP. Balaguer et al. (2022) use
gradient methods to implement the follower oracle. In the case where both followers and world
dynamics are differentiable they directly differentiate the leader policy (as opposed to estimating its
gradient using sampled trajectories). For the non-differentiable case they use evolutionary strategies
(Salimans et al., 2017). Interestingly, they seem to accumulate leader reward throughout the entire
learning phase of the follower. This puts their approach outside the scope of our Theorem 1, and
may give the leader the wrong optimization target, as we detail in Appendix C.3. Our understand-
ing is that if the leader were to optimize for its final reward at the end of follower learning instead,
their approach would fall within Theorem 1 and yield Stackelberg equilibria. Zheng et al. (2022)


                                                   6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Table 2: Situating different approaches within the framework of Theorem 1. Approaches marked *
do not fully satisfy the conditions of the theorem. Approaches marked in bold indicate approaches
that apply to general Markov games, i.e., that are sequential for both leader and followers, and
otherwise unrestricted.
                                                 Leader Learning Approach
          Oracle               Optimization,        Direct Gradient Descent,
                                                                                       RL
      Implementation              Search            Evolutionary Strategies
       N/A - Oracle       Letchford et al. (2009)
                                                        Wang et al. (2022)     Zhong et al. (2021)
      Assumed Given         Peng et al. (2019)
        No-Regret                                                              Brero et al. (2021a)
                                                    Balaguer et al. (2022)*    Zheng et al. (2022)*
            RL               Bai et al. (2021)
                                                      Yang et al. (2022)*       Brero et al. (2022)
    Multitask / Meta-RL                                                                new



similarly use two-level RL design, using policy gradient to learn each of the follower oracle and the
leader policy. While they do not specifically mention Stackelberg equilibria, this would be the target
equilibrium condition in their taxation-policy design setting. Interestingly, they use a curriculum
learning approach that can be seen as a rudimentary form of the contextual policy meta-learning
approach that we develop in this paper. As with Balaguer et al. (2022), Zheng et al. (2022) also
seem to accumulate leader reward, putting them outside the assumptions of Theorem 1. It is also
not clear if their implementation of leader memory could violate the leader invariance requirement.
However, it may be possible to adapt their approach to fall within the theorem by adjusting leader
reward and resetting leader memory between follower queries / learning iterations.


5     E XPERIMENTS

We evaluate our Meta-RL approach on both a benchmark iterated matrix game domain, comparing
to existing approaches, as well as on a novel Atari 2600-based domain that is significantly more
challenging. In the first, our main positive finding is that our approach can match or exceed prior
approaches at greatly improved sample efficiency. In the latter, we show for the first time a positive
result using a principled Stackelberg approach on a state-of-the-art general RL benchmark domain.
We will detail each of the two domains and the results obtained therein using the Meta-RL algorithm.
Appendices F and G give further details on the algorithms used and full hyperparameters.

Environments: Iterated Matrix Games We evaluate our contextual policy approach and gen-
eral framework on an ensemble of iterated symmetric matrix games, such as the iterated prisoner’s
dilemma (Robinson & Goforth, 2005). We choose these games as an evaluation domain as they
present a significant step up in complexity from previous approaches that give explicit Stackelberg
guarantees, in that both leader and followers face a sequential decision-making problem. In these,
we play a matrix game for n = 10 steps per episode, and give agents a one-step memory. This makes
these environments Markov games, with five states: one for the initial steps of each episode, and four
for later steps depending on the two agents’ previous actions. At each step, each agent has a choice
of two actions (e.g. “cooperate” or “defect”), leading to the next state, e.g. “both cooperated”.
Figure 1 shows the performance of our Meta-RL approach using PPO for the leader. We compare
against the approaches of Balaguer et al. (2022) and Brero et al. (2022). For our PPO+Meta-RL
approach, we plot the combined environment steps used by the meta-follower training plus the
leader training on the x-axis. For Balaguer et al. (2022), we estimate performance from Figure 2
therein. Note that this is the eventual performance at the end of training (Balaguer et al. (2022) do
not publish learning curves).
We see that final performance largely matches that of the “good shepherd” ES-MD approach, and by
extension also matches or outperforms all their baselines (c.f. Figures 1 and 2 therein). Importantly,
notice that our approach converges in around 50k environment steps, whereas Balaguer et al. (2022)


                                                    7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                env = assurance                env = battle                 env = chicken            env = coordination
                        0                            0                              0                           0


          Performance
                        1                                                                                       1
                                                     1                              1
                        2
                            0       100000 200000         0       100000 200000         0       100000 200000       0       100000 200000
                                env = deadlock                env = harmony                   env = hero            env = mixedharmony
                   1.0                              0.0                             0                           0
    Performance


                   1.5                              0.5
                                                                                    1                           1
                   2.0                              1.0
                            0       100000 200000         0       100000 200000         0       100000 200000       0       100000 200000
                                env = noconflict      env = prisoners_delight       env = prisoners_dilemma             env = stag_hunt
                  0.00                                                              1                           0
 Performance


                                                    1.0
                  0.25                                                                                          1
                                                                                    2
                  0.50                              1.5                                                         2
                            0       100000 200000         0       100000 200000         0       100000 200000       0       100000 200000
                                timesteps_total               timesteps_total               timesteps_total             timesteps_total


Figure 1: Blue: Performance of our novel PPO+Meta-RL approach on 12 canonical symmetric
iterated matrix games. Orange: PPO+Q-learn Brero et al. (2022). Dashed green: Good Shepherd
ES-MD Balaguer et al. (2022) (final performance at 1.28B timesteps, estimated from Fig. 2 ibid.)



report performance at 1.28 billion environment steps in the ES-MD case. We give further details on
comparing performance to Balaguer et al. (2022) in Appendix H.
We also see that our approach outperforms the PPO+Q-learn approach of Brero et al. (2022). In
Appendix H we show the PPO+Q-learn approach training for significantly longer, and see that where
it does converge it does so around 500k environment steps at the earliest, whereas for most of the
harder cases it still has not nearly reached optimal performance at 2M timesteps. We again note that
our approach shows greatly improved sample efficiency.


Environments: Bilateral Trade on Atari 2600 As a second, significantly higher-dimensional and
challenging domain, we present a bilateral trade scenario on a modified Atari 2600 game (which are
a state-of-the-art benchmark domain in single-agent RL). We use a two-player version of the game
“Space Invaders”, and introduce an artificial resource constraint: Each agent can only fire in the
game if they have a bullet available. Initially, neither player has any bullets available. Throughout
the episode, we give bullets to player 1, one at a time at stochastic intervals. Player 1 can then
choose to offer the sell this bullet to player 2 by offering them a price, or Player 1 can choose to use
the bullet themselves. Player 2 in turn can choose to accept or reject a particular offer at a particular
price. If a trade takes place, the sales price is added to player 1’s reward, and subtracted from player
2’s reward. Additionally, we introduce a reward scale imbalance: Each time player 1 successfully
shoots an alien invader, they get a reward of 0.1. However each time player 2 shoots an alien, they
get a much higher reward of 1.0. Noting that even well-trained AI agents do not hit every single shot
they take, we should still expect that player 2 be able to generate just under 1.0 reward from each
bullet they fire, and player 1 a much smaller reward of just under 0.1.
Clearly there is more total reward generated if player 1 sells all their bullets to player 2, with the
difference referred to as the “gains from trade” in economics. However, notice that this is not a
mechanism design setting (there is no mechanism), and also that there are two Stackelberg equilibria:
If player 1 is the leader, then their optimal strategy is to offer bullets to player 2 at just under player
2’s average utility per bullet. Player 2 will best respond by accepting the trade, still generate small
positive reward, and player 1 will receive almost the entirety of the gains from trade. In the second
Stackelberg equilibrium, player 2 is the leader. Player 2’s optimal strategy is to refuse any price
higher than just above player 1’s average utility per bullet; and player 1’s best response is to offer to
sell at that (low) price. In this scenario, player 1 will be left with little more reward than had they
kept and used the bullets themselves, and player 2 will receive almost all the gains from trade.


                                                                                8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


         4 Metric = Seller Reward        Metric = Buyer Reward            Metric = Total Reward
                                                                                                    0.75
                                                                                                               Metric = Avg Price
                                                                  5
                                     3
                                                                  4                                                                       Leader
 Value   2
                                     2                                                              0.50                                     Seller
                                     1                            3                                                                          Buyer
                                                                                                    0.25
             0   50      100   150       0    50      100   150       0        50      100    150          0       50      100      150
                      Step                         Step                             Step                                Step


Figure 2: Performance of PPO+Meta-RL on Atari 2600 bilateral trade scenario. Plots show two
Stackelberg equilibria: Agent 1 (seller) as leader (blue curves) and agent 2 (buyer) as leader (orange).



Figure 2 shows that our Meta-RL algorithm is able to successfully learn this for both equilibria.
In this experiment we use discrete prices (0, 0.25, 0.5, 0.75.1.0) for compatibility with the discrete
Atari environment, so the results shown are the exact optimum.

6            C ONCLUSION AND D ISCUSSION
Conclusion: We have introduced a general framework for using multi-agent RL approaches to find
Stackelberg equilibria in Markov games, and discussed how this encompasses several approaches
in the literature while also conveying a much larger design space. As a second key contribution,
we have proposed and evaluated a novel approach to Stackelberg learning that uses Meta-RL to
implement the follower oracle. This shows the power of our main theorem, which enables this
approach, but is also a key contribution itself. Our approach matches or exceeds performance to
previous approaches at greatly reduced sample complexity in experiments. It enables Stackelberg
learning in novel domains beyond the reach of previous approaches, which we show on a novel
Atari 2600-based bilateral trade scenario. Finally, we show theoretically and experimentally the
limits of Theorem 1, and in particular that RL algorithms can provably be unable to learn without
the query-oracle special case construction.
Discussion: In addition to the technical results, we would like to offer a more high-level interpreta-
tion of the framework. A useful way to think about learning Stackelberg equilibria in Markov games
is that they are, in a way, two problems in one: One, how does my strategy, i.e., choice of policy,
affect the best-response of other agents? Two, how does my interactions with the environment, i.e.,
actions at each step, affect the reward I (and others) get? These are two very different problems, even
operating at different levels—entire policy, versus action at each step. In a way, Theorem 1 is giving
ways to reconcile the best-response “meta-level” and the environment-interaction “RL problem.”
In the general case, using techniques such as direct gradient descent or evolutionary policies, we
focus on the best-response meta-level and either ignore the environment interaction (in evolution-
ary strategies) or subsume them inside an end-to-end differentiation (in direct policy gradient). In
contrast, in the query-oracle special case, we focus on the environment interaction RL problem, and
implicitly work the follower best-response into this. One way of looking at the contextual-policy
follower oracle is that it makes the latter more feasible, by greatly reducing the number of leader
queries compared to real environment interaction.
We hope that this Meta-RL for Stackelberg learning work will enable Stackelberg RL approaches to
scale up to richer settings, both through the explicit, contextual-policy approach taken in this paper,
as well as approaches that infer context through recurrent networks. Beyond this, we hope the
framework of Theorem 1 will inspire novel ways of thinking about Stackelberg RL. One potential
avenue for future work that we are excited about is to study approaches that explicitly take into
account both the “meta-level” and “environment-interaction” problems outlined above. We believe
that doing so could enable Stackelberg RL to scale to much more complex scenarios and open
novel applications to it. If successful, this may enable automated learning of system design beyond
traditional security games and mechanism design.


                                                                      9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


R EPRODUCIBILITY S TATEMENT

All source code used for experiments will be submitted as part of the supplementary material, along
with detailed instructions on how to recreate the experiments presented in this paper. Hyperparam-
eters used are also listed in the appendix. We plan to release the source code of our experiments
under an open-source license upon acceptance.

R EFERENCES
Bo An, Milind Tambe, and Arunesh Sinha. Stackelberg security games (SSG) basics and application
  overview. Improving Homeland Security Decisions, pp. 485, 2017.

Yu Bai, Chi Jin, Huan Wang, and Caiming Xiong. Sample-efficient learning of Stackelberg equilibria
  in general-sum games. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 34:25799–25811,
  2021.

Jan Balaguer, Raphael Koster, Christopher Summerfield, and Andrea Tacchetti. The good shepherd:
  An oracle agent for mechanism design. arXiv preprint arXiv:2202.10135, 2022.

James Bergstra, Daniel Yamins, and David Cox. Making a science of model search: Hyperparameter
  optimization in hundreds of dimensions for vision architectures. In International conference on
  machine learning, pp. 115–123. PMLR, 2013.

Avrim Blum, Nika Haghtalab, and Ariel D Procaccia. Learning optimal commitment to overcome
  insecurity. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 27, 2014.

Gianluca Brero, Darshan Chakrabarti, Alon Eden, Matthias Gerstgrasser, Vincent Li, and David C.
  Parkes. Learning Stackelberg equilibria in sequential price mechanisms. In Proc. ICML Workshop
  for Reinforcement Learning Theory, 2021a.

Gianluca Brero, Alon Eden, Matthias Gerstgrasser, David Parkes, and Duncan Rheingans-Yoo. Re-
  inforcement learning of sequential price mechanisms. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on
  Artificial Intelligence, pp. 5219–5227, 2021b.

Gianluca Brero, Nicolas Lepore, Eric Mibuari, and David C Parkes. Learning to mitigate ai collusion
  on economic platforms. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 35, 2022.

Yan Duan, John Schulman, Xi Chen, Peter L Bartlett, Ilya Sutskever, and Pieter Abbeel. Rlˆ2: Fast
  reinforcement learning via slow reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:1611.02779, 2016.

Jan Humplik, Alexandre Galashov, Leonard Hasenclever, Pedro A Ortega, Yee Whye Teh, and
  Nicolas Heess. Meta reinforcement learning as task inference. arXiv preprint arXiv:1905.06424,
  2019.

Joshua Letchford, Vincent Conitzer, and Kamesh Munagala. Learning and approximating the opti-
  mal strategy to commit to. In International symposium on algorithmic game theory, pp. 250–262.
  Springer, 2009.

Zun Li, Feiran Jia, Aditya Mate, Shahin Jabbari, Mithun Chakraborty, Milind Tambe, and Yevgeniy
  Vorobeychik. Solving structured hierarchical games using differential backward induction. In
  Uncertainty in Artificial Intelligence, pp. 1107–1117. PMLR, 2022.

Eric Liang, Richard Liaw, Robert Nishihara, Philipp Moritz, Roy Fox, Ken Goldberg, Joseph E.
  Gonzalez, Michael I. Jordan, and Ion Stoica. RLlib: Abstractions for distributed reinforcement
  learning. In International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML), 2018.

Baoding Liu. Stackelberg-Nash equilibrium for multilevel programming with multiple followers
  using genetic algorithms. Computers & Mathematics with Applications, 36(7):79–89, 1998.

Nikhil Mishra, Mostafa Rohaninejad, Xi Chen, and Pieter Abbeel. A simple neural attentive meta-
  learner. arXiv preprint arXiv:1707.03141, 2017.


                                                10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Volodymyr Mnih, Koray Kavukcuoglu, David Silver, Alex Graves, Ioannis Antonoglou, Daan Wier-
  stra, and Martin Riedmiller. Playing atari with deep reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:1312.5602, 2013.
Volodymyr Mnih, Koray Kavukcuoglu, David Silver, Andrei A Rusu, Joel Veness, Marc G Belle-
  mare, Alex Graves, Martin Riedmiller, Andreas K Fidjeland, Georg Ostrovski, et al. Human-level
  control through deep reinforcement learning. nature, 518(7540):529–533, 2015.
Tomoya Nakamura. One-leader and multiple-follower Stackelberg games with private information.
  Economics Letters, 127:27–30, 2015.
Noam Nisan and Amir Ronen. Algorithmic mechanism design. In Proceedings of the thirty-first
  annual ACM symposium on Theory of computing, pp. 129–140, 1999.
Praveen Paruchuri, Jonathan P Pearce, Janusz Marecki, Milind Tambe, Fernando Ordonez, and Sarit
  Kraus. Playing games for security: An efficient exact algorithm for solving Bayesian Stackel-
  berg games. In Proceedings of the 7th international joint conference on Autonomous agents and
  multiagent systems-Volume 2, pp. 895–902, 2008.
Binghui Peng, Weiran Shen, Pingzhong Tang, and Song Zuo. Learning optimal strategies to commit
  to. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, pp. 2149–2156, 2019.
Kate Rakelly, Aurick Zhou, Chelsea Finn, Sergey Levine, and Deirdre Quillen. Efficient off-policy
  meta-reinforcement learning via probabilistic context variables. In International conference on
  machine learning, pp. 5331–5340. PMLR, 2019.
David Robinson and David Goforth. The topology of the 2x2 games: a new periodic table, volume 3.
  Psychology Press, 2005.
Tim Salimans, Jonathan Ho, Xi Chen, Szymon Sidor, and Ilya Sutskever. Evolution strategies as a
  scalable alternative to reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:1703.03864, 2017.
John Schulman, Filip Wolski, Prafulla Dhariwal, Alec Radford, and Oleg Klimov. Proximal policy
  optimization algorithms. arXiv preprint arXiv:1707.06347, 2017.
Zhenyu Shi, Runsheng Yu, Xinrun Wang, Rundong Wang, Youzhi Zhang, Hanjiang Lai, and Bo An.
  Learning expensive coordination: An event-based deep rl approach. In International Conference
  on Learning Representations, 2019.
Tianmin Shu and Yuandong Tian. M ˆ3 rl: Mind-aware multi-agent management reinforcement
  learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:1810.00147, 2018.
Ankur Sinha, Pekka Malo, Anton Frantsev, and Kalyanmoy Deb. Finding optimal strategies in a
  multi-period multi-leader–follower Stackelberg game using an evolutionary algorithm. Comput-
  ers & Operations Research, 41:374–385, 2014.
Arunesh Sinha, Fei Fang, Bo An, Christopher Kiekintveld, and Milind Tambe. Stackelberg security
  games: Looking beyond a decade of success. In Proceedings of the Twenty-Seventh International
  Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence (IJCAI-18), 2018.
Cesar U Solis, Julio B Clempner, and Alexander S Poznyak. Modeling multileader–follower non-
  cooperative Stackelberg games. Cybernetics and Systems, 47(8):650–673, 2016.
Richard S Sutton, David McAllester, Satinder Singh, and Yishay Mansour. Policy gradient meth-
  ods for reinforcement learning with function approximation. Advances in neural information
  processing systems, 12, 1999.
Chaitanya Swamy. The effectiveness of Stackelberg strategies and tolls for network congestion
  games. In SODA, pp. 1133–1142. Citeseer, 2007.
Jane X Wang, Zeb Kurth-Nelson, Dhruva Tirumala, Hubert Soyer, Joel Z Leibo, Remi Munos,
  Charles Blundell, Dharshan Kumaran, and Matt Botvinick. Learning to reinforcement learn.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:1611.05763, 2016.


                                               11
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Kai Wang, Lily Xu, Andrew Perrault, Michael K Reiter, and Milind Tambe. Coordinating followers
  to reach better equilibria: End-to-end gradient descent for stackelberg games. In Proceedings of
  the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, pp. 5219–5227, 2022.
Haifeng Xu, Fei Fang, Albert Xin Jiang, Vincent Conitzer, Shaddin Dughmi, and Milind Tambe.
  Computing minimax strategy for discretized spatio-temporal zero-sum security games. In In-
  ternational Joint Workshop on Optimization in Multi-Agent Systems and Distributed Constraint
  Reasoning (OPTMASDCR) at AAMAS. Citeseer, 2014.
Jiachen Yang, Ethan Wang, Rakshit Trivedi, Tuo Zhao, and Hongyuan Zha. Adaptive incentive
   design with multi-agent meta-gradient reinforcement learning. In Proceedings of the 21st Inter-
   national Conference on Autonomous Agents and Multiagent Systems, pp. 1436–1445, 2022.
Huaqing Zhang, Yong Xiao, Lin X Cai, Dusit Niyato, Lingyang Song, and Zhu Han. A multi-leader
  multi-follower Stackelberg game for resource management in LTE unlicensed. IEEE Transactions
  on Wireless Communications, 16(1):348–361, 2016.
Stephan Zheng, Alexander Trott, Sunil Srinivasa, David C Parkes, and Richard Socher. The AI
  Economist: Taxation policy design via two-level deep multiagent reinforcement learning. Science
  Advances, 8(18):eabk2607, 2022.
Han Zhong, Zhuoran Yang, Zhaoran Wang, and Michael I Jordan. Can reinforcement learning find
  Stackelberg-Nash equilibria in general-sum markov games with myopic followers? arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2112.13521, 2021.
Luisa Zintgraf, Maximilian Igl, Kyriacos Shiarlis, Anuj Mahajan, Katja Hofmann, and Shimon
  Whiteson. Variational task embeddings for fast adapta-tion in deep reinforcement learning. In
  International Conference on Learning Representations Workshop (ICLRW), 2019.


                                               12
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


A    P ROOF OF T HEOREM 1
We include here the proof of Theorem 1.
Theorem 1. Given a Markov Game M and a follower equilibrium oracle E, then:
[General Case] If

      1. the leader locally aims to solve a single-agent optimization problem L(πL ), and
      2. for each choice of leader policy πL , L computes the follower best-response E(πL ), and
      3. L(πL ) evaluates the leader policy πL against the follower best-response E(πL ) in M, i.e.
         the value of L(πL ) is rL (πL , E(πL )) in M,
                          ∗                                                  ∗
then an optimal solution πL to L together with the follower best-response E(πL ) form a Stackelberg
equilibrium in M.
[Query-Oracle Special Case] Furthermore, if additionally

      4. the follower oracle implementation E only requires query access to πL , i.e. values πL (o)
         for one or more observations o ∈ OL from M, and
      5. leader policies πL are invariant, i.e. acting the same during queries as they would in M,

then L can be constructed as a POMDP.

Proof. We show the proof in two parts, first for the general case, then the query-oracle special case.
[General Case] We first show the general case:
Assume s∗L optimally solves L, i.e. rL,L (s∗L ) = max rL,L (πL ).
By condition 3, the leader’s reward in L is the same as that in M when the followers play their best-
response equilibrium, i.e. rL,L (s∗L ) = max rL,L (πL ) = max rL,M (πL , E(πL )). This immediately
means that s∗L together with E(πL ) form a Stackelberg equilibrium in M. Condition 2 is only
required implicitly to ensure that followers are playing their best-response equilibrium when the
leader strategy πL is evaluated in M. This shows the general case.
[Query-Oracle Special Case]
Construction of L: Given a Markov Game M and a follower best-response oracle E that only
requires query access to the leader strategy πL , define a new leader POMDP L as follows:

       • [initial segment] For an initial number of steps in L, each step performs one query from
         the follower oracle E: If a given query wishes to determine the leader policy’s response to
         observation o, then the leader will receive o as its observation in L, and the leader’s action
         will be given to E as the response to its query. The leader will receive no reward in these
         steps.
       • [final segment] Once a follower equilibrium πF has been determined, the remainder of L
         will be constructed from the original Markov game M: We let followers act according to
         the computed follower equilibrium πF and treat them (including all their internal state) as
         part of the environment.

We now show that L is a POMDP.
POMDP, setup: Let the state of L be zt = (zE,t , zM,t , zF,t ), the internal state of the follower
equilibrium oracle (in the initial part of the L), the state of the original Markov Game, and the
internal state of the follower agents (in the final part of the L). In the initial part wlog assume this is
(zE , 0, 0), and in the final part (0, zM,t , zF,t ).
POMDP, part 1: By assumption, E only requires query access to πL , i.e. if at timestep t, the
oracle’s internal state is zE,t and the oracle issues the query ot , then the oracle’s next internal state
zE,t+1 is a function of only zE,t and qt , the leader’s response to the query ot . By the construction of


                                                    13
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


the first part of L, we have that the leader’s observation at timestep t is precisely the oracle query
ot , and so it’s action at gives the oracle response qt . Together, we get that the L state at time t + 1,
zt+1 , is a function of only zt and at , showing that L is a POMDP in the initial part.
POMDP, part 2: In the final part of L, at step t, the Markov Game state is zM,t , and leader and
follower observations depend only on this state, i.e. oL,t = oL,t (zM,t ) and oF,t = oF,t (zM,t ). In
turn, both the follower actions aF,t as well as the next follower state zF,t+1 , only depend on oF,t and
the current follower state zF,t ; therefore both depend only on zM,t and zF,t . In turn, the next state
of M, zM,t+1 , depends on leader and follower actions, and therefore only on leader action, zM,t
and zF,t . Together, it follows that zt+1 only depends on zt and the leader’s action aL,t , meaning the
final part of L is Markovian.
We have therefore shown that L as a whole is a POMDP. We now show that an optimal policy in L
forms a Stackelberg equilibrium.
Stackelberg: By the assumption that the leader policy is invariant, we have that if πL (o) = a
in response to an oracle query, then πL (o) = a in the Markov Game M as well. Therefore, the
follower equilibrium πF computed by the oracle at the end of the initial part of L is a best-response
equilibrium to the strategy the leader plays in M in the final part of L.
Now, by construction of L, the leader reward given any πL in L is the same as the leader reward in M
when followers play πF , and by the above πF is indeed a best-response equilibrium, i.e. rL,L (πL ) =
                                                                  ∗        ∗
rL,M (πL , πF ) = rL,M (πL , E(πL )). Finally, by optimality of πL  in L, πL  ∈ argmax(rL,L (πL )),
                ∗                                                                  ∗         ∗
and therefore πL  ∈ argmax(rL,M (πL , E(πL ))). But this precisely means that πL     and E(πL  ) form
a Stackelberg equilibrium in M.


B    T HEOREM 1: L EADER M EMORY AND L EADER I NVARIANCE

Leader Memory. We state the query-oracle case of Theorem 1 for memory-less leader policies,
i.e. leader policies that map directly from observations to actions. This is without loss of generality
because for leader policies that use memory we may take the view that the leader policy operates
on belief states, mapping belief state to action. In this view, the theorem applies as-is, and we
query the leader policy on belief states. This would work well, for instance, if leader memory was
implemented through a sufficient statistic. Alternatively, if we want to treat memory as intrinsic
to the leader policy, queries become sequences of observations. In this view, the proof applies
mutatis mutandis. The main technicality in this case is to reset internal state of the leader policy
between queries, so that queries are well-defined. This is also important in order to ensure the leader
invariance conditions (an unrestricted LSTM could easily allow a leader to distinguish queries from
real game).

Leader Invariance. It may be possible to give the leader policy memory beyond the two cases
above, i.e. memory with state that carries through between follower oracle queries and/or to real
play. In any such cases, it is necessary that the leader policy be invariant, meaning it is acting the
same during the initial segment (i.e. oracle queries) and the final segment (i.e. original game) of
the constructed leader POMDP L. This has not been stated explicitly in previous works, but is a
critical part of ensuring convergence to the correct equilibrium. If the leader policy were to act
differently during the oracle queries, it could “trick” followers into suboptimal behavior that gives
the leader better reward but is not a best-response, and thus not a Stackelberg equilibrium. For
instance, in an iterated prisoners dilemma, a leader could pretend to be playing tit-for-tat during
oracle queries, leading followers to cooperate; and could then defect during the actual game. We
show this experimentally in Appendix C.2. Invariance is easily ensured if the leader policy cannot
distinguish queries and real play, which is generally true for memory-less policies. Alternatively the
leader policy could be explicitly constrained to be invariant, e.g. through an appropriate loss term.


C    L IMITATIONS OF T HEOREM 1

We now present experimental evidence of the limitations of our main Theorem. In particular, we
will show that violating any of the conditions of the theorem can lead to learning failure.


                                                   14
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                     Algorithm = PG                                      Algorithm = ES
                     0.0
                                                              1.1
                     0.5                                      1.2

       Performance
                                                              1.3                                                              Queries
                     1.0
                                                              1.4                                                                Observed
                                                                                                                                 Hidden
                     1.5                                      1.5
                                                              1.6
                     2.0
                                                              1.7
                           0   250   500    750   1000 1250          0          50           100     150    200   250
                                           Step                                                    Step


Figure 3: Performance of contextual-policy approach with hidden and rolled-out oracle queries in
iterated prisoners dilemma.


C.1    N ON -POMDP

An interesting question we asked earlier is whether rolling out the follower queries into the leader
episode to form a POMDP is strictly necessary. In the next section we will present a proof that this is
the case, but we also show this experimentally here. Figure 3 shows the performance of our approach
on a slightly modified iterated prisoner’s dilemma (see Appendix D for full payoff matrices). We
show our standard setting where queries are part of the leader episode, as well as a setting where
they are hidden from the leader. The hidden-queries setting fails to learn a sensible behavior. This
is consistent across learning rates, and across algorithms. Note however that this only applies to RL
algorithms. An approach that operates directly on the policy space such as Evolutionary Strategies
is still able to learn successfully, as shown on the right hand side of Figure 3.

C.2    N ON -I NVARIANT L EADER

We also experimentally illustrate the leader in-
variance condition in Theorem 1 in the iterated
prisoner’s dilemma setting. For simplicity, we                                         0.0
emulate memory for the leader policy by con-                                                                                   Memory
                                                                                       0.5                                         True
                                                                         Performance


catenating a binary variable to its observation,
                                                                                                                                   False
set to 0 during the first five steps of each episode                                   1.0                                     Learning Rate
(the queries), and 1 afterwards.2 As can be                                                                                        0.004
seen in Figure 4, when given access to this ad-                                        1.5
                                                                                                                                   0.008
ditional variable, the leader gains significantly                                      2.0                                         0.015
higher reward. The leader policy effectively                                                  0            1000         2000       0.03
learns to act as if it was playing tit-for-tat dur-                                                        Step
ing the queries, thereby inducing the follower to
respond by cooperating; the leader then always
defects during the actual game, thereby achiev-                     Figure 4: Leader reward with invariant and non-
ing maximum reward. This is not a Stackelberg                       invariant policies in iterated prisoners dilemma.
equilibrium.

C.3    L EADER R EWARD D URING F OLLOWER L EARNING

One condition of Theorem 1 is that the leader only be evaluated against followers who are best-
responding. If the follower oracle is implemented using learning dynamics observable to the leader,
this means that the leader must not receive reward during this learning phase. If the leader did receive
reward, this could give the leader the wrong optimization target. Imagine for instance a setting
where the leader has one strategy choice corresponding to a quickly-learnable follower best-response
strategy that gives medium reward to the leader, and another leader strategy choice corresponding
   2
     A neural network could learn to extract the same discriminator from a step counter, and a recurrent network
could easily learn to keep such a counter.


                                                               15
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                               matrix = [[[2, 0.001], [0, 0]], [[0, 0], [1, 2]]]       matrix = [[[2, 0.001], [-5, 0]], [[-5, 0], [1, 2]]]
                     2.0
                     1.8


       Performance
                     1.6                                                                                                                     Reward During
                                                                                                                                             Follower Learning
                     1.4                                                                                                                             False
                                                                                                                                                     True
                     1.2
                     1.0
                           0         5000        10000       15000       20000     0            5000          10000     15000      20000
                                              timesteps_total                                               timesteps_total


Figure 5: Leader performance with and without reward during follower Q-learning. Clearly the
leader fails to learn the sole Stackelberg equilibrium (reward 2.0) if reward is given during follower
learning. Plots show reward during actual play only, i.e. without reward during follower Q-learning,
as this is the relevant quantity for Stackelberg equilibria.


to a slow-to-learn follower strategy with high leader reward. We can easily simulate this using
a slightly modified version of the “Battle of the Sexes” single-shot matrix game we used as an
example in the introduction. In this, we modify the follower reward so that the leader-preferred
option gives the follower very little reward. We then couple this with carefully chosen (but entirely
reasonable) Q-learning hyperparameters for the follower. As a result, a leader who receives reward
during the follower learning phase is not able to reliable learn the correct equilibrium anymore, even
in such a simple game, as Figure 5 shows. If we further modify the game to penalize the leader for
coordination failure, this can even lead to the leader consistently learning the wrong coordination
choice, as the right-hand plot shows.
Notice however that this (reward throughout follower learning) is also a valid target to optimize for,
where the leader aims to optimize its expected return taking into account that followers may need
some time to adjust to the leader’s behavior. In the case of Balaguer et al. (2022) this is the intent,
especially with regards to designing mechanisms for human participants as followers.


C.4   C ONTINUOUS F OLLOWER L EARNING

Finally, virtually all previous approaches in the
literature use some sort of learning dynamics
                                                        2.00
to implement the follower oracle. A tempt-
ing way of improving learning speed in such             1.75
                                                        1.50                           Follower Learning
a paradigm would be to retain follower poli-
                                                                                              Performance


                                                                                           Reset
cies between leader updates. That is, if at the         1.25                               Ongoing
                                                                                       Learning Rate
end of the leader learning iteration t, the fol-        1.00                               0.008
lower is best responding using strategy / pol-          0.75                               0.015
                                                                                           0.03
icy parameters ϕt,end , then instead of initial-        0.50
izing follower weights ϕt+1,start randomly, set              0  100 200 300 400 500
                                                                       Step
ϕt+1,start = ϕt,end . Under the assumption that
the leader policy only changed a little, and the
conjecture that therefore the optimal follower Figure 6: Leader reward with a Q-learning fol-
policy only changed a little, this should allow lower on Battle of the Sexes, where the follower
follower learning to start from very near the op- initializes a blank Q-table each episode (blue) or
timum, and thus hopefully require much short keeps their previous Q-table (orange).
inner (follower learning) loops. However, this
has some drawbacks. For one, it makes the
leader learning problem non-stationary. Beyond this, it can lead to learning failure, if both leader and
follower get stuck on a local optimum. Figure 6 shows this in practice on the “Battle of the Sexes”
example, where non-resetting follower learning can lead to convergence to the follower-preferred
choice rather than the Stackelberg equilibrium.


                                                                                       16
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


D    P ROOF OF N ON -POMDP D IVERGENCE
We now present a theorem that shows that the query-oracle special case is meaningful. A priori it is
not clear that the query-oracle POMDP construction is strictly necessary, or if standard RL algorithm
could also learn without it. Without the POMDP construction, the leader would effectively always
play against followers who immediately best respond. The following theorem shows that this cannot
work.
Theorem 2. There exists a Stochastic Markov Game M where neither tabular Q-learning nor policy
gradient can learn the optimal policy for the leader, if the follower agent always best-responds
(without the construction of the query-oracle special case of Theorem 1).

Proof. We consider a slight variation
                                       of the
                                             iterated prisoner’s
                                                                 dilemma
                                                                           discussed in the main text.
                                   0 −2                  −1 0
Consider payoff matrices L =                  and F =                denoting the payoff to the leader
                                  −1 −3                  −3 −2
and follower agent respectively. The leader chooses the row, the first row denoting “cooperate” or C
and the second row “defect” or D, and similarly the follower chooses the column. Notice that these
are the standard prisoner’s dilemma payoff matrices, except the top and bottom row for the leader
have been switched.
Let each agent’s observation space be a one-step memory of the other agent’s previous action, that
is, there are three possible observations o0 , oC and oD . At the first step of each episode, both agents
observe o0 . If at step t the leader cooperates and the follower defects, then at step t + 1, the leader
observes oD (“other agent defected”) and the follower observes oC (“other agent cooperated”). We
also write sCD for this state if we want to refer to both agents. In particular sCD corresponds to
leader reward -2 for the leader and 0 for the follower (top right corner of both matrices). This is a
simplification of the setting presented in the main text, but without loss of generality in the case of
iterated prisoner’s dilemma, and also defines a valid stochastic Markov game in its own right. Let
us define an episode of our SMG to be h iterations of the matrix game, where h denotes the horizon
or episode length of the game. As a preliminary, notice that for any leader policy, the follower
best-response is always deterministic. This is easy to check.
It is also easy to see that the optimal leader policy is to cooperate on the first step, and to then
play tit-for-tat. That is, if the follower cooperated, the leader cooperates in the following step. If
the follower defects, the leader defects in return. If the leader plays this policy, then the follower
will in turn always cooperate, leading to leader episode reward 0, clearly the optimum. Using the
construction in the query-oracle special case of Theorem 1, this optimal leader policy can be learned
using standard RL algorithms. What we will now show is that if the follower best-responds without
that construction, i.e. immediately without queries folded into the leader sample batch, then standard
RL algorithms will diverge. This is independent of choice of hyperparameters, but as a matter of
principle.
Intuitively, the problem is one of a missing counterfactual: Notice that for the leader tit-for-tat
Stackelberg equilibrium, it is essential that the leader commits to defecting if the follower defects.
But notice also that when the leader plays this tit-for-tat policy, the follower will always best respond,
and so the leader will never actually see a follower defection. But this also means that it cannot
accumulate a gradient for this hypothetical behavior.
We now make this formal. Consider first the case of (tabular) Q-learning. Let q(s, a) be the (leader’s)
Q-value of taking action a in state s. We let α denote the learning rate and γ the discount factor.
Given an experience (s, a, r, s′ ) we update Q-values as follows:
                  q(s, a) ← (1 − α) · q(s, a) + α · r + γ max q(s′ , .)

                                                                                                    (2)

As a convenient shorthand and as a slight abuse of notation, we will define θ as follows:

                                         0 if q(s, D) ≤ q(s, C)
                                θs =                                                                    (3)
                                         1 if q(s, D) > q(s, C)
In words, we let θs = 1 denote that the current leader policy given the q(s, a) values will defect in
state s, and 0 if the leader will cooperate in state s. We can then write θ = (θ0 , θC , θD ) for the entire
leader policy induced by the current Q-table. θ = (0, 0, 0) would denote a leader policy that always


                                                    17
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


cooperates, θ = (1, 1, 1) denotes a leader always defecting, and θ = (0, 0, 1) denotes the (optimal)
tit-for-tat strategy.
Now consider the case of tabular Q-learning with parameter noise exploration. In this, we collect
experiences from any of the eight possible deterministic leader policies. Note also that the leader
action on the initial step does not affect the follower’s best response strategy; and it does not influ-
ence Q-table updates for the non-initial observations oC , oD (because o0 will never be revisited and
so the reward generated from o0 can never appear in a Q-table update or indeed in a reward-to-go
calculation in a policy gradient algorithm). We can therefore disregard the leader’s initial action and
for brevity focus only on the four cases θ = (⋆, 0, 0), θ = (⋆, 0, 1), θ = (⋆, 1, 0) and θ = (⋆, 1, 1).
It is easy to see that for θ = (⋆, 0, 1) the follower best-response is to always cooperate, and for the
other three cases it is to always defect. We may therefore encounter experiences of the following
form:
                 θ = (⋆, 0, 0)                  →                    (oD , C, −2, oD )
                 θ = (⋆, 0, 1)                  →                      (oC , C, 0, oC )
                 θ = (⋆, 1, 0)                  →                    (oD , C, −2, oD )
                 θ = (⋆, 1, 1)                  →                    (oD , D, −3, oD )


It is easy to see that under usual Q-learning update rules and for any choice of learning rate, we will
                                                                                                   h/2
have that in the limit q(oD , C) = −2·g (lines 1, 3) and q(oD , D) = −3·g (line 4) where g = 1−γ 1−γ
is a term from the discount factor γ. Crucially we have that q(oD , C) > q(oD , D), and therefore
the policy will converge toward θ = (⋆, ⋆, 0), which is not optimal. This holds for any choice of
learning rate, discount factor and exploration parameters (as any mix of the above trajectories will
lead to this).
For the ϵ-greedy case, let θsϵ = θs + (−1)θs (ϵ/2). That is, if our current Q-table induces the
deterministic policy θ, then θsϵ gives the probability of choosing action D in state s in the ϵ-greedy
case. It is easy to see that for sufficiently small ϵ and θsϵ = (⋆, ϵ, 1 − ϵ) the follower best-response
is still to always cooperate, and for any other θsϵ the follower best-response is to always defect.
Therefore in particular, no matter which way a particular leader action is sampled, the follower will
best-respond in the same way (only depending on the leader policy as a whole, not the particular
leader action sampled). In turn this means that q(oD , C) can only continue to accumulate −2 terms,
and q(oD , D) can only continue to accumulate −3 terms, and the policy will converge toward θ =
(⋆, ⋆, 0), which is not optimal.
To show this for policy gradient, let the leader policy be parametrized by theta as above, i.e. let θo
be the probability that the leader policy defects given observation o, and 1 − θo the probability that
the leader cooperates given o. Recall the basic REINFORCE gradient update rule:
                                    θ ← θ + αGt ∇θ ln πθ (at |ot )                                  (4)
                                                                             2
Here Gt denotes the (discounted) “reward to go”, i.e. Gt = rt + γrt+1 + γ rt+2 . . . as usual. A very
similar argument as in the Q-learning case now holds to show that the reward-to-go from cooperat-
ing when observing oD will always be larger in expectation than the reward-to-go from defecting,
because rt when defecting is smaller than rt when cooperating given oD and the remainder of the
sum in Gt is the same in expectation. This in turn pushes gradients toward cooperation, and away
from the optimal tit-for-tat policy.

The above holds for tabular Q-learning and basic policy-gradient with direct parametrization, but
likely can be extended to further RL algorithms such as DQN or actor-critic.
Notice the key difference in the query-oracle POMDP construction: In this, the oracle must query
the leader policy for its action given oD at least once in the initial “oracle” segment of the episode.
That action therefore sees as its reward to go the reward from the entire final segment, i.e. the entire
episode reward of the original Markov game. Intuitively, the leader gets to see at least one experience
where it retaliates on a follower defection and this leading to an entire episode of cooperation and
good rewards. Without the oracle query, the leader never gets to see this, and cannot learn from
it. It may still see experiences where it retaliates for defection, but these will be from within the
actual episode, will not influence follower behavior, and will lead to strictly worse rewards than


                                                  18
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


cooperating. Finally, it is also clear that this only applies to typical RL algorithms that learn on
taking actions in individual steps. Approaches that learn on the policy space as a whole, such as
evolutionary strategies, are not affected by this (as indeed they never look at individual steps and
actions at all).

E    N ECESSARY C ONDITIONS FOR S TACKELBERG C ONVERGENCE
It may also be interesting to consider the inverse direction of Theorem 1, i.e. what are necessary
conditions that follow from Stackelberg convergence. The resulting theorem is not very strong, but
still informative, as it suggests avenues for future research. Recall that in Theorem 1 we map a
Markov game to a single-agent RL problem (POMDP) for the leader. In the general case this is
simply taking the leader’s view of the original Markov game as-is, and in the query-oracle special
case we construct a POMDP that incorporates oracle queries. We then show that a solution to the
leader’s POMDP together with the follower best-response forms a Stackelberg Equilibrium.
Consider now the reverse: Suppose we are given some mapping from Markov game to leader
POMDP, and a guarantee that no matter the original Markov game, an optimal solution to the leader
POMDP it maps to forms part of a Stackelberg equilibrium. What needs to be true of any such map-
ping? We formulate this here in a slightly more general manner, in that we also allow an additional
(not necessarily identity) mapping between leader policies in the Markov game and the POMDP.
Theorem 3 (Necessity). Suppose we are given mappings L : M 7→ L(M) and l : ΠL → ΠM . L
maps any Markov Game M to a single-agent RL problem, and l maps policies in L to policies in M.
Furthermore suppose that whenever a policy πL,L optimally solves L(M), then l(πL,L ) together
with E(l(πL,L )) are a Stackelberg equilibrium in M. Then the following two conditions must be
true of L and l.

      1. The leader reward in L is maximized by the same choice of strategy as the leader reward
         in M when followers play E(πL ), i.e.

                           l arg max rL,L (πL ) ⊆ arg max rL,M (πL , E(πL ))

      2. L implements a follower equilibrium oracle E(πL )

Proof (Sketch). The first condition immediately follows from the problem statement. For the second
condition, consider that given full freedom in choosing M, we can construct M so as to let E be
any arbitrary function from leader to follower policy space. Similarly, we can choose M so that rL
is any arbitrary function. Both of these follow from cardinality arguments, and the observation that
since Markov games may be partially observable we are essentially unrestricted in the complexity of
the Markov game we choose to construct even for small strategy spaces. Since by the first condition
L needs to compute r ◦ E, both of which can be arbitrary, it thus also needs to compute E.

The main difference to the conditions in Theorem 1 is that we can only show that the argmax of
the leader reward needs to be that of the original Markov game, not that the rewards need to be
identical. This is in a way trivial (of course Theorem 1 still holds if we scaled leader rewards in
the leader learning problem by a constant factor), but it also suggests that reward shaping may be a
viable technique to accelerate leader learning, potentially still with provable Stackelberg equilibrium
guarantees.

F    F URTHER E XPERIMENT D ETAILS : I TERATED M ATRIX G AMES
Environments We use the 12 canonical symmetric matrix games identified in Robinson & Goforth
(2005) and also used by Balaguer et al. (2022). We construct Markov games from these matrices by
concatenating multiple iterations into an episode, and giving both agents one-step memory of both
agents’ action in the previous step. We use n = 10 steps per episode. Table H shows the payoff
matrices for all the Markov games, reported on the same scale as the figures. During training, we
scale rewards to be centered at 0, i.e. taking values −1.5, −0.5, 0.5, 1.5, but we report results offset
to match the reward scales used by Balaguer et al. (2022). This has no effect on comparability of
results.


                                                  19
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Algorithm. We focus on the contextual policy meta-learning approach described in subsection
4 for followers, and standard RL for the leader: At the beginning of each episode, the leader is
queried (as part of the episode rollout) for its action in each possible state of the environment. Its
responses are then concatenated to the follower observation. In a pre-training phase, we train the
follower against randomly sampled leader policies. In the main training phase, we then train the
leader against the follower meta-policy. Algorithm 1 in the Appendix details this in pseudo-code.
An advantage of the generality of our framework is that it is agnostic to which specific RL algorithm
is used. We generally use a standard policy gradient (PG) algorithm for the followers, although our
results do not depend on this specific choice.
Algorithm 1 details the two-phase learning algorithm we use. In all the experiments shown in the
main text, we use policy gradient to train the follower meta-policy in the pre-training loop. We use
PG (Sutton et al., 1999), PPO (Schulman et al., 2017) and DQN (Mnih et al., 2013; 2015) in the main
training loop, as indicated in the respective figures. We use linear models, and disable exploration in
the leader policy while pre-training the follower and vice versa. Table H lists the hyperparameters
used for each of these algorithms. Any hyperparameters not listed were left at default values in rllib
version 2.0.0. All experiments were run with a single rollout worker (per experiment), and using
Torch.

Equilibrium Verification. At the end of every experiment, we freeze the leader policy and further
train the follower policy for n = 50 iterations. Unlike in the pre-training phase, we here train them
only against the specific leader policy trained in the main training loop. This is to further verify that
the policies indeed form a Stackelberg equilibrium, and in particular that the follower meta-policy
is best-responding to the trained leader. If this is the case, we should not see any change in leader or
follower performance in this post-training phase. If the follower meta-policy was not already best-
responding to the leader, we may see an increase in follower performance during this post-training
phase. In all of the experiments in this paper (except the ones designed to show failure modes) we
see no follower improvement, i.e. behavior consistent with a Stackelberg equilibrium. This is not
shown in the training curves in the figures, but can be reproduced from the source code.

Implementation and Environment. All experiments were implemented using Ray / RLlib 2.0.0
(Liang et al., 2018). Experiments were run on recent Intel Xeon processors with a single core and
2GB RAM per experiment.

Hyperparameter Tuning. Learning rates and batch sizes were tuned using grid search, with some
additional tuning using the HyperOpt Python package (Bergstra et al., 2013), yielding no further
improvement however.

G    F URTHER E XPERIMENT D ETAILS : ATARI 2600
Environment. We modify the Atari 2600 game “Space Invaders”. We read from emulator RAM
to detect when a shot has been fired, and by which player. Separately in a Python wrapper we keep
a count of how many shots each player has available. We decrement this whenever we detect that
the player fired a shot. If the Python variable keeping track of the available bullets reaches zero, we
overwrite the player action that is fed to the Atari emulator to not-firing. Both players start with zero
available bullets, but we increment the bullets available to player 1 at stochastic intervals for up to a
total of five times per episode.
We implement a bilateral trade between agents: The selling agent may offer a price, and the buying
agent may choose to accept this price.

Neural Network Architecture. This is implemented by augmenting both action and observation
space, both providing a dictionary of both the underlying Atari action/observation, as well as the
new economic action and observations.
The action space contains the original Atari action, as well as the trading action. For the seller, the
trading action is picking one of several discrete price points, where we choice n = 5 price points
ranging from 0 to 1 in 0.25-step increments. For the buyer, instead of giving a discrete buy / don’t-
buy action, we let the buyer policy set a maximum price it is willing to buy. If the offered sales


                                                   20
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                                   1x32
                                                    FC
                                        Econ
                                        Input

                                                                                Action
                                                                                 Out
                  Image
                   Input                                             Joint
                                                                    Logits
                                 CNN            2x256      Concat
                                                  FC


     Figure 7: Neural Network Architecture used in the Atari 2600 bilateral trade experiments.


price is below the maximum buying price of the buyer, the trade happens, and the price paid is that
set by the selling agent. It is easy to see that this is equivalent to letting the buying agent observe
the price offer and respond with acceptance or rejection. We chose this implementation as it makes
implementing the follower oracle easier when the buyer is Stackelberg leader, but it does not affect
the outcome.
In the observation space, we provide a Dictionary to each agents containing both the original Atari
2600 image observation, as well as all the relevant economic information (number of bullets the
agent currently has available, if applicable price offered by the other agent, whether a trade is current
being proposed). In the neural network, we run these economic features through a separate fully
connected layer, which feeds into a joint logits layer. The Atari input is run through default RLlib
CNN and fully connected layers. Figure 7 shows this neural network architecture as a diagram.

Algorithm. We use standard PPO for both the leader and follower. Hyperparameters were taken
from RLlib tuned examples and are listed at the end of Table H. For convenience, we initialize
weights of the CNN and default RLlib FC layers to weights obtained from training agents in the
unmodified game. This speeds up training, but is not strictly necessary. We utilize the same Meta-
RL approach as we do in the iterated matrix game experiments: We first train a meta-follower. In
this phase, we let the gameplay actions of the leader agent be controlled by an agent trained on
the unmodified game, but we randomize the leader’s economic actions. Once this meta-follower
training has finished, we train the leader. In this phase, the meta-follower weights are frozen, and
only the leader policy is trained. In the Atari experiments, we let the meta-follower query the leader
immediately before each trade rather than at the start of the episode, as this allows us to fold the
queries into the trading exchange.

H    F URTHER D ETAILS ON P ERFORMANCE C OMPARISONS
In Figure 1 we compare our Meta-RL approach with the PPO+Q-learn approach of Brero et al.
(2022) and the ES-MD approach of Balaguer et al. (2022).
For Brero et al. (2021a), we implement follower Q-learning using information therein. Hyperparam-
eters for both the leader and the follower were tuned using the HyperOpt package (Bergstra et al.,
2013). In Figure 1 we plot learning curves up to 200k timesteps, as our approach converges before
that point. We show in Figure 8 learning curves until 2M timesteps. We can see that in some cases
PPO+Q-learn eventually converges to the optimum, while in the majority of cases this still has not
happened by 2M timesteps.
For Balaguer et al. (2022), we estimate their performance from Figure 2 therein. Notice that that
figure is not a learning curve, but represents a single inner loop at the end of their training procedure.


                                                   21
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                       env = assurance                                  env = battle                                    env = chicken
                       0                                             0.0                                              0


         Performance
                                                                     0.5
                       1                                                                                              1
                                                                     1.0
                       2
                           0.0   0.5         1.0         1.5   2.0         0.0   0.5         1.0         1.5   2.0         0.0   0.5         1.0          1.5   2.0
                                                               1e6                                             1e6                                              1e6
                                   env = coordination                0.5
                                                                                       env = deadlock                                  env = harmony
                       0
         Performance


                                                                     1.0                                             0.0
                       1                                             1.5                                             0.5
                                                                     2.0                                             1.0
                           0.0   0.5         1.0         1.5   2.0         0.0   0.5         1.0         1.5   2.0         0.0   0.5         1.0          1.5   2.0   Algorithm
                                                               1e6                                             1e6                                              1e6      PPO+Meta-RL
                                                                                                                                                                         PPO+Q-Learn
                                         env = hero                               env = mixedharmony                                   env = noconflict                  GS ES-MD*
                  0.0                                                 0                                              0.0
   Performance


                  0.5                                                                                                0.5
                  1.0                                                 1
                                                                                                                     1.0
                  1.5
                           0.0   0.5         1.0         1.5   2.0         0.0   0.5         1.0         1.5   2.0         0.0   0.5         1.0          1.5   2.0
                                                               1e6                                             1e6                                              1e6
                                 env = prisoners_delight                         env = prisoners_dilemma                               env = stag_hunt
                                                                      1                                               0
                 1.00
Performance


                 1.25                                                                                                 1
                                                                      2
                 1.50                                                                                                 2
                           0.0   0.5         1.0         1.5   2.0         0.0   0.5         1.0         1.5   2.0         0.0   0.5         1.0          1.5   2.0
                                       timesteps_total         1e6                     timesteps_total         1e6                     timesteps_total          1e6


                           Figure 8: Performance on symmetric matrix games (see Figure 1) up to 2M timesteps.


In the ES-MD case, Balaguer et al. (2022) report their performance after 1.28 billion environment
steps. In the Diff-MD case, a comparison of sample complexity is difficult, as that approach uses
a description of the environment rather than sample access. The closest we can come to a like-for-
like comparison is noting that Balaguer et al. (2022) report performance for Diff-MD after 500k
computed expected episode returns with 10-step episodes. In some sense this could be seen to be
equivalent to 5M environment steps as a lower bound.


                                                                                                   22
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Algorithm 1 Contextual Policy
  Pre-Training Loop
  Initialize follower policy πF
  for each pre-training iteration do
      for each episode per sample batch do
                                              r
           Sample a random leader policy πL
           for each oL ∈ OL do
                       r        r
               Query πL  for πL   (oL )
           end for
                              r
           Set context ω = πL   (oL ), oL ∈ OL
           for each episode step do
               Return oL,t to leader, (ω, oF,t ) to follower
                                                   r
               Step environment using aL,t = πL      (oL ), aF,t = πF (ω, oF,t )
           end for
      end for
      Update follower policy πF using collected sample batch using PG/PPO/DQN
  end for
  Main Training Loop
  Initialize leader policy πL
  for each training iteration do
      for each episode per sample batch do
           for each oL ∈ OL do
               Query πL for πL (oL )
           end for
           Set context ω = πL (oL ), oL ∈ OL
           for each episode step do
               Return oL,t to leader, (ω, oF,t ) to follower
                                                   r
               Step environment using aL,t = πL      (oL ), aF,t = πF (ω, oF,t )
           end for
      end for
      Update leader policy πL using collected sample batch using PG/PPO/DQN
  end for


                                              23
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                 Table 3: Payoff Matrices used in the matrix-game experiments
               Iterated Matrix Games (Figure 1 etc.)
                         Name               Leader Payoff     Follower Payoff

                                              −1 −3               −1 0
                    prisoners dilemma
                                               0 −2               −3 −2

                                               0 −3                0 −1
                        stag hunt
                                              −1 −2               −3 −2

                                               0 −3                0 −2
                        assurance
                                              −2 −1               −3 −1

                                               0 −2                0 −3
                      coordination
                                              −3 −1               −2 −1

                                               0 −1                0 −3
                     mixedharmony
                                              −3 −2               −1 −2

                                               0 −1                0 −2
                        harmony
                                              −2 −3               −1 −3

                                               0 −2                0 −1
                        noconflict
                                              −1 −3               −2 −3

                                              −2 −3               −2 0
                        deadlock
                                               0 −1               −3 −1

                                              −3 −2               −3 0
                    prisoners delight
                                               0 −1               −2 −1

                                              −3 −1               −3 0
                          hero
                                               0 −2               −1 −2

                                              −2 −1               −2 0
                          battle
                                               0 −3               −1 −3

                                              −1 −2               −1 0
                         chicken
                                               0 −3               −2 −3
               Single-Shot Matrix Game (Appendix C)

                                              2 0                     1   0
                    battle of the sexes
                                              0 1                     0   2
               Modified Prisoner’s Dilemma (Theorem 2)

                                              0 −2               −1        0
               prisoners dilemma modified
                                             −1 −3               −3       −2


                                             24
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                       Table 4: Hyper-Parameter Configuration Table
   Follower Policy Gradient
   Hyper-Parameter                Value    Hyper-Parameter                           Value
   algorithm                        PG     rollout fragment length                      100
   lr                              0.02    train batch size                             100
   iterations                       500    batch mode                     complete episodes
   Leader Policy Gradient
   Hyper-Parameter                Value    Hyper-Parameter                           Value
   algorithm                        PG     rollout fragment length                      100
   lr                             0.156    train batch size                             100
   iterations                      1200    batch mode                     complete episodes
   Leader PPO
   Hyper-Parameter                Value    Hyper-Parameter                           Value
   algorithm                       PPO     rollout fragment length                     1000
   lr                             0.008    train batch size                            1000
   entropy coeff                     0.0   sgd minibatch size                          1000
   iterations                       500    batch mode                     complete episodes
   Leader DQN
   Hyper-Parameter                Value    Hyper-Parameter                           Value
   algorithm                    SimpleQ    rollout fragment length                       10
   lr                              0.001   train batch size                            1024
   learning starts                  5000   exploration type                 ParameterNoise
   exploration initial stddev        1.0   exploration random timesteps                   0
   iterations                     20000    batch mode                     complete episodes
   Atari PPO
   Hyper-Parameter                Value    Hyper-Parameter                           Value
   train batch size                5000    rollout fragment length                     100
   sgd minibatch size               100    num sgd iter                                 10
   lambda                           0.95   kl coeff                                    0.5
   clip param                        0.1   vf clip param                              10.0
   entropy coeff                    0.01   lr                                        0.001
   num rollout workers                10   num envs per worker                           5


                                               25
