Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


P HENAKI : VARIABLE LENGTH VIDEO GENERATION
FROM OPEN DOMAIN TEXTUAL DESCRIPTIONS

 Ruben Villegas‡                          Mohammad Babaeizadeh‡                       Pieter-Jan Kindermans‡
 Google Brain                             Google Brain                                Google Brain
 rubville@google.com                      mbz@google.com                              pikinder@google.com


 Hernan Moraldo                            Han Zhang                             Mohammad Taghi Saffar
 Google Brain                              Google Brain                          Google Brain
 hmoraldo@google.com                       zhanghan@google.com                   msaffar@google.com


 Santiago Castro⇤                         Julius Kunze⇤                                Dumitru Erhan
 University of Michigan                   University College London                    Google Brain
 sacastro@umich.edu                       juliuskunze@gmail.com                        dumitru@google.com


                                                  A BSTRACT

            We present Phenaki, a model capable of realistic video synthesis, given a sequence
            of textual prompts. Generating videos from text is particularly challenging due to
            the computational cost, limited quantities of high quality text-video data and vari-
            able length of videos. To address these issues, we introduce a new model for
            learning video representation which compresses the video to a small representa-
            tion of discrete tokens. This tokenizer uses causal attention in time, which allows
            it to work with variable-length videos. To generate video tokens from text we
            are using a bidirectional masked transformer conditioned on pre-computed text
            tokens. The generated video tokens are subsequently de-tokenized to create the
            actual video. To address data issues, we demonstrate how joint training on a large
            corpus of image-text pairs as well as a smaller number of video-text examples can
            result in generalization beyond what is available in the video datasets. Compared
            to the previous video generation methods, Phenaki can generate arbitrary long
            videos conditioned on a sequence of prompts (i.e. time variable text or a story) in
            open domain. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first time a paper studies
            generating videos from open domain time variable prompts. In addition, com-
            pared to the per-frame baselines, the proposed video encoder-decoder computes
            fewer tokens per video but results in better spatio-temporal consistency.


1       I NTRODUCTION
It is now possible to generate realistic high resolution images given a description [38, 39, 36, 42,
65], but generating high quality videos from text remains challenging. In essence, videos are just
a sequence of images, but this does not mean that generating a long coherent video is easy. In
practice, it is a significantly harder task because there is much less high quality data available and
the computational requirements are much more severe [11]. For image generation, there are datasets
with billions of image-text pairs (such as LAION-5B [45] and JFT4B [67]) while the text-video
datasets are substantially smaller e.g. WebVid [4] with ⇠10M videos, which is not enough given
the higher complexity of open domain videos. As for computation, training current state-of-the-
art image generation models is already pushing the state-of-the-art computational capabilities [65],
leaving little to no room for generating videos, particularly videos of variable length.
To make the matters worse, one can argue that a single short text prompt is not sufficient to provide
a complete description of a video (except for short clips), and instead, a generated video must be
conditioned on a sequence of prompts, or a story, which narrates what happens over time. Ideally,
a video generation model must be able to generate videos of arbitrary length, all the while having
the capability of conditioning the generated frames at time t on prompts at time t that can vary over
time. Such capability can clearly distinguish the video from a “moving image” and open up the way
    ‡
        Equal contribution. * Intern at Google Brain while working on this project.


                                                         1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Figure 1. Time variable text (i.e. story) conditional video generation. The entire figure is one con-
tinuous video generated auto-regressively. We start by generating the video conditioned on the first
prompt and then after a couple of frames we change the prompt to the next one. Each row contains a
selected number of frames (from left to right in order) while the model was conditioned on that par-
ticular prompt. The model manages to preserve the temporal coherence of the video while adopting
to the new prompt, usually taking the shortest path for the adaption (notice the morphing of the teddy
bear to the panda). Note that the generated video has complex visual features such as reflections,
occlusions, interactions and scene transitions. Full video is available at phenaki.github.io.


to real-world creative applications in art, design and content creation. To the best our knowledge,
story based conditional video generation in open domain has never been explored before and this is
the first paper to take early steps towards that goal. A traditional deep learning approach of simply
learning this task from data is not possible, since there is no story-based dataset to learn from.
Instead, to achieve this we rely on a model that is designed specifically with this capability in mind.
In this paper, we introduce Phenaki, a text to video model trained on both text to video and text to
image data that can:
 – Generate temporally coherent and diverse videos conditioned on open domain prompts even
   when the prompt is a new composition of concepts (Fig. 3). The videos can be long (minutes)
   even though the model is trained on 1.4 seconds videos (at 8 fps).
 – Generate videos conditioned on a story (i.e. a sequence of prompts), e.g. Fig. 1 and Fig. 5.
To enable these capabilities, we could not rely on current video encoders, because they either can
only decode fixed size videos or they encode frames independently. Hence, we introduce C-ViViT ,
a novel encoder-decoder architecture that:
 – Exploits temporal redundancy in videos to improve reconstruction quality over a per frame model
   while compressing the number of video tokens by 40% or more.
 – Allows encoding and decoding of variable length videos given its causal structure.


                                                  2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


            C-ViViT Encoder                                      Training Transformer                                             Video Generation

                                   ...                                                                                                                          "1st Prompt"


                                                                                                                         Tokens
                                                                                                                         Empty
                                                                                                                                                    ...             T5X
                                                                                                       "Prompt"
        Patch
         Emb
                       Patch
                        Emb
                                   ...      Patch
                                             Emb                                       C-ViViT
                                                                                                                                      Transformer


                                                                                                                         Predicted
                                                                                                         T5X


                                                                                                                          Tokens
                                                                                       Encoder
                                                                                                                                                    ...


                                                             Tokens
                                                              Video
                                                                                                 ...
        Spatial
      Transformer
                       Spatial
                     Transformer
                                   ...     Spatial
                                         Transformer
                                                                                                                                           Shift Time


                                                                                                                  Frozne Past
                                                                                    Random Masking


                                                                                                                    Tokens
                                                                                                                                                                "Next Prompt"
                                                                                                                                     ...                ...


                                                             Reconstructed Masked
                                                                           Tokens
                                                                                                 ...
        Causal
      Transformer
                       Causal
                     Transformer
                                   ...     Causal
                                         Transformer
                                                                                                                                                                     T5X


                                                                                      Transformer                                     Transformer


                                                                                                                  Future Tokens
                                                                                                                    Predicted
       Discretize     Discretize          Discretize


                                                                Tokens
                                                                                                 ...                                 ...                ...
                                   ...
                             Masked/Empty                                                    Linear                                                           Operation
             Token                                     Transformer                                                       Frozen Model
                                Token                                                      Embedding



Figure 2. The architecture of Phenaki. Left: C-ViViT encoder architecture. The embeddings of
images and video patches from raw frames x are processed by a spatial and then a causal transformer
(auto-regressive in time) to generate video tokens z. Center: MaskGiT is trained to reconstruct
masked tokens z predicted by a frozen C-ViViT encoder and conditioned on T5X tokens of a given
prompt p0 . Right: How Phenaki can generate arbitrary long videos by freezing the past token and
generating the future tokens. The prompt can change over time to enable time-variable prompt (i.e.
story) conditional generation. The subscripts represent time (i.e. frame number).


2     T HE P HENAKI MODEL
Inspired by the previous work in auto-regressive text to image [38, 65, 42] and text to video [60,
59, 22], Phenaki is designed with two main components (see Figure 2): an encoder-decoder model
which compresses videos to discrete embeddings (i.e. tokens) and a transformer model to translate
text embeddings to video tokens. To get the text embeddings, Phenaki uses a pre-trained language
model, T5-XXL [41]. We will discuss each one of these components in the following subsections.

2.1     E NCODER - DECODER VIDEO MODEL : C-V I V I T

One of the primary challenges for generating video from text, is to get a compressed representation
of videos. Previous work on text to video either use per-frame image encoders [22, 60, 63] such
as VQ-GAN [14] or fixed length video encoders [58] such as VideoVQVAE [55]. The former
allows for generating videos of arbitrary length, however in practice, the videos have to be short
because the encoder does not compress the videos in time and the tokens are highly redundant in
consecutive frames. The latter is more efficient in the number of tokens but it does not allow to
generate variable length videos. In Phenaki, our goal is to generate videos of variable length while
keeping the number of video tokens to a minimum so they can be modeled with a transformer
within current computational limitations. To do so, we introduce C-ViViT , a causal variation of
ViViT [1] with additional architectural changes for video generation, which can compress the videos
in temporal and spatial dimensions, while staying auto-regressive in time. This capability allows for
generating videos of arbitrary length auto-regressively.

Encoder architecture: As illustrated in Figure 2, we start with a video sequence of tx + 1 frames
with a resolution of wx ⇥ hx and cx channels: x 2 R(tx +1)⇥hx ⇥wx ⇥cx . This sequence will be
compressed into a token representation of size (tz + 1) ⇥ wz ⇥ hz where the first wz ⇥ hz tokens
represent the first frame independently from the rest of the video, and the remaining tokens represent
spatio-temporal video tokens that auto-regressively depend on previous frames. To do so, we extract
non-overlapping image patches of size wp ⇥ hp ⇥ cp from the first frame and video patches of size
tp ⇥ wp ⇥ hp ⇥ cp from the rest of the video. We typically use all channels at once such that the
number of patches equals the number of video tokens tz = ttxp , wz = w                    hx
                                                                            wp and hz = hp . Each of
                                                                             x


these patches is flattened and linearly projected into a dz dimensional space. We combine the spatial


                                                                                          3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


dimensions to have a tensor of shape (tz +1)⇥wz ⇤hz ⇥dz where the spatial and temporal dimensions
are separated. Then multiple transformer layers are applied along the spatial dimensions with all-
to-all attention. This is followed by multiple transformer layers over the temporal dimension with
causal attention such that each spatial token only observes spatial tokens from previous frames in
an auto-regressive manner. The effect of this is that the first frame can be completely independently
encoded. This opens up the possibility of text to image training to be embedded naturally into
our video model. The second advantage is that we can condition the video generation process on
a number of starting frames. The resulting patch embeddings z of shape tz ⇥ wz ⇥ hz ⇥ dz are
then tokenized into learned codewords cz by vector quantization. The codebook learning will be
discussed later together with the losses.

Decoder architecture: The C-ViViT decoder is simply an upside down version of the encoder.
First tokens are transformed into embeddings. This is followed by the temporal transformer, then the
spatial transformer. After the output of the spatial transformer, we apply a single linear projection
without activation to map the tokens back to pixel space.

Quantization and Losses: To learn a discrete latent space, we quantize our encoder outputs into
the entries of a learned codebook via the vector quantization (VQ) objective in VQVAEs [51],
                              LVQ = ksg(z)      ek22 + kz      sg(e)k22 ,                          (1)
                      d
where sg(x) ⌘ x, and dx sg(x) ⌘ 0 is the stop-gradient operator, is the commitment loss weight,
and e is a codebook vector from codebook E. The index to the codebook vector closest to z is
found by i = argminj kz Ej k22 . In addition to the VQ objective, we adopt the factorized and `2 -
normalized codes from ViT-VQGAN [64] to improve codebook usage and reconstruction quality.
To train our model, we use a combination of L2 loss, image perceptual loss LIP [24, 68], video
perceptual loss LVP by using the I3D network [8] as feature extractor, and adversarial loss LAdv with
StyleGAN architecture [25]. As training objective, we use the following
                   L = LVQ + 0.1 ⇥ LAdv + 0.1 ⇥ LIP + 1.0 ⇥ LVP + 1.0 ⇥ L2 .                       (2)

Novelty over the ViViT architecture: While our proposed C-ViViT architecture is inspired by
the factorized encoder in ViViT [1], we modify their architecture to enable self-supervised learn-
ing from unlabeled videos. We first remove the [CLS] tokens in the spatial and the temporal
transformers. Next, we apply temporal transformer for all spatial tokens computed by the spatial en-
coder, in contrast to single run of the temporal transformer over the [CLS] tokens in ViViT. Most
importantly, the ViViT encoder requires a fixed length video input due to the all-to-all attention in
time. Therefore, we apply causal attention instead such that our C-ViViT encoder becomes auto-
regressive and allows for a variable number of input frames which are necessary to learn from image
datasets, and auto-regressively extrapolate video or single frames into the future.

2.2   T EXT- TO - VIDEO GENERATION WITH BIDIRECTIONAL TRANSFORMERS

In this stage, the text-to-video task can be formulated as a sequence-to-sequence problem to predict
video tokens given the paired text embeddings. Most of recent methods [38, 65, 60, 22] adopt a
transformer model for these sequence-to-sequence tasks. In their models, they use an auto-regressive
transformer which predicts the image or video tokens sequentially given the encoded text features.
As a result, the sampling time scales linearly with the sequence length, even when caching is used.
This becomes impractical for long video sequence generation.

Masked bidirectional transformer: In this work, we aim to reduce the sampling time by having
a small and fixed sampling step disregarding different video sequence lengths. Inspired by previous
work for image generation [10], we use a bidirectional transformer since it can predict different
video tokens simultaneously. For training step i, we first sample a mask ratio i from 0 to 1 and
randomly replace d i · N e tokens with the special token [MASK], where N is the video sequence
length. Then we learn the model parameters by minimizing the cross entropy loss on those masked
tokens given the encoded text embeddings and unmasked video tokens. During inference, we first
label all of the video tokens as the special token [MASK]. Then, at each inference step, we predict all
the masked (unknown) video tokens in parallel conditioned on the text embeddings and unmasked


                                                  4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


(predicted) video tokens. We keep a ratio i of the predicted tokens at sampling step i and the
remaining tokens are re-masked and re-predicted in the next step.
As discussed in MaskGIT [10], the masking schedule i and sampling schedule i have a signifi-
cant effect on the samples quality therefore we follow the same strategies. Compared to an auto-
regressive transformer, the number of sampling steps is an order-of-magnitude smaller (typically we
use values in the range of 12 to 48). Generally speaking, more sampling steps improves the quality.

Losses and training strategies: Given a pre-trained C-ViViT , videos are encoded into codebook
ids a of shape (tz + 1) ⇥ wz ⇥ hz which are flattened into a long vector using the raster ordering
from [64]. We then model the text-conditional video token distribution using Masked Visual Token
Modeling (MVTM) [10]:
                                    X
                          Lmask =                     log p(ai |aM̄ , p),                      (3)
                                           8i2[1,N ],mi =1

where aM̄ represents the masked version of a, mi is a binary variable indicating whether ai is
masked or not, N is the number of video tokens, and p is the text condition embedding. In addition
to the MVTM objective, we train using classifier-free guidance by dropping the text condition 10%
of the time during training [20, 65]. Finally, we dynamically adjust the MVTM objective during
training to allow the use of image and video datasets as a single large dataset. We achieve this by
only applying the masking ratio and objective on the first wz ⇥ hz tokens if only a single frame is
given or over all video tokens if a full video is given. This mixed image and video dataset training
strategy allows our models to learn concepts only present in image datasets, and transfer them to
concepts present video datasets (e.g., the pencil drawing styled video of the panda in Figure.3).

Inference and auto-regressive generation of long videos: At inference time, we sample videos
tokens by the same iterative process used in [10] with classifier-free guidance scale to control
alignment between the generation and the text condition. Once the first tx + 1 frames are generated
in latent space, we can extrapolate additional frames auto-regressively by re-encoding the last K
generated frames in the last generated video using C-ViViT , initializing MaskGIT with the tokens
computed by our C-ViViT encoder, and proceed to generate the remaining video tokens conditioned
on a text input. During video extrapolation, the text condition can be the same or a different one
which enables our model to dynamically create visual transitions between the previous and current
text condition visual content, effective generating a visual story an described by the input text.
Phenaki does not perform generation purely in latent space due to the design choices we made to
take advantage of text-image and text-video datasets during training. The first wz ⇥ hz tokens must
be single image (space only) tokens and the next tz ⇥ wz ⇥ hz tokens must be video (space-time)
tokens. Therefore, MaskGIT will always expect this input arrangement during generation.

3     E XPERIMENTS
To evaluate Phenaki, we test it on the following tasks: 1) text conditional video generation, 2) text-
image conditional video generation, 3) open domain time variable text conditional video generation
(i.e.) story mode, 4) video quantization and 5) image conditional video generation a.k.a. video
prediction. To the best of our knowledge, 3) open domain time variable text conditional video
generation has not been explored in prior work. Given the dynamic nature of videos, we highly
encourage readers to visit phenaki.github.io to check the generated videos. The website also includes
qualitative comparisons to a subset of the prompts from the CogVideo paper [22]. While the focus
is on the text to video generation tasks, it is remarkable that Phenaki is still competitive on the more
traditional video tasks despite not being developed explicitly for these tasks.

3.1   T EXT CONDITIONAL VIDEO GENERATION

Currently there is no established benchmark for evaluating text to video methods. This makes com-
paring Phenaki to recent methods such as NUWA [60], CogVideo [22], NUWA-Infinity [59] and
video diffusion models [21] difficult.
Unless specified otherwise, we train a 1.8B parameter Phenaki model on a corpus of ⇠15M text-
video pairs at 8 FPS mixed with ⇠50M text-images plus ⇠400M pairs of LAION-400M [45] (more


                                                   5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Table 1. Text to video compar-            Table 2. Text to video and text to image results highlighting the
isons on Kinetics-400 [26].               importance of image datasets in video models. Text-to-image eval-
                                          uation is done on ⇠40K images of LAION-400M [45].
                 FID    FID
Method                #      #
                Image Video                       Data Split    Text to Video   Text to Image
T2V [29]          82.13 14.65
SC [5]            33.51   7.34                   Vid% / Img% CLIP " FID # FVD # CLIP " FID #
TFGAN [5]         31.76   7.19                    100% / 0% 0.298 19.2 168.9 0.240 53.9
NUWA              28.46   7.05                    80% / 20% 0.303 21.4 198.4 0.289 29.4
Phenaki [0-Shot] 37.74    3.84                    50% / 50% 0.302 21.4 239.7 0.287 30.5



details in Appendix B.3). The model used in the visualisations in this paper was trained for 1 million
steps at a batch size of 512, which took less than 5 days. In this setup 80% of the training data came
from the video dataset and each image dataset contributed 10%.

Qualitative evaluation: Samples from this model can be seen in Figure 3 and additional samples
are provided at phenaki.github.io. We observe that there is a high degree of control over both the
actors and the background dynamics in the videos. The appearance of the actors and the video style
can be adjusted by the text prompt as well (e.g. a regular video, a cartoon or a pencil drawing).
On phenaki.github.io we provide examples from prompts that were provided in the CogVideo [22]
demo. Since there are substantial differences between these methods it is hard to compare them on
an equal footing. As an example, there are massive differences in scale: 9B parameters for CogVideo
and 1.8B for our model. Additionally, the training data is different. Finally, we do not know how
representative the prompts in the CogVideo demo are for the general performance of the CogVideo.

Quantative comparison: The NUWA [60] paper provided a qualitative evaluation on Kinetics-
400. Since the NUWA model is only 0.9B parameters we also use a model of the same size. Our
model was trained on 50% video and 50% image data in this experiment. The NUWA model fine-
tuned on Kinetics but the Phenaki model is not: it is evaluated in a zero shot setting. The results in
Table 1 show that Phenaki achieves comparable generation quality, in a zero-shot setting, compared
to previous text to video methods that were actually trained or finetuned on this dataset.

On the importance of joint text-to-image and text-to-video training While there are some text-
video datasets, text-image datasets dominate the internet in terms of quality and quantity [34]. Con-
sequently, there is simply not enough video data available to cover all the concepts present in text-
image datasets. For example using only our video data, concepts such as pencil drawings or different
painting styles cannot be learned. To be able to learn a model that can combine video dynamics with
these additional concepts we have to combine training on image and video data. In Table 2, we
evaluate the performance of using different ratios of video and images. We start with data splits of
only video, and vary the ratio of image and video datasets up to using 50% image and 50% video
datasets. In our results, we find that there is a trade-off in performance between models trained
with only video video (i.e., significantly better FVD), and models trained with more image data
(i.e., better text-video and text-image alignment, and significantly better FID in image datasets). On
phenaki.github.io we show samples from different models side by side where this trade-off between
control over the content and the quality of the dynamics can be seen. We believe that the trade-
off between concepts and dynamics will be improved as the quality and size of text-video datasets
increases in the future.

3.2   T EXT-I MAGE CONDITIONAL VIDEO GENERATION

Given that Phenaki can be conditioned on both still images and text, an interesting setup is to animate
existing images given a text prompt. For this experiment, we use the same model from Section 3.1
but conditioned on unseen pictures (captured with our phones from local subjects) and a related
prompt. As it can be seen in Figure 4 the model can generate coherent videos starting from the given
images, while following the given prompts.

3.3   V ISUAL STORY TELLING BY DYNAMIC TEXT INPUTS

A notable and useful feature of Phenaki is that it is auto-regressive in time. This allows for generating
long videos, while the prompt changes over time. Time variable prompts can be thought of as a story;


                                                   6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Figure 3. Text conditional video generation. Each row shows selected frames from a video gen-
erated given the prompt. The model is trained on a mix of images and videos. The video dataset
does not include any stylized videos such as pencil drawings, however, the image dataset does. The
model can generalize from still images to videos. This figure also demonstrate the capability of the
model in generating new unseen compositions. Full videos are available at phenaki.github.io.


Figure 4. Animating images conditioned on a prompt. Each row demonstrates multiple frames of a
generated video conditioned on a given first frame as well as a given text prompt. The first frames
are new (captured by author’s phone) and not observed during the training. The model animates the
given image while following the prompt. Full videos are available at phenaki.github.io.


a narration of the entire video where each prompt corresponds to a scene from the video. This allows
for creating dynamically changing scenes. To the best our knowledge, this paper is the first work to
generate such videos. An example of this can be seen in Fig. 1 and on phenaki.github.io. The way it
works is that we generate a video with the first prompt and then extend it in time by conditioning a
possibly new prompt and on the last N , typically 5, previously generated frames.


                                                 7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Table 3. Video reconstruction results on Moments-in-Time. The number of tokens is computed for 10 frames
with the exception of C-ViViT which is for 11, due to the isolated initial frame.
                   Method                           FID #    FVD #     Number of Tokens #
                   Conv VQ-GAN [14]                  7.5     306.1           2560
                   Conv VQ-GAN + Video loss          13.7    346.5           2560
                   ViT VQ-GAN [64]                   3.4     166.6           2560
                   ViT VQ-GAN + Video loss           3.8     173.1           2560
                   C-ViViT VQ-GAN (Ours)             4.5     65.78           1536
Table 4. Video prediction on Kinetics-600 [9]. While               Table 5. Video prediction on BAIR [13].
Phenaki is not designed for video prediction it achieves com-
parable results with SOTA video prediction models.                     Method                   FVD #
                                                                       DVD-GAN [11]              109.8
          Method                           FVD #                       VideoGPT [61]             103.3
          Video Transformer [57]     170.0 ± 5.00                      TrIVD-GAN [31]            103.3
          CogVideo [22]              109.2                             Transframer [35]          100.0
          DVD-GAN-FP [11]             69.1 ± 0.78                      HARP [63]                  99.3
          Video VQ-VAE [55]           64.3 ± 2.04                      CCVS [32]                  99.0
          CCVS [32]                   55.0 ± 1.00                      Video Transformer [57]     94.0
          TrIVD-GAN-FP [31]           25.7 ± 0.66                      FitVid [3]                 93.6
          Transframer [35]            25.4                             MCVD [53]                  89.5
          RaMViD [23]                 16.5                             NUWA [60]                  86.9
          Video Diffusion [21]        16.2 ± 0.34                      RaMViD [23]                84.2
          Phenaki (Ours)              36.4 ± 0.19                      Phenaki (Ours)             97.0


3.4   V IDEO E NCODING

To evaluate the video encoding and reconstruction performance of C-ViViT , we use the Moments-
in-Time (MiT) [33] dataset. MiT contains ⇠802K training, ⇠33K validation and ⇠67K test videos
at 25 FPS. The MiT dataset, in contrast to other publicly available video datasets, is a high quality
balanced dataset with high coverage and density of verbs depicting moments of a few seconds [33].
We compare C-ViViT against per-frame image based encoder-decoders that have been used as video
quantizers for conditional video generation [63, 60, 22, 60, 22, 58]: a ViT [64] and a convolutional
VQ-GAN[14]. The experimental details can be found in the Appendix B.1.
As demonstrated in Table 3, we evaluate the video reconstruction quality using FID [19] and
FVD [50]. Both FID and FVD compare the distribution of generated videos (or images) to the
ground truth distribution. The FID ignores temporal coherency, while the FVD measures how well
the spatio-temporal dynamics of the videos are reconstructed. Results in Table 3 show that per-
frame image based methods slightly outperform our video method (indicated by marginally higher
FID of C-ViViT ), however, they do poorly at modeling the spatio-temporal dynamics in video (sig-
nificantly lower FVD of C-ViViT ). This is expected as C-ViViT has spatio-temporal connections
between patches in each frame, allowing space and time to be modeled together. In addition, C-
ViViT compresses the video into fewer tokens per video compared to the image based baselines.
This is crucial as the number of tokens drastically impacts the computational cost of the transformer
in downstream tasks. Furthermore, C-ViViT tokens are auto-regressive in time which enables vari-
able length videos to be modeled with the same encoder which is important for video extrapolation
conditioned on previously generated frames.

3.5   I MAGE CONDITIONAL VIDEO GENERATION A . K . A V IDEO PREDICTION

To evaluate the learnt video representation of C-ViViT beyond reconstruction, we test it on the task
of frame-conditioned video generation, also commonly known as video prediction [3]. In this ex-
periment, we test Phenaki on BAIR Robot Pushing benchmark [13] where the task is to generate 15
frames conditioned on a given single frame. For open domain videos, we test Phenaki on Kinetics-
600 [9] where the task is to predict 11 frames given 5 frames. More details about these experiments
can be found in Appendix B.2. Tables 4 and 5 show the results of these experiments. Note that
Phenaki is not specifically designed for video prediction, therefore, it lacks components such as
skip connections in U-Nets which are known to improve the performance for video prediction meth-
ods [12, 52, 3]. Nevertheless, our method is competitive on these benchmarks with SOTA video
prediction methods. Overall, these experiments show that Phenaki is strong at modeling dynamics
of the videos which is required for generating coherent videos from text.


                                                       8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


4   R ELATED W ORKS

This paper is closely related to auto-regressive methods for text conditioned image and video genera-
tion. DALL-E [38] translates text tokens to discrete image embeddings learnt using a VQVAE [51].
Parti [65] has a similar architecture but can generate higher quality images by predicting tokens
from a ViT-VQGAN [64] using a 20B parameters transformer. Similar architectures have been used
for generating videos as well. GODIVA [58] uses a transformer to map text tokens to video tokens
from a image based VQVAE. Given the large number of tokens from multiple frames, GODIVA
relied on a local-attention mechanism. Similarly, NUWA [60] and NUWA-Infinity [59] both employ
auto-regressive architectures to generate videos and images from text. NUWA generates fixed size
outputs, while NUWA-Infinity introduces a second layer of auto-regressive computation to support
variable size videos. Likewise, CogVideo [22] argues the main reason behind low quality video
generation is the scarcity of good text-video data and tried to leverage pre-trained text to images
models to generate high quality video.
While Phenaki sticks to the same architecture principles, it has major differences with previous work.
Most notably, NUWA, NUWA-Infinity and CogVideo treat videos as a sequence of independent
images. This can lead to poor modeling of dynamics and generate motion artifacts. To combat
this, NUWA-infinity used the previous frame during decoding to combat this. In Phenaki, we go
further and treat videos as a temporal sequence of images which substantially decreases the number
of video tokens given the redundancy in video generation, and results in a much lower training cost.
The auto-regressive nature of the Phenaki also allows us to effectively condition on previous frames
and generates longer videos as detailed in Section 2.
Diffusion models are another class of models which recently have been used for conditional and
unconditional video generation, which we call VDM [21]. In VDM, authors proposed replacing
the conventional U-Net architectures for 2D image modeling with a 3D space-time model to run
the diffusion process directly on pixels. While this approach provides an effective formulation for
modeling videos, it is limited to fixed size videos. To address this issue, VDM provides an auto-
regressive extension, which allows the model to generate longer videos but it is typically impractical
due to high sampling time of diffusion models.
Text conditional video generation is a relatively new field of research, nonetheless, image condi-
tional video generation, commonly known as video prediction, and unconditional video generation
have been studied more comprehensively. These papers include deterministic methods using a com-
bination of recurrent and convolutional networks [40, 48, 15, 56], variational based stochastic meth-
ods [2, 12, 52, 3] and more recently by learning a discrete representation [55, 37, 35], auto-regressive
models [57, 61, 32, 63], diffusion models [53, 18, 62, 23] flow based models [28], and finally adver-
sarial based methods [54, 43, 49, 11, 44, 31, 66, 16, 46, 7, 17]. These works mostly consider limited
domain (e.g. robotic videos, video games and small datasets) prediction/generation, or short fixed
size clips. Section 3 and Section C provide comparison with some of these models.



5   C ONCLUSION

We introduced Phenaki, a model which is capable of generating variable length videos conditioned
on a sequence of open domain text prompts. Phenaki uses C-ViViT as video encoder. C-ViViT is
a new model which provides temporal-spatial compression while being auto-regressive in time. The
C-ViViT model is a crucial part of Phenaki that allows it to generate variable length videos. We
demonstrate how joint training on images and videos can improve the generation quality, and diver-
sity, given the existence of much larger image-text dataset with order of magnitude more samples.
The Phenaki model achieves good performance on video prediction, it can be used as to generate
long videos conditioned on a text prompt. Additionally it is able to condition on both text and a
starting frame. Finally, Phenaki is not limited to generating a video depicting a single concept or
caption. It is actually able to generate longer coherent video stories based on a sequence of text
prompts. The more complex narratives it can visualize demonstrate how this can become a great
creative tool for story telling.


                                                   9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


E THICS S TATEMENT

While we have not explored potential downstream applications of the generative models described
in this work, we believe Phenaki can have a positive impact in a variety of creative settings. In
general, many of the samples from the model will not perfectly correspond to the input caption or
the user’s intent; however, the end-user is likely to gain considerable time savings even if only one
of the generated samples aligns with their intent. We thus foresee Phenaki being useful in eventually
empowering users to accelerate their creativity, especially since the model can so quickly generate
videos. Phenaki and similar models will be part of an ever-broad toolset for artists and non-artists
alike, providing new and exciting ways to express creativity.
The flip-side of this acceleration and ease-of-use is the potential for harmful impact, as with many
of the prior or concurrent work in generative modeling. An easy-to-use system like Phenaki can
be repurposed for generating maliciously fake content and enable spreading of such content much
easier. While the quality of the videos generated by Phenaki is not yet indistinguishable from real
videos, getting to that bar for a specific set of samples is within the realm of possibility, even today.
This can be particularly harmful if Phenaki is to be used to generate videos of someone without their
consent and knowledge.
Like DALLE-2 [39], Imagen [42], Parti [65] and others, Phenaki is trained on a collection of datasets
that is known to encode a number of undesirable biases. LAION-400M [45] specifically has a variety
of issues regarding violence, pornography, gore [6]. While our primary image and video datasets
have minimal traits like this, we did incorporate LAION-400M into our training and observed better
results. In a currently training version of Phenaki, we use a set of datasets that minimizes such
problems.
Another potential issue when training generative models of any sorts is that public datasets of im-
agery and videos may contain examples whose ownership status is unclear or impossible to verify.
The Phenaki model is not an exception, as part of its training set uses the LAION-400M set of im-
ages. There is an ongoing public debate about how generative modeling research should proceed in
the presence of potentially copyrighted works in the training set. Given this debate, we are taking a
conservative stance by not releasing the trained checkpoints.
Taken together, these issues contribute to our decision not to release the underlying models, code,
data or interactive demo at this time. Before we can do that, we want to focus our efforts on better
understanding of data, prompt and output filtering. We would also like to more explicitly measure
the biases encoded in the outputs of Phenaki, so that we can further mitigate them actively, either in
the data, models or pre/post-processing steps.


R EFERENCES
 [1] Anurag Arnab, Mostafa Dehghani, Georg Heigold, Chen Sun, Mario Lucic, and Cordelia
     Schmid. Vivit: A video vision transformer. In ICCV, 2021.

 [2] Mohammad Babaeizadeh, Chelsea Finn, Dumitru Erhan, Roy H Campbell, and Sergey Levine.
     Stochastic variational video prediction. ICLR, 2018.

 [3] Mohammad Babaeizadeh, Mohammad Taghi Saffar, Suraj Nair, Sergey Levine, Chelsea Finn,
     and Dumitru Erhan. Fitvid: Overfitting in pixel-level video prediction. arXiv preprint
     arXiv:2106.13195, 2020.

 [4] Max Bain, Arsha Nagrani, Gül Varol, and Andrew Zisserman. Frozen in time: A joint video
     and image encoder for end-to-end retrieval. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International
     Conference on Computer Vision, pages 1728–1738, 2021.

 [5] Yogesh Balaji, Martin Renqiang Min, Bing Bai, Rama Chellappa, and Hans Peter Graf. Con-
     ditional gan with discriminative filter generation for text-to-video synthesis. In IJCAI, 2019.

 [6] Abeba Birhane, Vinay Uday Prabhu, and Emmanuel Kahembwe. Multimodal datasets: misog-
     yny, pornography, and malignant stereotypes. arXiv preprint arXiv:2110.01963, 2021.


                                                   10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


 [7] Tim Brooks, Janne Hellsten, Miika Aittala, Ting-Chun Wang, Timo Aila, Jaakko Lehtinen,
     Ming-Yu Liu, Alexei A Efros, and Tero Karras. Generating long videos of dynamic scenes.
     arXiv preprint arXiv:2206.03429, 2022.

 [8] Joao Carreira and Andrew Zisserman. Quo vadis, action recognition? a new model and the
     kinetics dataset. In CVPR, 2017.

 [9] Joao Carreira, Eric Noland, Andras Banki-Horvath, Chloe Hillier, and Andrew Zisserman. A
     short note about kinetics-600, 2018.

[10] Huiwen Chang, Han Zhang, Lu Jiang, Ce Liu, and William T. Freeman. Maskgit: Masked
     generative image transformer. arXiv preprint arXiv:2202.04200, 2022.

[11] Aidan Clark, Jeff Donahue, and Karen Simonyan. Adversarial video generation on complex
     datasets. arXiv preprint arXiv:1907.06571, 2019.

[12] Emily Denton and Rob Fergus. Stochastic video generation with a learned prior. In Jennifer
     Dy and Andreas Krause, editors, Proceedings of the 35th International Conference on Machine
     Learning, volume 80 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pages 1174–1183, 2018.

[13] Frederik Ebert, Chelsea Finn, Alex X. Lee, and Sergey Levine. Self-supervised visual planning
     with temporal skip connections, 2017.

[14] Patrick Esser, Robin Rombach, and Björn Ommer. Taming transformers for high-resolution
     image synthesis, 2020.

[15] Chelsea Finn, Ian Goodfellow, and Sergey Levine. Unsupervised learning for physical inter-
     action through video prediction. In Advances in neural information processing systems, pages
     64–72, 2016.

[16] Songwei Ge, Thomas Hayes, Harry Yang, Xi Yin, Guan Pang, David Jacobs, Jia-Bin Huang,
     and Devi Parikh. Long video generation with time-agnostic vqgan and time-sensitive trans-
     former. arXiv preprint arXiv:2204.03638, 2022.

[17] Sonam Gupta, Arti Keshari, and Sukhendu Das. Rv-gan: Recurrent gan for unconditional
     video generation. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pat-
     tern Recognition, pages 2024–2033, 2022.

[18] William Harvey, Saeid Naderiparizi, Vaden Masrani, Christian Weilbach, and Frank Wood.
     Flexible diffusion modeling of long videos. arXiv preprint arXiv:2205.11495, 2022.

[19] Martin Heusel, Hubert Ramsauer, Thomas Unterthiner, Bernhard Nessler, and Sepp Hochreiter.
     Gans trained by a two time-scale update rule converge to a local nash equilibrium. Advances
     in neural information processing systems, 30, 2017.

[20] Jonathan Ho and Tim Salimans. Classifier-free diffusion guidance, 2021.

[21] Jonathan Ho, Tim Salimans, Alexey Gritsenko, William Chan, Mohammad Norouzi, and
     David J Fleet. Video diffusion models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2204.03458, 2022.

[22] Wenyi Hong, Ming Ding, Wendi Zheng, Xinghan Liu, and Jie Tang. Cogvideo: Large-scale
     pretraining for text-to-video generation via transformers. arXiv preprint arXiv:2205.15868,
     2022.

[23] Tobias Höppe, Arash Mehrjou, Stefan Bauer, Didrik Nielsen, and Andrea Dittadi. Diffusion
     models for video prediction and infilling. arXiv preprint arXiv:2206.07696, 2022.

[24] Justin Johnson, Alexandre Alahi, and Li Fei-Fei. Perceptual losses for real-time style transfer
     and super-resolution. arXiv preprint arXiv:1603.08155, 2016.

[25] JTero Karras, Samuli Laine, Miika Aittala, Janne Hellsten, Jaakko Lehtinen, and Timo Aila.
     Analyzing and improving the image quality of stylegan. In CVPR, 2020.


                                                11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


[26] Will Kay, Joao Carreira, Karen Simonyan, Brian Zhang, Chloe Hillier, Sudheendra Vijaya-
     narasimhan, Fabio Viola, Tim Green, Trevor Back, Paul Natsev, Mustafa Suleyman, and An-
     drew Zisserman. The kinetics human action video dataset, 2017.

[27] Diederik P. Kingma and Jimmy Ba. Adam: A method for stochastic optimization. In ICLR,
     2015.

[28] Manoj Kumar, Mohammad Babaeizadeh, Dumitru Erhan, Chelsea Finn, Sergey Levine, Lau-
     rent Dinh, and Durk Kingma. Videoflow: A flow-based generative model for video. arXiv
     preprint arXiv:1903.01434, 2019.

[29] Yitong Li, Martin Min, Dinghan Shen, David Carlson, and Lawrence Carin. Video generation
     from text. In AAAI, 2018.

[30] Ilya Loshchilov and Frank Hutter. Decoupled weight decay regularization. In ICLR, 2019.

[31] Pauline Luc, Aidan Clark, Sander Dieleman, Diego de Las Casas, Yotam Doron, Albin Cas-
     sirer, and Karen Simonyan. Transformation-based adversarial video prediction on large-scale
     data. arXiv preprint arXiv:2003.04035, 2019.

[32] Guillaume Le Moing, Jean Ponce, and Cordelia Schmid. CCVS: Context-aware controllable
     video synthesis. In NeurIPS, 2021.

[33] Mathew Monfort, Alex Andonian, Bolei Zhou, Kandan Ramakrishnan, Sarah Adel Bargal,
     Tom Yan, Lisa Brown, Quanfu Fan, Dan Gutfruend, Carl Vondrick, et al. Moments in time
     dataset: one million videos for event understanding. IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis
     and Machine Intelligence, 2019.

[34] Arsha Nagrani, Paul Hongsuck Seo, Bryan Andrew Seybold, Anja Hauth, Santiago Manen,
     Chen Sun, and Cordelia Schmid. Learning audio-video modalities from image captions. In
     ECCV, 2022.

[35] Charlie Nash, João Carreira, Jacob Walker, Iain Barr, Andrew Jaegle, Mateusz Malinowski,
     and Peter Battaglia. Transframer: Arbitrary frame prediction with generative models. arXiv
     preprint arXiv:2203.09494, 2019.

[36] Alex Nichol, Prafulla Dhariwal, Aditya Ramesh, Pranav Shyam, Pamela Mishkin, Bob Mc-
     Grew, Ilya Sutskever, and Mark Chen. Glide: Towards photorealistic image generation and
     editing with text-guided diffusion models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2112.10741, 2021.

[37] Ruslan Rakhimov, Denis Volkhonskiy, Alexey Artemov, Denis Zorin, and Evgeny Burnaev.
     Latent video transformer. arXiv preprint arXiv:2006.10704, 2020.

[38] Aditya Ramesh, Mikhail Pavlov, Gabriel Goh, Scott Gray, Chelsea Voss, Alec Radford, Mark
     Chen, and Ilya Sutskever. Zero-shot text-to-image generation. In International Conference on
     Machine Learning, pages 8821–8831. PMLR, 2021.

[39] Aditya Ramesh, Prafulla Dhariwal, Alex Nichol, Casey Chu, and Mark Chen. Hierarchical
     text-conditional image generation with clip latents. arXiv preprint arXiv:2204.06125, 2022.

[40] MarcAurelio Ranzato, Arthur Szlam, Joan Bruna, Michael Mathieu, Ronan Collobert, and
     Sumit Chopra. Video (language) modeling: a baseline for generative models of natural videos.
     arXiv preprint arXiv:1412.6604, 2014.

[41] Adam Roberts, Hyung Won Chung, Anselm Levskaya, Gaurav Mishra, James Bradbury,
     Daniel Andor, Sharan Narang, Brian Lester, Colin Gaffney, Afroz Mohiuddin, et al. Scal-
     ing up models and data with t5x and seqio. arXiv preprint arXiv:2203.17189, 2022.

[42] Chitwan Saharia, William Chan, Saurabh Saxena, Lala Li, Jay Whang, Emily Denton, Seyed
     Kamyar Seyed Ghasemipour, Burcu Karagol Ayan, S Sara Mahdavi, Rapha Gontijo Lopes,
     et al. Photorealistic text-to-image diffusion models with deep language understanding. arXiv
     preprint arXiv:2205.11487, 2022.


                                               12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


[43] Masaki Saito, Eiichi Matsumoto, and Shunta Saito. Temporal generative adversarial nets with
     singular value clipping. In Proceedings of the IEEE international conference on computer
     vision, pages 2830–2839, 2017.
[44] Masaki Saito, Shunta Saito, Masanori Koyama, and Sosuke Kobayashi. Train sparsely, gener-
     ate densely: Memory-efficient unsupervised training of high-resolution temporal gan. Interna-
     tional Journal of Computer Vision, 128(10):2586–2606, 2020.
[45] Christoph Schuhmann, Richard Vencu, Romain Beaumont, Robert Kaczmarczyk, Clayton
     Mullis, Aarush Katta, Theo Coombes, Jenia Jitsev, and Aran Komatsuzaki. Laion-400m: Open
     dataset of clip-filtered 400 million image-text pairs. arXiv preprint arXiv:2111.02114, 2021.
[46] Ivan Skorokhodov, Sergey Tulyakov, and Mohamed Elhoseiny. Stylegan-v: A continuous
     video generator with the price, image quality and perks of stylegan2. In Proceedings of the
     IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pages 3626–3636, 2022.
[47] Khurram Soomro, Amir Roshan Zamir, and Mubarak Shah. Ucf101: A dataset of 101 human
     actions classes from videos in the wild. arXiv preprint arXiv:1212.0402, 2012.
[48] Nitish Srivastava, Elman Mansimov, and Ruslan Salakhudinov. Unsupervised learning of video
     representations using lstms. In International Conference on Machine Learning, 2015.
[49] Sergey Tulyakov, Ming-Yu Liu, Xiaodong Yang, and Jan Kautz. Mocogan: Decomposing
     motion and content for video generation. In Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer
     vision and pattern recognition, pages 1526–1535, 2018.
[50] Thomas Unterthiner, Sjoerd van Steenkiste, Karol Kurach, Raphael Marinier, Marcin Michal-
     ski, and Sylvain Gelly. Towards accurate generative models of video: A new metric & chal-
     lenges. arXiv preprint arXiv:1812.01717, 2018.
[51] Aaron van den Oord, Oriol Vinyals, and Koray Kavukcuoglu. Neural discrete representation
     learning. In NeurIPS, 2018.
[52] Ruben Villegas, Arkanath Pathak, Harini Kannan, Dumitru Erhan, Quoc V Le, and Honglak
     Lee. High fidelity video prediction with large stochastic recurrent neural networks. In Ad-
     vances in Neural Information Processing Systems, pages 81–91, 2019.
[53] Vikram Voleti, Alexia Jolicoeur-Martineau, and Christopher Pal. Mcvd: Masked conditional
     video diffusion for prediction, generation, and interpolation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2205.09853,
     2022.
[54] Carl Vondrick, Hamed Pirsiavash, and Antonio Torralba. Generating videos with scene dy-
     namics. arXiv preprint arXiv:1609.02612, 2016.
[55] Jacob Walker, Ali Razavi, and Aäron van den Oord. Predicting video with vqvae. arXiv
     preprint arXiv:2103.01950, 2019.
[56] Yunbo Wang, Mingsheng Long, Jianmin Wang, Zhifeng Gao, and Philip S Yu. Predrnn: Re-
     current neural networks for predictive learning using spatiotemporal lstms. Advances in neural
     information processing systems, 30, 2017.
[57] Dirk Weissenborn, Oscar Täckström, and Jakob Uszkoreit. Scaling autoregressive video mod-
     els. In ICLR, 2020.
[58] Chenfei Wu, Lun Huang, Qianxi Zhang, Binyang Li, Lei Ji, Fan Yang, Guillermo Sapiro, and
     Nan Duan. Godiva: Generating open-domain videos from natural descriptions. arXiv preprint
     arXiv:2104.14806, 2021.
[59] Chenfei Wu, Jian Liang, Xiaowei Hu, Zhe Gan, Jianfeng Wang, Lijuan Wang, Zicheng Liu,
     Yuejian Fang, and Nan Duan. Nuwa-infinity: Autoregressive over autoregressive generation
     for infinite visual synthesis. arXiv preprint arXiv:2207.09814, 2022.
[60] Chenfei Wu, Jian Liang, Lei Ji, Fan Yang, Yuejian Fang, Daxin Jiang, and Nan Duan. NÜwa:
     Visual synthesis pre-training for neural visual world creation. In ECCV, 2022.

                                                13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


[61] Wilson Yan, Yunzhi Zhang, Pieter Abbeel, and Aravind Srinivas. Videogpt: Video generation
     using vq-vae and transformers. arXiv preprint arXiv:2104.10157, 2019.
[62] Ruihan Yang, Prakhar Srivastava, and Stephan Mandt. Diffusion probabilistic modeling for
     video generation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2203.09481, 2022.
[63] Fangchen Liu Stephen James Pieter Abbeel Younggyo Seo, Kimin Lee. Harp: Autoregressive
     latent video prediction with high-fidelity image generator. arXiv preprint arXiv:2209.07143,
     2022.
[64] Jiahui Yu, Xin Li, Jing Yu Koh, Han Zhang, Ruoming Pang, James Qin, Alexander Ku,
     Yuanzhong Xu, Jason Baldridge, and Yonghui Wu. Vector-quantized image modeling with
     improved vqgan. In ICLR, 2022.
[65] Jiahui Yu, Yuanzhong Xu, Jing Yu Koh, Thang Luong, Gunjan Baid, Zirui Wang, Vijay Va-
     sudevan, Alexander Ku, Yinfei Yang, Burcu Karagol Ayan, Ben Hutchinson, Wei Han, Zarana
     Parekh, Xin Li, Han Zhang, Jason Baldridge, and Yonghui Wu. Scaling autoregressive models
     for content-rich text-to-image generation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2206.10789, 2022.
[66] Sihyun Yu, Jihoon Tack, Sangwoo Mo, Hyunsu Kim, Junho Kim, Jung-Woo Ha, and Jinwoo
     Shin. Generating videos with dynamics-aware implicit generative adversarial networks. arXiv
     preprint arXiv:2202.10571, 2022.
[67] Xiaohua Zhai, Alexander Kolesnikov, Neil Houlsby, and Lucas Beyer. Scaling vision trans-
     formers. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recog-
     nition, pages 12104–12113, 2022.
[68] Richard Zhang, Phillip Isola, Alexei A Efros, Eli Shechtman, , and Oliver Wang. The unrea-
     sonable effectiveness of deep features as a perceptual metric. CVPR, 2018.


                                               14
