Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


N EURAL C AUSAL M ODELS FOR C OUNTERFACTUAL
I DENTIFICATION AND E STIMATION
 Kevin Xia and Yushu Pan and Elias Bareinboim
 Causal Artificial Intelligence Laboratory
 Columbia University, USA
 {kevinmxia,yushupan,eb}@cs.columbia.edu


                                             A BSTRACT
         Evaluating hypothetical statements about how the world would be had a different
         course of action been taken is arguably one key capability expected from mod-
         ern AI systems. Counterfactual reasoning underpins discussions in fairness, the
         determination of blame and responsibility, credit assignment, and regret. In this
         paper, we study the evaluation of counterfactual statements through neural models.
         Specifically, we tackle two causal problems required to make such evaluations,
         i.e., counterfactual identification and estimation from an arbitrary combination of
         observational and experimental data. First, we show that neural causal models
         (NCMs) are expressive enough and encode the structural constraints necessary
         for performing counterfactual reasoning. Second, we develop an algorithm for
         simultaneously identifying and estimating counterfactual distributions. We show
         that this algorithm is sound and complete for deciding counterfactual identification
         in general settings. Third, considering the practical implications of these results, we
         introduce a new strategy for modeling NCMs using generative adversarial networks.
         Simulations corroborate with the proposed methodology.


1    I NTRODUCTION
Counterfactual reasoning is one of human’s high-level cognitive capabilities, used across a wide
range of affairs, including determining how objects interact, assigning responsibility, credit and
blame, and articulating explanations. Counterfactual statements underpin prototypical questions of
the form "what if–" and "why–", which inquire about hypothetical worlds that have not necessarily
been realized (Pearl & Mackenzie, 2018). If a patient Alice had taken a drug and died, one may
wonder, "why did Alice die?"; "was it the drug that killed her?"; "would she be alive had she not
taken the drug?". In the context of fairness, why did an applicant, Joe, not get the job offer? Would
the outcome have changed had Joe been a Ph.D.? Or perhaps of a different race? These are examples
of fundamental questions about attribution and explanation, which evoke hypothetical scenarios that
disagree with the current reality and which not even experimental studies can reconstruct.
We build on the semantics of counterfactuals based on a generative process called structural causal
model (SCM) (Pearl, 2000). A fully instantiated SCM M∗ describes a collection of causal mecha-
nisms and distribution over exogenous conditions. Each M∗ induces families of qualitatively different
distributions related to the activities of seeing (called observational), doing (interventional), and
imagining (counterfactual), which together are known as the ladder of causation (Pearl & Mackenzie,
2018; Bareinboim et al., 2022); also called the Pearl Causal Hierarchy (PCH). The PCH is a contain-
ment hierarchy in which distributions can be put in increasingly refined layers: observational content
goes into layer 1 (L1 ); experimental to layer 2 (L2 ); counterfactual to layer 3 (L3 ). It is understood
that there are questions about layers 2 and 3 that cannot be answered (i.e. are underdetermined), even
given all information in the world about layer 1; further, layer 3 questions are still underdetermined
given data from layers 1 and 2 (Bareinboim et al., 2022; Ibeling & Icard, 2020).
Counterfactuals represent the more detailed, finest type of knowledge encoded in the PCH, so
naturally, having the ability to evaluate counterfactual distributions is an attractive proposition. In
practice, a fully specified model M∗ is almost never observable, which leads to the question – how
can a counterfactual statement, from L∗3 , be evaluated using a combination of observational and
experimental data (from L∗1 and L∗2 )? This question embodies the challenge of cross-layer inferences,
which entail solving two challenging causal problems in tandem, identification and estimation.


                                                   1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


In the more traditional literature of causal inference,               (a)                                       (b)
                                                                  Unobserved                                 Learned/
there are different symbolic methods for solving these           Nature/Truth                              Hypothesized
problems in various settings and under different as-
sumptions. In the context of identification, there ex-             SCM M∗                  Causal
                                                                                          Diagram
                                                                                                             NCM M  c
ists an arsenal of results that includes celebrated meth-       = hF ∗ , P (U∗ )i            G             = h F,
                                                                                                               b P (U)i
                                                                                                                    b

ods such as Pearl’s do-calculus (Pearl, 1995), and go                                       G-Constraint

through different algorithmic methods when consid- PCH: L∗1 L∗2 L∗3                                       L1    L2    L3
ering inferences for L2 - (Tian & Pearl, 2002; Shpitser
& Pearl, 2006; Huang & Valtorta, 2006; Bareinboim                      Training (L = L ,
                                                                                       1
                                                                                           ∗
                                                                                            ∗
                                                                                            1
                                                                                L =L )2
& Pearl, 2012; Lee et al., 2019; Lee & Bareinboim,                                         2



2020; 2021) and L3 -distributions (Heckman, 1992; Figure 1: The l.h.s. contains the true SCM
Pearl, 2001; Avin et al., 2005; Shpitser & Pearl, 2009; M∗ that induces PCH’s three layers. The
Shpitser & Sherman, 2018; Zhang & Bareinboim,
2018; Correa et al., 2021). On the estimation side, r.h.s. contains a neural model M constrained
                                                                                                         c
                                                                                                                    ∗
there are various methods including the celebrated by inductive∗ bias G (entailed by M ) and
Propensity Score/IPW for the backdoor case (Rubin,        matching    M         on  L 1  and    L  2   through    training.
1978; Horvitz & Thompson, 1952; Kennedy, 2019; Kallus & Uehara, 2020), and some more relaxed
settings (Fulcher et al., 2019; Jung et al., 2020; 2021), but the literature is somewhat scarcer and less
developed. In fact, there is a lack of estimation methods for L3 quantities in most settings.
On another thread in the literature, deep learning methods have achieved outstanding empirical
success in solving a wide range of tasks in fields such as computer vision (Krizhevsky et al., 2012),
speech recognition (Graves & Jaitly, 2014), and game playing (Mnih et al., 2013). One key feature
of deep learning is its ability to allow inferences to scale with the data to high dimensional settings.
We study here the suitability of the neural approach to tackle the problems of causal identification
and estimation while trying to leverage the benefits of these new advances experienced in non-causal
settings. 1 The idea behind the approach pursued here is illustrated in Fig. 1. Specifically, we will
search for a neural model M  c (r.h.s.) that has the same generative capability of the true, unobserved
          ∗
SCM M (l.h.s.); in other words, M      c should be able to generate the same observed/inputted data,
             ∗              ∗ 2
i.e., L1 = L1 and L2 = L2 . To tackle this task in practice, we use an inductive bias for the neural
model in the form of a causal diagram (Pearl, 2000; Spirtes et al., 2000; Bareinboim & Pearl, 2016),
which is a parsimonious description of the mechanisms (F ∗ ) and exogenous conditions (P (U∗ )) of
the generating SCM. 3 The question then becomes: under what conditions can a model trained using
this combination of qualitative inductive bias and the available data be suitable to answer questions
about hypothetical counterfactual worlds, as if we had access to the true M∗ ?
There exists a growing literature that leverages modern neural methods to solve causal inference
tasks.1 Our approach based on proxy causal models will answer causal queries by direct evaluation
through a parameterized neural model M     c fitted on the data generated by M∗ . 4 For instance, some
recent work solves the estimation of interventional (L2 ) or counterfactual (L3 ) distributions from
observational (L1 ) data in Markovian settings, implemented through architectures such as GANs,
flows, GNNs, and VGAEs (Kocaoglu et al., 2018; Pawlowski et al., 2020; Zecevic et al., 2021;
Sanchez-Martin et al., 2021). In some real-world settings, Markovianity is a too stringent condition
(see discussion in App. D.4) and may be violated, which leads to the separation between layers 1 and
2, and, in turn, issues of causal identification. 5 The proxy approach discussed above was pursued in
Xia et al. (2021) to solve the identification and estimation of interventional distributions (L2 ) from
observational data (L1 ) in non-Markovian settings. 6 This work introduced an object we leverage
throughout this paper called Neural Causal Model (NCM, for short), which is a class of SCMs
constrained to neural network functions and fixed distributions over the exogenous variables. While
    1
       One of our motivations is that these methods showed great promise at estimating effects from observational
data under backdoor/ignorability conditions (Shalit et al., 2017; Louizos et al., 2017; Li & Fu, 2017; Johansson
et al., 2016; Yao et al., 2018; Yoon et al., 2018; Kallus, 2020; Shi et al., 2019; Du et al., 2020; Guo et al., 2020).
    2
      This represents an extreme case where all L1 - and L2 -distributions are provided as data. In practice, this
may be unrealistic, and our method takes as input any arbitrary subset of distributions from L1 and L2 .
    3
      When imposed on neural models, they enforce equality constraints connecting layer 1 and layer 2 quantities,
defined formally through the causal Bayesian network (CBN) data structure (Bareinboim et al., 2022, Def. 16).
    4
      In general, Mc does not need to, and will not be equal to the true SCM M∗ .
    5
      Layer 3 differs from lower layers even in Markovian models; see Bareinboim et al. (2022, Ex. 7).
    6
      Witty et al. (2021) shows a related approach taking the Bayesian route; further details, see Appendix C.


                                                            2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


NCMs have been shown to be able to solve the identification and estimation tasks for L2 queries,
their potential for counterfactual inferences is still largely unexplored, and existing implementations
have been constrained to low-dimensional settings.
Despite all the progress achieved so far, no practical methods exist for estimating counterfactual
(L3 ) distributions in the general setting where an arbitrary combination of observational (L1 ) and
experimental (L2 ) distributions is available, and unobserved confounders exist (i.e. Markovianity
does not hold). Hence, in addition to providing the first neural method of counterfactual identification,
this paper establishes the first general counterfactual estimation technique even among non-neural
methods, leveraging the neural toolkit for scalable inferences. Specifically, our contributions are:
1. We prove that when fitted with a graphical inductive bias, the NCM encodes the L3 -constraints
necessary for performing counterfactual inference (Thm. 1), and that they are still expressive enough
to model the underlying data-generating model, which is not necessarily a neural network (Thm. 2).
2. We show that counterfactual identification within a neural proxy model setting is equivalent to
established symbolic approaches (Thm. 3). We leverage this duality to develop an optimization
procedure (Alg. 1) for counterfactual identification and estimation that is both sound and complete
(Corol. 2). The approach is general in that it accepts any combination of inputs from L1 and L2 , it
works in any causal diagram setting, and it does not require the Markovianity assumption to hold.
3. We develop a new approach to modeling the NCM using generative adversarial networks (GANs)
(Goodfellow et al., 2014), capable of robustly scaling inferences to high dimensions (Alg. 3). We
then show how GAN-NCMs can solve the challenging optimization problems in identifying and
estimating counterfactuals in practice. Experiments are provided in Sec. 5 and proofs in Appendix A.
All supplementary material can be found in the full technical report (Xia et al., 2022).
Preliminaries. We now introduce the notation and definitions used throughout the paper. We use
uppercase letters (X) to denote random variables and lowercase letters (x) to denote corresponding
values. Similarly, bold uppercase (X) and lower case (x) letters are used to denote sets of random
variables and values respectively. We use DX to denote the domain of X and DX = DX1 ×· · ·×DXk
for the domain of X = {X1 , . . . , Xk }. We denote P (X = x) (which we will often shorten to P (x))
as the probability of X taking the values x under the probability distribution P (X).
We utilize the basic semantic framework of structural causal models (SCMs), as defined in (Pearl,
2000, Ch. 7). An SCM M consists of endogenous variables V, exogenous variables U with
distribution P (U), and mechanisms F. F contains a function fVi for each variable Vi that maps
endogenous parents PaVi and exogenous parents UVi to Vi . Each M induces a causal diagram G,
where every Vi ∈ V is a vertex, there is a directed arrow (Vj → Vi ) for every Vi ∈ V and Vj ∈ PaVi ,
and there is a dashed-bidirected arrow (Vj L9999K Vi ) for every pair Vi , Vj ∈ V such that UVi and
UVj are not independent. For further details, see (Bareinboim et al., 2022, Def. 13/16, Thm. 4). The
exogenous UVi ’s are not assumed independent (i.e. Markovianity is not required). Our treatment is
constrained to recursive SCMs (implying acyclic causal diagrams) with finite domains over V (see
Apps. A/E for details). Each SCM M assigns values to each counterfactual distribution as follows:
Definition 1 (Layer 3 Valuation). An SCM M induces layer L3 (M), a set of distributions over V,
each with the form P (Y∗ ) = P (Y1[x1 ] , Y2[x2 ],... ) such that
                                            Z
         P M (y1[x1 ] , y2[x2 ] , . . . ) =   1 Y1[x1 ] (u) = y1 , Y2[x2 ] (u) = y2 , . . . dP (u),

                                                                                                    (1)
                                        DU

where Yi[xi ] (u) is evaluated under Fxi := {fVj : Vj ∈ V \ Xi } ∪ {fX ← x : X ∈ Xi }.
Each Yi corresponds to a set of variables in a world where the original mechanisms fX are replaced
with constants xi for each X ∈ Xi ; this is also known as the mutilation procedure. This procedure
corresponds to interventions, and we use subscripts to denote the intervening variables (e.g. Yx ) or
subscripts with brackets when the variables are indexed (e.g. Y1[x1 ] ). For instance, P (yx , yx0 0 ) is the
probability of the joint counterfactual event Y = y had X been x and Y = y 0 had X been x0 .
SCM M2 is said to be P (Li ) -consistent (for short, Li -consistent) with SCM M1 if Li (M1 ) =
Li (M2 ). We will use Z to denote a set of quantities from Layer 2 (i.e. Z = {P (Vzk )}`k=1 ), and we
use Z(M) to denote those same quantities induced by SCM M (i.e. Z(M) = {P M (Vzk )}`k=1 ).
We use neural causal models (NCMs) as a substitute (proxy) model for the true SCM, as follows:
Definition 2 (G-Constrained Neural Causal Model (G-NCM) (Xia et al., 2021, Def. 7)). Given a
causal diagram G, a G-constrained Neural Causal Model (for short, G-NCM) M c(θ) over variables V


                                                     3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


with parameters θ = {θVi : Vi ∈ V} is an SCM hU,
                                               b V, F, b Pb(U)i
                                                             b such that Ub = {U
                                                                               bC : C ∈ C(G)},
where C(G) is the set of all maximal cliques over bidirected edges of G, and DUb = [0, 1] for all
b ∈ U;
U     b Fb = {fˆV : Vi ∈ V}, where each fˆV is a feedforward neural network parameterized by
                  i                          i

θVi ∈ θ mapping values of UVi ∪ PaVi to values of Vi for UVi = {U       bC ∈ U
                                                                   bC : U     b s.t. Vi ∈ C} and
PaVi = P aG (Vi ); Pb(U)                b ∼ Unif(0, 1) for each U
                      b is defined s.t. U                       b ∈ U.
                                                                    b

2    N EURAL C AUSAL M ODELS FOR C OUNTERFACTUAL I NFERENCE
We first recall that inferences about higher layers of the PCH generated by the true SCM M∗ cannot
be made in general through an NCM M     c trained only from lower layer data (Bareinboim et al., 2022;
Xia et al., 2021). This impossibility motivated the use of the inductive bias in the form of a causal
diagram G in the construction of the NCM in Def. 2, which ascertains that the G-consistency property
holds. (See App. D.1 for further discussion.) We next define consistency w.r.t. to each layer, which
will be key for a more fine-grained discussion later on.
Definition 3 (G (Li ) -Consistency). Let G be the causal diagram induced by the SCM M∗ . For
any SCM M, M is said to be G (Li ) -consistent (w.r.t. M∗ ) if Li (M) satisfies all layer i equality
constraints implied by G.

This generalization is subtle since regardless of which Li is used with the definition, the causal
diagram G generated by M∗ is the same. The difference lies in the implied constraints. For instance,
if an SCM M is G (L1 ) -consistent, that means that G is a Bayesian network for the observational
distribution of M, implying independences readable through d-separation Pearl (1988). If M is
G (L2 ) -consistent, that means that G is a Causal Bayesian network (CBN) (Bareinboim et al., 2022,
Def. 16) for the interventional distributions of M. While several SCMs could share the same
d-separation constraints as M∗ , there are fewer that share all L2 constraints encoded by the CBN. G-
consistency at higher layers imposes a stricter set of constraints, narrowing down the set of compatible
SCMs. There also exist constraints of layer 3 that are important for counterfactual inferences.
To motivate the use of such constraints, consider an example inspired by the multi-armed bandit
problem. A casino has 3 slot machines, labeled “0", “1", and “2". Every day, the casino assigns
one machine a good payout, one a bad payout, and one an average payout, with chances of winning
represented by exogenous variables U+ , U− , and U= , respectively. A customer comes every day and
plays a slot machine. X represents their choice of machine, and Y is a binary variable representing
whether they win. Suppose a data scientist creates a model of the situation, and she hypothesizes
that the casino predicts the customer’s choice based on their mood (UM ) and will always assign the
predicted machine the average payout to maintain profits. Her model is described by the SCM M0 :
          
          U
                     = {UM , U+ , U= , U− }, UM ∈ {0, 1, 2}, U+ , U= , U− ∈ {0, 1}
             V        = {X, Y }, X ∈ {0, 1, 2}, Y ∈ {0, 1}
          
          
          
          
                         
          
          
                          fX (uM )                  = uM
  M0 =
                                                       
                                                        u= x = uM                              (2)
                          
             F        =
                            f (x, uM , u+ , u= , u− ) = u− x = (uM − 1)%3
          
          
                           Y
          
                         
                          
                                                       
                                                          u+ x = (uM + 1)%3
          
          
          
          
             P (U) : P (UM = i) = 13 , P (U+ = 1) = 0.6, P (U= = 1) = 0.4, P (U− = 1) = 0.2
          

It turns out that in this model P (yx ) = P (y | x). For example, P (Y = 1 | X = 0) = P (U= =
1) = 0.4, and P (YX=0 = 1) = P (UM = 0)P (U= = 1) + P (UM = 1)P (U− = 1) + P (UM =
2)P (U+ = 1) = 13 (0.4) + 13 (0.2) + 13 (0.6) = 0.4.
Suppose the true model M∗ employed by the casino (and unknown by the customers and data
scientist) induces graph G = {X → Y }. Interestingly enough, M0 would be G (L2 ) -consistent with
M∗ since M0 is compatible with all L2 -constraints, including P (yx ) = P (y | x) and P (xy ) = P (x).
However, and perhaps surprisingly, it would fail to be G (L3 ) -consistent. A further constraint implied
by G on the third layer is that P (yx | x0 ) = P (yx ), which is not true of M0 . To witness, note that
P (YX=0 = 1 | X = 2) = P (U+ = 1) = 0.6 in M0 , which means that if the customer chose
machine 2, they would have had higher payout had they chosen machine 0. This does not match
P (YX=0 = 1) = 0.4, computed earlier, so M0 fails to encode the L3 -constraints implied by G.


                                                   4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


In general, the causal diagram encodes a family of L3 -constraints which we
leverage to make cross-layer inferences. A more detailed discussion can be
found in Appendix D. We show next that NCMs encodes all of the equality
constraints related to L3 , in addition to the known L2 -constraints.
Theorem 1 (NCM G (L3 ) -Consistency). Any G-NCM M            c(θ) is G (L3 ) -
consistent.
This will be a key result for performing inferences at the counterfactual
level. Similar to how constraints about layer 2 distributions help bridge
the gap between layers 1 and 2, layer 3 constraints allow us to extend our
inference capabilities into layer 3. (In fact, most of L3 ’s distributions are not
obtainable through experimentation.) While this graphical inductive bias is Figure 2:             Model-
powerful, the set of NCMs constrained by G is no less expressive than the          theoretic visualization
set of SCMs constrained by G, as shown next.                                       of Thms. 1 and 2.
                                                          ∗
Theorem 2 (L3 -G Expressiveness). For any SCM M that induces causal diagram G, there exists a
G-NCM M  c(θ) = hU, b V, F, b Pb(U)i
                                   b s.t. M c is L3 -consistent w.r.t. M∗ .
This result ascertains that the NCM class is as expressive, and therefore, contains the same generative
capabilities as the original generating model. More interestingly, even if the original SCM M∗ does
not belong to the NCM class, but from the higher space, there exists a NCM M         c(θ) that will be
capable of expressing the collection of distributions from all layers of the PCH induced by it.
A visual representation of these two results is shown in Fig. 2. The space of all SCMs is called Ω∗ ,
and the subspace that contains all SCMs G ((Li ) -consistent w.r.t. the true SCM M∗ (black dot) is
called Ω∗ (G (Li ) ). Note that the G (Li ) space shrinks with higher layers, indicating a more constrained
space with fewer SCMs. Thm. 1 states that all G-NCMs (Ω(G)) are within Ω∗ (G (L3 ) ), and Thm. 2
states that all SCMs in Ω∗ (G (L3 ) ) can be represented by a corresponding G-NCM on all three layers.
It may seem intuitive that the G-NCM has these two properties by construction, but these properties
are nontrivial and, in fact, not enjoyed by many model classes. Examples can be found in Appendix
D. Together, these two theorems ensure that the NCM has both the constraints and the expressiveness
necessary for counterfactual inference, elaborated further in the next section.

3    N EURAL C OUNTERFACTUAL I DENTIFICATION
The problem of identification is concerned with determining whether a certain quantity is computable
from a combination of assumptions, usually encoded in the form of a causal diagram, and a collection
of distributions (Pearl, 2000, p. 77). This challenge stems from the fact that even though the space of
SCMs (or NCMs) is constrained upon assuming a certain causal diagram, the quantity of interest
may still be underdetermined. In words, there are many SCMs compatible with the same diagram G
but generate different answers for the target distribution. In this section, we investigate the problem
of identification and decide whether counterfactual quantities (from L3 ) can be inferred from a
combination of a subset of L2 and L1 datasets together with G, as formally defined next.
Definition 4 (Neural Counterfactual Identification). Consider an SCM M∗ and the corresponding
causal diagram G. Let Z = {P (Vzk )}`k=1 be a collection of available interventional (or observational
if Zk = ∅) distributions from M∗ . The counterfactual query P (Y∗ = y∗ | X∗ = x∗ ) is said to be
neural identifiable (identifiable, for short) from the set of G-constrained NCMs Ω(G) and Z if and
only if P M1 (y∗ | x∗ ) = P M2 (y∗ | x∗ ) for every pair of models M        c2 ∈ Ω(G) s.t. they match
                                                                       c1 , M
           c                  c

M on all distributions in Z (i.e. Z(M∗ ) = Z(M1 ) = Z(M2 ) > 0).
   ∗

From a symbolic standpoint, a counterfactual quantity P (y∗ | x∗ ) is identifiable from G and Z if all
SCMs that induce the distributions of Z and abide by the constraints of G also agree on P (y∗ | x∗ ).
This is illustrated in Fig. 3. In the definition above, the search is constrained to the NCM subspace
(shown in light gray) within the space of SCMs (dark gray). It may be concerning that the true SCM
M∗ might not be an NCM, as we alluded to earlier. The next result ascertains that identification within
the constrained space of NCMs is actually equivalent to identification in the original SCM-space.
Theorem 3 (Counterfactual Graphical-Neural Equivalence (Dual ID)). Let Ω∗ , Ω be the spaces
including all SCMs and NCMs, respectively. Consider the true SCM M∗ and the corresponding


                                                    5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


causal diagram G. Let Q = P (y∗ | x∗ ) be the target query and Z the set of observational and
interventional distributions available. Then, Q is neural identifiable from Ω(G) and Z if and only if it
is identifiable from G and Z.

Interestingly, this result connects the new concept of                                    Ω
                                                                       Ω∗                                     Structural Assumptions
neural counterfactual identification (Def. 4) with estab-
                                                                                              M
lished non-neural results. If a counterfactual quantity is
                                                                                              c2
                                                                                 M
                                                                                 c1                                      G
determined to be neural identifiable, then it is also iden-                 M∗
tifiable from G and Z through other non-neural means,
and vice versa.7 Practically speaking, counterfactual in-
ference can be performed while constrained in the NCM                                                           P M1(y∗ |x∗ ) =
                                                                                                                   c
                                                                       Z(M∗ ) = Z(M
                                                                                  c1 ) = Z(M
                                                                                           c2 )
space, and the obtained results will be faithful to existing                                                     P M2 (y∗ |x∗ )
                                                                                                                   c


symbolic approaches. This broadens the previous results                                                ?
                                                                                        Data
                                                                         (L1 , L2 ) Distributions              (L3 ) Counterfactual
connecting NCMs to classical identification.                                                                            Query


Corollary 1 (Neural Counterfactual Mutilation (Opera-             Figure 3: P (y∗ ) is identifiable from Z
tional ID)). Consider the true SCM M∗ ∈ Ω∗ , causal               and Ω(G) if for any SCM M∗ ∈ Ω∗
diagram G, a set of available distributions Z, and a tar-                              c2 ∈ Ω (top left),
                           ∗                                      and NCMs M      c1 , M
get query Q equal to P M (y∗ | x∗ ). Let M   c ∈ Ω(G) be
                                                                               ∗
                                                                  M1 , M2 , M match in Z (bottom left) and
                                                                  c    c
a G-constrained NCM such that Z(M ) = Z(M∗ ). If Q
                                      c
is identifiable from G and Z, then Q is computable via            G (top right), then the NCMs M
                                                                                               c1 , M
                                                                                                    c2 also
                                                                  match in P (y∗ ) (bottom right).
Eq. 1 from M c.

Corol. 1 states that once identification is established, the counterfactual query can be inferred through
the NCM M  c, as if it were the true SCM M∗ , by directly applying layer 3’s definition to M  c (Def. 1).
                                              ∗
Remarkably, this result holds even if M does not match M         c in either the mechanisms F or the
exogenous dist. P (U), and it only requires some specific properties: G (L3 ) -consistency, matching Z,
and identifiability. Without these properties, inferences performed on M    c would bear no meaningful
information about the ground truth. To understand this subtlety, refer to examples in App. D.
Building on these results, we demonstrate          Algorithm 1: NeuralID – Identifying/estimating counterfactual
through the procedure NeuralID (Alg. 1)            queries with NCMs.
how to decide the identifiability of counter-          Input : query Q = P (y∗ |x∗ ), L2 datasets Z(M∗ ), and
                                                               causal diagram G
factual quantities. The specific optimization                       ∗
                                                       Output : P M (y∗ |x∗ ) if identifiable, FAIL otherwise.
procedure searches explicitly in the space of          c ← NCM(V, G)
                                                   1   M                                                   // from Def. 2
NCMs for two models that respectively min-              ∗
                                                   2 θmin ← arg minθ P
                                                                                 M(θ)
                                                                          (y∗ |x∗ ) s.t. Z(M(θ)) = Z(M∗ )
                                                                                 c
imize and maximize the target query while
                                                                                            c
                                                      ∗
                                                   3 θmax ← arg maxθ P
                                                                       M(θ)
                                                                            (y∗ |x∗ ) s.t. Z(M(θ)) = Z(M∗ )
                                                                       c
maintaining consistency with the provided
                                                                                             c
                                                            c ∗
                                                            M(θ    )                     c ∗
                                                                                         M(θ
                                                   4 if P    min (y∗ |x∗ ) =
                                                                           6 P              max ) (y∗ |x∗ ) then
data distributions in Z. If the two models         5      return FAIL
match in the target query Q, then the effect       6 else
                                                                             ∗
is identifiable, and the value is returned; oth-            return P M(θmin ) (y∗ |x∗ )
                                                                        c
                                                   7                                                // choose min or max
                                                              arbitrarily
erwise, the effect is non-identifiable.
The implementation of how to enforce these consistency constraints in practice is somewhat chal-
lenging. We note two nontrivial details that are abstracted away in the description of Alg. 1. First,
although training to fit a single, observational dataset is straightforward, it is not as clear how to
simultaneously maintain consistency with the multiple datasets in Z. Second, unlike with simpler
interventional queries, it is not clear how to search the parameter space in a way that maximizes or
minimizes a counterfactual query, which may be more involved due to nesting (e.g. P (YZX=0 )) or
evaluating the same variable in multiple worlds (e.g. P (YX=0 , YX=1 )). The details of how to solve
these issues are discussed in Sec. 4.
Interestingly, this approach is qualitatively different than the case of classical, symbolic methods that
avoid operating in the space of SCMs directly. Still, in principle, this alternative approach does not
imply any loss in functionality, as evident from the next result.
Corollary 2 (Soundness and Completeness). Let Ω∗ be the set of all SCMs, M∗ ∈ Ω∗ be the true
SCM inducing causal diagram G, Q = P (y∗ | x∗ ) be a query of interest, and Q         b be the result from
   7
     We say identification from G and Z instead of Ω∗ (G) and Z because existing symbolic approaches (e.g.
do-calculus) directly solve the identification problem on top of the graph instead of the space of SCMs.


                                                       6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


running Alg. 1 with inputs Z(M∗ ) > 0, G, and Q. Then Q is identifiable from G and Z if and only if
Qb is not FAIL. Moreover, if Q                   b = P M∗ (y∗ | x∗ ).
                             b is not FAIL, then Q
In words, the procedure NeuralID is both necessary and sufficient in this very general setting,
implying that for any instances involving any arbitrary diagram, datasets, or queries, the identification
status of the query is always classified correctly by this algorithm.

4    N EURAL C OUNTERFACTUAL E STIMATION
We developed a procedure for identifying counterfactual          Algorithm 2: NCM Counterfactual Sampling
quantities that is both sound and complete under ideal con-           Input :NCM
ditions – e.g., unlimited data, perfect optimization, which is               c(θ) = hU,
                                                                             M           b V, F  b, P (U)i,
                                                                                                        b
encouraging. In this section, we build on these results and                  counterfactual Y∗ , conditional
                                                                             X∗ = x∗ , number of samples m
establish a more practical approach to solving these tasks            Output : m samples from P M (Y∗ |x∗ )
                                                                                                c

under imperfect optimization and finite samples.
                                                                 1 Function M.sample(Y
                                                                            c           ∗ , x∗ , m):
                                                                 2     S←∅
Consider a G-NCM M  c constructed as specified by Def. 2.        3     while |S| < m do
Any counterfactual statement Y∗ = (Y1[x1 ] , Y2[x2 ] , . . . )   4          b ← P (U).sample()
                                                                            u       b
                                                                               if XM (θ)
                                                                                         (b
                                                                                          u) = x∗ then
                                                                                      c
                                                                 5
can be evaluated from an NCM M c for a specific setting of                         ∗
                                                                                    S.add(Y∗M (θ) (b
                                                                                                   u))
                                                                                              c
                                                                  6
Ub =u b by computing the corresponding values of Yi in
                                                                 7        return S;
the mutilated submodel Mcx for each i. That is,

          Y∗M (u) = (Y1[x
                      M           M
                            (u), Y2[x   (u), . . . )       (3)
            c            c           c
                         1]          2]

Then, sampling can be done following the natural approach delineated by Alg. 2. In words, the
distribution P (Y∗ | x∗ ) can be sampled from NCM M    c by (1) sampling instances of P (U),
                                                                                           b (2)
computing their corresponding value for X∗ (via Eq. 3) while rejecting cases that do not match x∗ ,
and (3) returning the corresponding value for Y∗ (via Eq. 3) for the remaining instances.
Following this procedure, a counterfactual P (Y∗ = y∗ | X∗ = x∗ ) can be estimated from the NCM
through a Monte-Carlo approach, instantiating Eq. 4 as follows:
                                              h                                     i
                                            1
                                     Pm           M                  M
                                                Y   (b
                                                     u   ) = y   , X   (b
                                                                        u   ) = x
                                                  c                  c
                                        j=1       ∗    j       ∗     ∗    j       ∗
                   P M (y∗ | x∗ ) ≈                                                   ,       (4)
                     c
                                                      h                   i
                                                j=1 1 X∗ (b
                                              Pm           M
                                                           c
                                                              uj ) = x∗

       uj }m
where {b   j=1 are a set of m samples from P (U).
                                              b
Alg. 3 demonstrates how to solve the challenging optimization task in lines 2 and 3 of Alg. 1.
The first step is to learn parameters such that the distributions induced by the NCM M  c match
the true distributions in Z. While Alg. 1 describes the inputs in the form of L2 -distributions,
                  ∗
Z(M∗ ) = {P M (Vzk )}`k=1 , in most settings, one has the empirical versions of such distributions
                                    ∗
in the form of finite datasets, {PbM (Vzk ) = {vzk ,i }ni=1
                                                         k
                                                            }`k=1 .
One way to train M    c to match M∗ in the distribution P (Vz ) is to compare the distribution of
                                                                 k
                     ∗
                 M                                                  c, PbM
data points in Pb (Vzk ) with the distribution of samples from M           (Vzk ). The two empirical
                                                                         c

distributions can be compared using a divergence function DP , which returns a smaller value when
                                                                                         ∗
the two distributions are “similar”. The goal is then to minimize DP (PbM (Vzk ), PbM (Vzk )) for
                                                                           c

each k ∈ {1, . . . , `}. In this work, a generative adversarial approach (Goodfellow et al., 2014) is
taken to train the NCM, and DP is computed using a discriminator network.
In addition to fitting the datasets, the second challenge of Alg. 1 is to simultaneously maxi-
mize or minimize the query of interest Q = P (y∗ | x∗ ). This can be done by first comput-
ing samples of P (Y∗ | x∗ ) from M    c via Alg. 2, denoted Q,
                                                             b and then minimizing (or maxi-
mizing) the “distance” between Q and Q. Essentially, samples from Y∗ are penalized based
                                          b
on how similar they are to the correct values y∗ . For example, if the query to maximize is
P (Y = 1), and a value of 0.6 is sampled for Y from M   c, then the goal could be to minimize
squared error, (1 − 0.6)2 . In general, a distance metric DQ is used to compute the distance
between Q b and Q, and we use log loss for DQ as our experiments involve binary variables.

                                                       7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Figure 4: Experimental results on deciding identifiability on counterfactual queries with NCMs.
GAN-NCM (green) is compared with MLE-NCM (orange) for settings with d = 1. GAN-NCM
performance is also shown for d = 16 (dashed green). Blue (resp. yellow) backgrounds on plots
correspond to a ground truth of ID (resp. non-ID). ID cases are numbered for reference in later plots.
For this reason, an NCM trained with this            Algorithm 3: Training Model
approach will be referred as a GAN-NCM. 8                 Input : Data {P bM∗ (Vz ) = {vz ,i }nk }` , query
                                                                                     k        k    i=1 k=1
More details about architecture and hyperpa-                     Q = P (y∗ |x∗ ), causal diagram G, number of Monte
                                                                 Carlo samples m, regularization constant λ, learning
rameters used throughout this work can be                        rate η, training epochs T
found in Appendix B.                                 1  c ← NCM(V, G)
                                                        M                                       // from Def. 2
                                                     2  Initialize parameters θmin and θmax
Putting DP and
               DQ together, we can write
                                       that          3  for t ← 1 to T do
                       M∗         `                  4        Lmin ← 0, Lmax ← 0
the objective L M , {P
                 c   b    (Vz )}        is
                                        k   k=1      5        for k ← 1 to ` do
                                                                    // Sample via Alg. 2
    `
                                 !
                                                      6             Pbmin (Vz ) ← M  c(θmin ).sample(Vz , nk )
    X                      ∗                                                  k                        k
           DP PbzMk , PbzM           ± λDQ Q,
                                            b Q ,
                 c
                                                      7             Pbmax (Vz ) ← M  c(θmax ).sample(Vz , nk )
                         k                                                    k                              k
    k=1                                               8             Lmin ←
                                                                                                  bM∗

                                            (5)                      Lmin + DP         P
                                                                                       bmin (Vz ), P
                                                                                               k
                                                                                                        (Vzk )
where λ is initially set to a high value, and         9             Lmax ←
                                                                                                 bM∗ (Vz )

decreases during training. Optimization may                          Lmax + DP      Pbmax (Vz ), P
                                                                                             k          k
be done using gradient descent. After training,               b min ← M
                                                     10       Q       c(θmin ).sample(Y∗ , m)
the two values of Q induced by M c(θmin ) and
                                                     11       b max ← M
                                                              Q       c(θmax ).sample(Y∗ , m)
M (θmax ) are compared with a hypothesis test-
c                                                             // L from Eq. 5

ing procedure to decide identifiability. Eq. 4       12       Lmin ← Lmin − λDQ Q  b min , Q

is used as Q’s estimate, whenever identifiable.      13       Lmax ← Lmax + λDQ Q   b max , Q
                                                     14        θmin ← θmin − η∇Lmin
                                                     15        θmax ← θmax − η∇Lmax
5       E XPERIMENTAL E VALUATION
We first evaluate the NCM’s ability to identify counterfactual distributions through Alg. 3. 9 Each
setting consists of a target query (Q), a causal diagram (G), and a set of input distributions (Z). In
total, we test 32 variations. Specifically, we evaluate the identifiability of four queries Q: (1) Average
Treatment Effect (ATE), (2) Effect of Treatment on the Treated (ETT) (Pearl, 2000, Eq. 8.18), (3)
Natural Direct Effect (NDE) (Pearl, 2001, Eq. 6), and (4) Counterfactual Direct Effect (CtfDE)
(Zhang & Bareinboim, 2018, Eq. 3); each expression is shown on the top of Fig. 4. The four
graphs used are shown on the figure’s left side, and represent general structures found throughout the
mediation and fairness literature (Pearl, 2001; Zhang & Bareinboim, 2018). The variable X encodes
the treatment/decision, Y the outcome, Z observed features, and W mediating variables. Lastly, we
consider a setting in which only the observational data is available (Z = {P (V)}) and another in
which additional experimental data on X is available (Z = {P (V), P (Vx )}). In the experiments
shown, all variables are 1-dimensional binary variables except Z, whose dimensionality d is adjusted
    8
        Other choices of DP include KL divergence or Maximum Mean Discrepancy (MMD) (Gretton et al., 2012).
    9
        The code is publicly available at: https://github.com/CausalAILab/NCMCounterfactuals


                                                          8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


in experiments. The background color of each setting indicates that the query Q is identifiable (blue)
or is not identifiable (yellow) from the inputted G and Z. Given the sheer volume of variations, we
summarize the experiments below and provide further discussion and details in Appendix B.
We implement two approaches to ground the discussion around
NCMs, one based on GANs (GAN-NCM), and another based on
maximum likelihood (MLE-NCM). The former was discussed in the
previous section and the latter is quite natural in statistical settings.
The experiments (Fig. 4) show that GAN-NCM has on average
higher accuracy. The MLE-NCM performs slightly better in ID
cases (blue), but the performance drops significantly for non-ID
cases (yellow), suggesting it may be biased in returning ID for all Figure 5: Results comparing
cases. The GAN-NCM is also shown to achieve decent performance run times of 100 epochs of
in 16-d, where the MLE-NCM fails to work. We plot the run time training between GAN-NCM
of these two approaches in Fig. 5, which shows that the MLE-NCM (green) and MLE-NCM (or-
scales poorly compared to the GAN-NCM; this pattern is observed ange) in the first graph of
in all settings. Intuitively, this is not surprising since the MLE-NCM Fig. 4 as the dimensionality d
explicitly computes a likelihood for every value in every variable of Z scales higher.
domain, the size of which grows exponentially w.r.t. the dimensionality (d), while the GAN-NCM
avoids this by implicitly fitting distributions through P (U)  b and Fb and directly outputting samples.
For the identifiable cases (blue background), the tar-
get Q is estimated through Eq. 4 after training. Re-
sults are shown in Fig. 6. The MLE-NCM serves as a
benchmark for 1-dimensional cases since, intuitively,
the data distributions can be learned more accurately
when modeled explicitly. Still, even when d = 1,
the GAN-NCM achieves competitive results in most
settings and consistently achieves an error under 0.05
with more samples. The GAN-NCM is able to main-
tain this consistency even at d = 16, demonstrating
its robustness scaling to higher dimensions.
After all, the GAN-NCM is shown to be effective
at identifying and estimating counterfactual distri- Figure 6: Results on estimating identifiable
butions even in high dimensions. As expected, the cases from Fig. 4 (corresponding numbers
MLE-NCM may achieve lower error in some 1-d set- shown on the right). Mean Absolute Error
tings, but the GAN-NCM may be preferred for scala- (MAE) is plotted (with 95% confidence) for
bility. Moreover, an incorrect ID conclusion in a non- each setting for varying sample sizes. Results
ID case may be dangerous for downstream decision- are shown for GAN-NCM (solid green) and
making as the resulting estimation will likely be in- MLE-NCM (orange) with d = 1 and also
correct or misleading. The GAN-NCM is evidently GAN-NCM with d = 16 (dashed green).
more robust in such non-ID cases while still performing competitively in ID cases. Further experi-
ments and discussions are provided in App. B.


6    C ONCLUSIONS

We developed in this work a neural approach to the problems of counterfactual identification and
estimation using neural causal models (NCMs). Specifically, we first showed that with the graphical
inductive bias, NCMs are capable of encoding counterfactual (L3 ) constraints and are still expressive
so as to represent any generating SCM (Thms. 1, 2). We then showed that NCMs have the ability
of solving any counterfactual identification instance (Thm. 3, Corol 1). Given these theoretical
properties, we introduced a sound and complete algorithm (Alg. 1, Corol. 2) for identifying and
estimating counterfactuals in general non-Markovian settings given arbitrary datasets from L1 and
L2 . We developed an approach based on GANs to implement this algorithm in practice (Alg. 3) and
empirically demonstrated its ability to scale inferences. From a neural perspective, counterfactual
reasoning under a causal inductive bias allows for deep models to be trained with an improved
understanding of interpretability and generalizability. From a causal perspective, neural nets can now
provide tools to solve counterfactual inference problems previously only understood in theory.


                                                   9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
This research was supported in part by the NSF, ONR, AFOSR, DoE, Amazon, JP Morgan, and The
Alfred P. Sloan Foundation.

R EFERENCES
Martin Arjovsky, Soumith Chintala, and Léon Bottou. Wasserstein generative adversarial networks.
 In International conference on machine learning, pp. 214–223. PMLR, 2017.
C Avin, Ilya Shpitser, and Judea Pearl. Identifiability of Path-Specific Effects. In Proceedings of the
  Nineteenth International Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence, pp. 357–363, Edinburgh, UK,
  2005. Morgan-Kaufmann Publishers.
Jimmy Lei Ba, Jamie Ryan Kiros, and Geoffrey E Hinton. Layer normalization. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:1607.06450, 2016.
Elias Bareinboim and Judea Pearl. Causal Inference by Surrogate Experiments: z-Identifiability.
  In Nando de Freitas Murphy and Kevin (eds.), Proceedings of the Twenty-Eighth Conference on
  Uncertainty in Artificial Intelligence, pp. 113–120. AUAI Press, 2012.
Elias Bareinboim and Judea Pearl. Causal inference and the data-fusion problem. Proceedings of the
  National Academy of Sciences, 113(27):7345–7352, 2016.
Elias Bareinboim, Juan D. Correa, Duligur Ibeling, and Thomas Icard. On pearl’s hierarchy and the
  foundations of causal inference. In Probabilistic and Causal Inference: The Works of Judea Pearl,
  pp. 507–556. Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 1st edition, 2022.
Léon Bottou, Jonas Peters, Joaquin Quiñonero-Candela, Denis X Charles, D Max Chickering, Elon
  Portugaly, Dipankar Ray, Patrice Simard, and Ed Snelson. Counterfactual reasoning and learning
  systems: The example of computational advertising. Journal of Machine Learning Research, 14
  (11), 2013.
Juan Correa, Sanghack Lee, and Elias Bareinboim. Nested counterfactual identification from arbitrary
  surrogate experiments. In M. Ranzato, A. Beygelzimer, Y. Dauphin, P.S. Liang, and J. Wortman
  Vaughan (eds.), Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 34, pp. 6856–6867.
  Curran Associates, Inc., 2021.
Xin Du, Lei Sun, Wouter Duivesteijn, Alexander Nikolaev, and Mykola Pechenizkiy. Adversarial
  balancing-based representation learning for causal effect inference with observational data, 2020.
William Falcon and Kyunghyun Cho. A framework for contrastive self-supervised learning and
 designing a new approach. arXiv preprint arXiv:2009.00104, 2020.
Isabel R Fulcher, Ilya Shpitser, Stella Marealle, and Eric J Tchetgen Tchetgen. Robust inference
   on population indirect causal effects: the generalized front door criterion. Journal of the Royal
   Statistical Society: Series B (Statistical Methodology), 2019.
David Galles and Judea Pearl. An axiomatic characterization of causal counterfactuals. Foundation
  of Science, 3(1):151–182, 1998.
Mathieu Germain, Karol Gregor, Iain Murray, and Hugo Larochelle. Made: Masked autoencoder
 for distribution estimation. In Francis Bach and David Blei (eds.), Proceedings of the 32nd
 International Conference on Machine Learning, volume 37 of Proceedings of Machine Learning
 Research, pp. 881–889, Lille, France, 07–09 Jul 2015. PMLR.
Xavier Glorot and Yoshua Bengio. Understanding the difficulty of training deep feedforward neural
  networks. In Proceedings of the thirteenth international conference on artificial intelligence and
  statistics, pp. 249–256. JMLR Workshop and Conference Proceedings, 2010.
Ian Goodfellow, Jean Pouget-Abadie, Mehdi Mirza, Bing Xu, David Warde-Farley, Sherjil Ozair,
  Aaron Courville, and Yoshua Bengio. Generative adversarial nets. In Z. Ghahramani, M. Welling,
  C. Cortes, N. Lawrence, and K. Q. Weinberger (eds.), Advances in Neural Information Processing
  Systems, volume 27, pp. 2672–2680. Curran Associates, Inc., 2014.


                                                 10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Alex Graves and Navdeep Jaitly. Towards end-to-end speech recognition with recurrent neural
  networks. In Eric P. Xing and Tony Jebara (eds.), Proceedings of the 31st International Conference
  on Machine Learning, volume 32 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pp. 1764–1772,
  Bejing, China, 22–24 Jun 2014. PMLR.
Arthur Gretton, Karsten M. Borgwardt, Malte J. Rasch, Bernhard Schölkopf, and Alexander Smola.
  A kernel two-sample test. Journal of Machine Learning Research, 13(25):723–773, 2012.
Ishaan Gulrajani, Faruk Ahmed, Martin Arjovsky, Vincent Dumoulin, and Aaron C Courville.
   Improved training of wasserstein gans. Advances in neural information processing systems, 30,
   2017.
E.J. Gumbel. Statistical Theory of Extreme Values and Some Practical Applications: A Series of
  Lectures. Applied mathematics series. U.S. Government Printing Office, 1954.
Ruocheng Guo, Lu Cheng, Jundong Li, P. Richard Hahn, and Huan Liu. A survey of learning
  causality with data. ACM Computing Surveys, 53(4):1–37, Sep 2020. ISSN 1557-7341. doi:
 10.1145/3397269.
J J Heckman. Randomization and Social Policy Evaluation. In C Manski and I Garfinkle (eds.),
   Evaluations: Welfare and Training Programs, pp. 201–230. Harvard University Press, Cambridge,
   MA, 1992.
Daniel G Horvitz and Donovan J Thompson. A generalization of sampling without replacement from
  a finite universe. Journal of the American statistical Association, 47(260):663–685, 1952.
Yimin Huang and Marco Valtorta. Pearl’s calculus of interventions is complete. In Proceedings of
  the Twenty-Second Conference on Uncertainty in Artificial Intelligence (UAI2006), 2006.
Duligur Ibeling and Thomas Icard. Probabilistic reasoning across the causal hierarchy. In Proceedings
  of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, volume 34, pp. 10170–10177, 2020.
A. Jaber, J. Zhang, and E. Bareinboim. Causal identification under Markov equivalence. In Proceed-
  ings of the 34th Conference on Uncertainty in Artificial Intelligence, pp. 978–987. AUAI Press,
  Aug 2018.
A. Jaber, J. Zhang, and E. Bareinboim. Identification of conditional causal effects under Markov
  equivalence. In H. Wallach, H. Larochelle, A. Beygelzimer, F. d’Alché Buc, E. Fox, and R. Gar-
  nett (eds.), Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 32, pp. 11512–11520. Curran
  Associates, Inc., 2019.
A. Jaber, M. Kocaoglu, K. Shanmugam, and E. Bareinboim. Causal discovery from soft interventions
  with unknown targets: Characterization and learning. In H. Larochelle, M. Ranzato, R. Hadsell,
  M. F. Balcan, and H. Lin (eds.), Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 33,
  pp. 9551–9561, Vancouver, Canada, Jun 2020. Curran Associates, Inc.
A. Jaber, A. Ribeiro, J. Zhang, and E. Bareinboim. Causal identification under markov equivalence:
  Calculus, algorithm, and completeness. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems.
  Curran Associates, Inc., 2022, forthcoming.
Fredrik D. Johansson, Uri Shalit, and David Sontag. Learning representations for counterfactual
  inference. In Proceedings of the 33rd International Conference on International Conference on
  Machine Learning - Volume 48, ICML’16, pp. 3020–3029. JMLR.org, 2016.
Y. Jung, J. Tian, and E. Bareinboim. Learning causal effects via weighted empirical risk minimization.
   In H. Larochelle, M. Ranzato, R. Hadsell, M. F. Balcan, and H. Lin (eds.), Advances in Neural
   Information Processing Systems, volume 33, pp. 12697–12709, Vancouver, Canada, Jun 2020.
   Curran Associates, Inc.
Y. Jung, J. Tian, and E. Bareinboim. Estimating identifiable causal effects through double machine
   learning. In Proceedings of the 35th AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, number R-69,
  Vancouver, Canada, Feb 2021. AAAI Press.


                                                 11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Nathan Kallus. DeepMatch: Balancing deep covariate representations for causal inference using
  adversarial training. In Hal Daumé III and Aarti Singh (eds.), Proceedings of the 37th International
  Conference on Machine Learning, volume 119 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pp.
  5067–5077. PMLR, 13–18 Jul 2020.

Nathan Kallus and Masatoshi Uehara. Double reinforcement learning for efficient off-policy eval-
  uation in markov decision processes. In Proceedings of the 38th International Conference on
 Machine Learning, 2020.

Andrej Karpathy. pytorch-made.          https://github.com/karpathy/pytorch-made
  [Source Code], 2018.

Edward H Kennedy. Nonparametric causal effects based on incremental propensity score interventions.
  Journal of the American Statistical Association, 114(526):645–656, 2019.

Diederik P. Kingma and Jimmy Ba. Adam: A method for stochastic optimization. In Yoshua Bengio
  and Yann LeCun (eds.), 3rd International Conference on Learning Representations, ICLR 2015,
  San Diego, CA, USA, May 7-9, 2015, Conference Track Proceedings, 2015.

Murat Kocaoglu, Karthikeyan Shanmugam, and Elias Bareinboim. Experimental design for learning
 causal graphs with latent variablesjaber. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems
 30, pp. 7018–7028. Curran Associates, Inc., 2017.

Murat Kocaoglu, Christopher Snyder, Alexandros G. Dimakis, and Sriram Vishwanath. CausalGAN:
 Learning causal implicit generative models with adversarial training. In International Conference
 on Learning Representations, 2018.

Alex Krizhevsky, Ilya Sutskever, and Geoffrey E Hinton. Imagenet classification with deep con-
  volutional neural networks. In F. Pereira, C. J. C. Burges, L. Bottou, and K. Q. Weinberger
  (eds.), Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 25, pp. 1097–1105. Curran
  Associates, Inc., 2012.

Sanghack Lee and Elias Bareinboim. Causal effect identifiability under partial-observability. In
  Proceedings of the 37th International Conference on Machine Learning, volume 119. PMLR,
  2020.

Sanghack Lee and Elias Bareinboim. Causal identification with matrix equations. In Marc’Aurelio
  Ranzato, Alina Beygelzimer, Yann N. Dauphin, Percy Liang, and Jennifer Wortman Vaughan (eds.),
  Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 34: Annual Conference on Neural Information
  Processing Systems 2021, NeurIPS 2021, December 6-14, 2021, virtual, pp. 9468–9479, 2021.

Sanghack Lee, Juan D Correa, and Elias Bareinboim. General Identifiability with Arbitrary Surrogate
  Experiments. In Proceedings of the Thirty-Fifth Conference Annual Conference on Uncertainty in
  Artificial Intelligence, Corvallis, OR, 2019. AUAI Press.

Sheng Li and Yun Fu. Matching on balanced nonlinear representations for treatment effects estimation.
  In I. Guyon, U. V. Luxburg, S. Bengio, H. Wallach, R. Fergus, S. Vishwanathan, and R. Garnett
  (eds.), Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 30, pp. 929–939. Curran
  Associates, Inc., 2017.

Christos Louizos, Uri Shalit, Joris Mooij, David Sontag, Richard Zemel, and Max Welling. Causal
  effect inference with deep latent-variable models. In Proceedings of the 31st International
  Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems, pp. 6449–6459, Red Hook, NY, USA,
  2017. Curran Associates Inc.

Volodymyr Mnih, Koray Kavukcuoglu, David Silver, Alex Graves, Ioannis Antonoglou, Daan
  Wierstra, and Martin Riedmiller. Playing atari with deep reinforcement learning. In NIPS Deep
  Learning Workshop. 2013.

Vinod Nair and Geoffrey E Hinton. Rectified linear units improve restricted boltzmann machines. In
  Icml, 2010.


                                                 12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Adam Paszke, Sam Gross, Soumith Chintala, Gregory Chanan, Edward Yang, Zachary DeVito,
  Zeming Lin, Alban Desmaison, Luca Antiga, and Adam Lerer. Automatic differentiation in
  pytorch. 2017.

Nick Pawlowski, Daniel Coelho de Castro, and Ben Glocker. Deep structural causal models for
  tractable counterfactual inference. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 33:
  857–869, 2020.

Judea Pearl. Probabilistic Reasoning in Intelligent Systems. Morgan Kaufmann, San Mateo, CA,
  1988.

Judea Pearl. Causal diagrams for empirical research. Biometrika, 82(4):669–688, 1995.

Judea Pearl. Causality: Models, Reasoning, and Inference. Cambridge University Press, New York,
  NY, USA, 2nd edition, 2000.

Judea Pearl. Direct and indirect effects. In Proceedings of the Seventeenth Conference on Uncertainty
  in Artificial Intelligence, UAI’01, pp. 411–420, San Francisco, CA, USA, 2001. Morgan Kaufmann
  Publishers Inc. ISBN 1558608001.

Judea Pearl and Dana Mackenzie. The Book of Why. Basic Books, New York, 2018.

Jonas Peters, Dominik Janzing, and Bernhard Schlkopf. Elements of Causal Inference: Foundations
  and Learning Algorithms. The MIT Press, 2017.

Donald B Rubin. {B}ayesian inference for causal effects: The role of randomization. Annals of
 Statistics, 7(1):34–58, 1978.

Pablo Sanchez-Martin, Miriam Rateike, and Isabel Valera. Vaca: Design of variational graph
  autoencoders for interventional and counterfactual queries. arXiv preprint arXiv:2110.14690,
  2021.

Uri Shalit, Fredrik D. Johansson, and David Sontag. Estimating individual treatment effect: general-
  ization bounds and algorithms. In Doina Precup and Yee Whye Teh (eds.), Proceedings of the 34th
  International Conference on Machine Learning, volume 70 of Proceedings of Machine Learning
  Research, pp. 3076–3085, International Convention Centre, Sydney, Australia, 06–11 Aug 2017.
  PMLR.

Claudia Shi, David M. Blei, and Victor Veitch. Adapting neural networks for the estimation of
  treatment effects. In Hanna M. Wallach, Hugo Larochelle, Alina Beygelzimer, Florence d’Alché-
  Buc, Emily B. Fox, and Roman Garnett (eds.), Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems
  32: Annual Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems 2019, NeurIPS 2019, December
  8-14, 2019, Vancouver, BC, Canada, pp. 2503–2513, 2019.

Ilya Shpitser and Judea Pearl. Identification of Joint Interventional Distributions in Recursive semi-
   Markovian Causal Models. In Proceedings of the Twenty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial
   Intelligence, volume 2, pp. 1219–1226, 2006.

Ilya Shpitser and Judea Pearl. What Counterfactuals Can Be Tested. In Proceedings of the Twenty-
   Third Conference on Uncertainty in Artificial Intelligence, pp. 352–359. AUAI Press, Vancouver,
   BC, Canada, 2007.

Ilya Shpitser and Judea Pearl. Effects of Treatment on the Treated: Identification and Generalization.
   In Proceedings of the Twenty-Fifth Conference on Uncertainty in Artificial Intelligence, Montreal,
   Quebec, 2009. AUAI Press.

Ilya Shpitser and Eli Sherman. Identification of Personalized Effects Associated With Causal
   Pathways. In Proceedings of the 34th Conference on Uncertainty in Artificial Intelligence, pp.
   530–539, 2018.

P Spirtes, C N Glymour, and R Scheines. Causation, Prediction, and Search. MIT Press, Cambridge,
  MA, 2nd edition, 2000.


                                                 13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Jin Tian and Judea Pearl. A General Identification Condition for Causal Effects. In Proceedings of
   the Eighteenth National Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI 2002), pp. 567–573, Menlo
   Park, CA, 2002. AAAI Press/The MIT Press.
Cédric Villani. Optimal transport: old and new, volume 338. Springer, 2009.
Sam Witty, David Jensen, and Vikash Mansinghka. A simulation-based test of identifiability for
  bayesian causal inference. arXiv preprint arXiv:2102.11761, 2021.
Kevin Xia, Kai-Zhan Lee, Yoshua Bengio, and Elias Bareinboim. The causal-neural connection:
  Expressiveness, learnability, and inference. In M. Ranzato, A. Beygelzimer, Y. Dauphin, P.S. Liang,
  and J. Wortman Vaughan (eds.), Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 34,
  pp. 10823–10836. Curran Associates, Inc., 2021.
Kevin Xia, Yushu Pan, and Elias Bareinboim. Neural Causal Models for Counterfactual Identification
  and Estimation. Technical Report R-87, Columbia University, Department of Computer Science,
  New York, 2022. URL https://causalai.net/r87.pdf.
Liuyi Yao, Sheng Li, Yaliang Li, Mengdi Huai, Jing Gao, and Aidong Zhang. Representation learning
  for treatment effect estimation from observational data. In S. Bengio, H. Wallach, H. Larochelle,
  K. Grauman, N. Cesa-Bianchi, and R. Garnett (eds.), Advances in Neural Information Processing
  Systems, volume 31, pp. 2633–2643. Curran Associates, Inc., 2018.
Jinsung Yoon, James Jordon, and Mihaela van der Schaar. GANITE: Estimation of individualized
   treatment effects using generative adversarial nets. In International Conference on Learning
   Representations, 2018.
Matej Zecevic, Devendra Singh Dhami, Petar Velickovic, and Kristian Kersting. Relating graph
 neural networks to structural causal models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2109.04173, 2021.
J. Zhang and E. Bareinboim. Fairness in decision-making–the causal explanation formula. In
   Proceedings of the 32nd AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, pp. 2037–2045, 2018.
Junzhe Zhang, Tian Jin, and Elias Bareinboim. Partial counterfactual identification from observational
  and experimental data. In Proceedings of the 39th International Conference on Machine Learning
  (ICML-22), 2022.


                                                 14
