Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


FARE: P ROVABLY FAIR R EPRESENTATION L EARNING
 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                             A BSTRACT
         Fair representation learning (FRL) is a popular class of methods aiming to produce
         fair classifiers via data preprocessing. However, recent work has shown that prior
         methods achieve worse accuracy-fairness tradeoffs than originally suggested by
         their results. This dictates the need for FRL methods that provide provable upper
         bounds on unfairness of any downstream classifier, a challenge yet unsolved. In
         this work we address this challenge and propose Fairness with Restricted Encoders
         (FARE), the first FRL method with provable fairness guarantees. Our key in-
         sight is that restricting the representation space of the encoder enables us to derive
         suitable fairness guarantees, while allowing empirical accuracy-fairness tradeoffs
         comparable to prior work. FARE instantiates this idea with a tree-based encoder,
         a choice motivated by inherent advantages of decision trees when applied in our
         setting. Crucially, we develop and apply a practical statistical procedure that com-
         putes a high-confidence upper bound on the unfairness of any downstream clas-
         sifier. In our experimental evaluation on several datasets and settings we demon-
         strate that FARE produces tight upper bounds, often comparable with empirical
         results of prior methods, which establishes the practical value of our approach.


1   I NTRODUCTION
It has been repeatedly shown that machine learning systems deployed in real-world applications
propagate training data biases, producing discriminatory predictions (Buolamwini & Gebru, 2018;
Corbett-Davies et al., 2017; Kleinberg et al., 2017; Tatman & Kasten, 2017). This is especially con-
cerning in decision-making applications on data that represents humans (e.g., financial or medical),
and can lead to unfavorable treatment that negatively affects certain subgroups of the population
(Brennan et al., 2009; Khandani et al., 2010; Barocas & Selbst, 2016). For instance, a loan predic-
tion system deployed by a financial institution might recommend loan rejection based on a sensitive
attribute of a client, such as race or gender. These observations have forced regulators into action,
leading to directives (FTC, 2021; EU, 2021) which demand parties aiming to deploy such systems
to ensure fairness (Dwork et al., 2012) of their predictions. Mitigation of unfairness has become
a key concern for organizations, with the highest increase in perceived relevance over the previous
year, out of all potential risks of artificial intelligence (Chui et al., 2021; Benaich & Hogarth, 2021).

Fair representation learning A promising approach that attempts to address this issue is fair
representation learning (FRL) (Zemel et al., 2013; Moyer et al., 2018; Madras et al., 2018; Gupta
et al., 2021; Kim et al., 2022; Shui et al., 2022; Balunović et al., 2022)—a long line of work that
preprocesses the data using an encoder f , transforming each datapoint x ∈ X into a debiased rep-
resentation z. The key promise of FRL is that these debiased representations can be given to other
parties, who want to solve a prediction task without being aware of fairness (or potentially even
being fine with discriminating), while ensuring that any downstream classifier they train on these
representations has favorable fairness. However, recent work (Xu et al., 2020; Song & Shmatikov,
2020; Gupta et al., 2021) has demonstrated that for some FRL methods it is possible to train sig-
nificantly more unfair classifiers than originally claimed. This illuminates a major drawback of all
existing work—their claim about fairness of the downstream classifiers holds only for the models
they considered during the evaluation, and does not guarantee favorable fairness of other down-
stream classifiers trained on z. This is insufficient for critical applications where fairness must be
guaranteed or is enforced by regulations, leading to our key question:

 Can we create an FRL method that provably bounds the unfairness of any downstream classifier?


                                                   1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


      Input dataset                                                                         Representations

                                      Restricted encoder


Figure 1: Overview of our provably fair representation learning method, FARE. The input dataset is
transformed into fair representations using a restricted encoder. Our method can compute a provable
upper bound T on unfairness of any classifier g ∈ G trained on these representations.


The most prominent prior attempt to tackle this question, and the work most closely related to ours,
is FNF (Balunović et al., 2022); we discuss other related work in Section 2. Assuming two groups
s = 0 and s = 1 based on the sensitive attribute s, FNF shows that knowing the input distribution for
each group can lead to an upper bound on unfairness of any downstream classifier. While this work is
an important step towards provable fairness, the required assumption is unrealistic for most machine
learning settings, and represents an obstacle to applying the approach in practice. Thus, the original
problem of creating FRL methods that provide fairness guarantees remains largely unsolved.

This work: provably fair representation learning We propose FARE (Fairness with Restricted
Encoders, Fig. 1)—the first FRL method that offers provable upper bounds on the unfairness of any
downstream classifier g trained on its representations, without unrealistic prior assumptions. Our key
insight is that using an encoder with restricted representations, i.e., limiting possible representations
to a finite set {z1 , . . . , zk }, allows us to derive a practical statistical procedure that computes a high-
confidence upper bound on the unfairness of any g, detailed in Section 4. FARE instantiates this idea
with a suitable encoder based on fair decision trees (see Section 5), leading to a practical end-to-end
FRL method which produces debiased representations augmented with strong fairness guarantees.
More concretely, FARE takes as input the set of samples {x(1) , . . . , x(n) } from the input distribution
X (left of Fig. 1), and partitions the input space into k cells (middle plane, k = 3 in this example)
using the decision tree encoder. Finally, all samples from the same cell i are transformed into the
same representation zi (right). As usual in FRL, training a downstream classifier on representations
leads to lower empirical unfairness, while slightly sacrificing accuracy on the prediction task.
However, the main advantage of FARE comes from the fact that using a restricted set of repre-
sentations allows us to, using the given samples, estimate the distribution of two sensitive groups
in each cell, i.e., compute an empirical estimate of the conditional probabilities P (s = 0|zi ) and
P (s = 1|zi ) (solid color orange bars) for all zi . Further, we can use confidence intervals to obtain
upper bounds on these values that hold with high probability (transparent bars). As noted above, this
in turn leads to the key feature of our method: a tight upper bound T on the unfairness of any g ∈ G,
where G is the set of all downstream classifiers that can be trained on the resulting representations.
As we later elaborate on, increasing the number of samples n makes the bounds tighter. Given the
current trend of rapidly growing datasets, this further illustrates the practical value of FARE.
In our experimental evaluation in Section 6 we empirically demonstrate that on real datasets FARE
produces tight upper bounds, i.e., the unfairness of any downstream classifier trained on FARE
representations is tightly upper-bounded, which was not possible for any of the previously proposed
FRL methods. Moreover, these downstream classifiers are able to achieve comparable empirical
accuracy-fairness tradeoffs to methods from prior work. We believe this work represents a major
step towards solving the important problem of preventing discriminatory machine learning models.


                                                           2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Main contributions The key contributions of our work are:

      • A practical statistical procedure that, for restricted encoders, upper-bounds the unfairness
        of any downstream classifier trained on their representations (Section 4).
      • An end-to-end FRL method FARE, that instantiates this approach with a fair decision tree
        encoder (Section 5), and applies the said statistical procedure to augment the representa-
        tions with a tight provable upper bound on unfairness of any downstream classifier.
      • An extensive experimental evaluation in several settings, demonstrating favorable empirical
        fairness results, as well as tight upper bounds on unfairness (which were out of reach for
        prior work), often comparable to empirical results of existing FRL methods (Section 6).

2   R ELATED W ORK
We discuss related work on FRL, prior attempts to obtain fairness guarantees, and fair decision trees.

FRL for group fairness Following Zemel et al. (2013) which originally introduced FRL, a
plethora of different methods have been proposed based on optimization (Calmon et al., 2017; Shui
et al., 2022), adversarial training (Edwards & Storkey, 2016; Xie et al., 2017; Madras et al., 2018;
Song et al., 2019; Feng et al., 2019; Roy & Boddeti, 2019; Jaiswal et al., 2020; Kairouz et al., 2022;
Kim et al., 2022), variational approaches (Louizos et al., 2016; Moyer et al., 2018; Oh et al., 2022;
Liu et al., 2022), disentanglement (Sarhan et al., 2020), mutual information (Gupta et al., 2021;
Gitiaux & Rangwala, 2022), and normalizing flows (Balunović et al., 2022; Cerrato et al., 2022).
Notably, no prior method restricts representations as defined in Section 4, which is a key step in our
work. While Zemel et al. (2013) map data to a set of prototypes, this mapping is probabilistic, and
thus fundamentally incompatible with our bounding procedure (see Section 4 for further details).

Towards fairness guarantees The key issue is that most of these methods produce representations
that have no provable guarantees of fairness, meaning a model trained on their representations could
have arbitrarily bad fairness. In fact, prior work (Elazar & Goldberg, 2018; Xu et al., 2020; Gupta
et al., 2021) has shown that methods based on adversarial training often significantly overestimate
the fairness of their representations. Some of these works (McNamara et al., 2017; Zhao et al., 2020;
Gupta et al., 2021; Shen et al., 2021; Kairouz et al., 2022) propose theoretically-principled FRL, but
do not provide provable fairness guarantees with finite samples (we discuss the difference in Ap-
pendix E). Closest to our work is FNF (Balunović et al., 2022) that can compute high-confidence
bounds, but critically, assumes knowledge of the input probability distribution, which is rarely the
case in practice. Our work makes no such assumption, which makes it significantly more practical.

Provable fairness in other settings Numerous related works on provable fairness provide a dif-
ferent kind of guarantee or assume a different setting than ours. First, several FRL methods have
proposed approaches for learning individually fair representations (Lahoti et al., 2019; Ruoss et al.,
2020; Peychev et al., 2021), a different notion of fairness than group fairness which we focus on.
Prior work has also examined provable fairness guarantees in various problem settings such as rank-
ing (Konstantinov & Lampert, 2021), distribution shifting (Kang et al., 2022; Jin et al., 2022), fair
classification with in-processing (Feldman et al., 2015; Donini et al., 2018; Celis et al., 2019), indi-
vidually fair classification with post-processing (Petersen et al., 2021), and fair meta-learning (Oneto
et al., 2020). These are all different from our setting, which is FRL for group fairness.

Fair decision trees The line of work focusing on adapting decision trees to fairness concerns
includes a wide range of methods which differ mainly in the branching criterion. Common choices
include variations of Gini impurity (Kamiran et al., 2010; Raff et al., 2018; Zhang & Ntoutsi, 2019),
mixed-integer programming (Aghaei et al., 2019; Wang et al., 2022) or AUC (Barata & Veenman,
2021), while some apply adversarial training (Grari et al., 2020; Ranzato et al., 2021). Further,
some works operate in a different setting such as online learning (Zhang & Ntoutsi, 2019) or post-
processing (Abebe et al., 2022). The only works in this area that offer provable fairness guarantees
are Ranzato et al. (2021), which certifies individual fairness for post-processing, and Meyer et al.
(2021), which certifies that predictions will not be affected by data changes. This fundamentally
differs from our FRL setting where the goal is to certify fairness of any downstream classifier.


                                                   3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


3    P RELIMINARIES
We now set up the notation and provide the background necessary to understand our contributions.

Fair representation learning Assume data (x, s) ∈ Rd × {0, 1} from a joint probability distribu-
tion X , where each datapoint belongs to a group with respect to a sensitive attribute s. While in this
work we focus on the case of binary s, our results can be directly extended to other settings. Further,
we focus on binary classification, i.e., given a label y ∈ {0, 1} associated with each datapoint, the
goal is to build a model g : Rd → {0, 1} that predicts y from x. Besides maximizing accuracy
of g, we aim to maximize its fairness with respect to sensitive groups, according to some fairness
definition, which often implies a slight loss in accuracy as these two goals are generally at odds.
A large class of methods aims to directly produce g with satisfactory fairness properties. A different
                                                                                            0
group of methods, our focus here, preprocesses data by applying an encoder f : Rd → Rd to obtain
a new representation z = f (x, s) of each datapoint. This induces a joint distribution Z of (z, s).
                                                                                          0
The downstream classifier g is now trained to predict y from z, i.e., now we have g : Rd → {0, 1}.
The main advantage of these methods is that by ensuring fairness properties of representations z,
we can limit the unfairness of any g trained on data from Z.

Fairness metric Let Z0 and Z1 denote conditional distributions of z where s = 0 and s = 1,
respectively. In this work, we aim to minimize the demographic parity distance of g, reflecting the
goal of equally likely assigning positive outcomes to inputs from both sensitive groups:
                            ∆DP
                             Z0 ,Z1 (g) := |Ez∼Z0 [g(z)] − Ez∼Z1 [g(z)]| .
Our choice of metric is primarily motivated by consistency with prior work—other definitions (e.g.,
equalized odds) may be more suitable for a particular use-case (Hardt et al., 2016), and our method
can be easily adapted to support them, following the corresponding results of Madras et al. (2018).
In the remainder of this work, we will use p0 and p1 to denote the PDFs of Z0 and Z1 respectively,
i.e., p0 (zi ) = P (zi |s = 0) and p1 (zi ) = P (zi |s = 1) and p to denote the PDF of the marginal
distribution of z. Similarly, we will use q for the marginal distribution of s, and qi for the conditional
distribution of s for z = zi , i.e., qi (0) = P (s = 0|z = zi ) and qi (1) = P (s = 1|z = zi ).

Classification trees Starting from the training set Droot of examples (x, y) ∈ Rd × {0, 1}, a
binary classification tree f repeatedly splits some leaf node P with assigned DP , i.e., picks a split
feature j ∈ {1, . . . , d} and a split threshold v, and adds two nodes L and R as children of P , such
that DL = {(x, y) ∈ DP | xj ≤ v} and DR = DP \ DL . j and v are picked to minimize a chosen
criterion, weighted by |DL | and |DR |, aiming to produce y-homogeneousP     leaves. We focus on Gini
impurity, computed as Giniy (D) = 2py (1 − py ) ∈ [0, 0.5] where py = (x,y)∈D 1{y = 1}/|D|.
At inference, a test example x is propagated to a leaf l, and we predict the majority class of Dl .

4    P ROVABLE FAIRNESS B OUNDS FOR R ESTRICTED E NCODERS
In the following we describe our primary contribution, the derivation of provable fairness bounds
on unfairness of downstream classifiers, under the assumption of restricted encoders (i.e., encoders
with restricted representations, explained in more detail shortly). In Section 5 we demonstrate the
feasibility of our approach, by instantiating it with a particular encoder based on decision trees.
                                                         0
Optimal adversary Consider the adversary h : Rd → {0, 1} predicting group membership s,
which aims to maximize the following balanced accuracy objective:
                                         1
                        BAZ0 ,Z1 (h) := (Ez∼Z0 [1 − h(z)] + Ez∼Z1 [h(z)]) .                         (1)
                                         2
Let h? , such that for all h, BAZ0 ,Z1 (h? ) ≥ BAZ0 ,Z1 (h), denote the optimal adversary. Intuitively,
the optimal adversary predicts the group s for which the likelihood of z under the corresponding
distribution (Z0 or Z1 ) is larger. More formally, h? (z) = 1{p1 (z) ≥ p0 (z)}, where 1{φ} = 1 if φ
holds, and 0 otherwise (see Balunović et al. (2022) for a proof). As shown in Madras et al. (2018),
                                  ∆DP                          ?
                                   Z0 ,Z1 (g) ≤ 2 · BAZ0 ,Z1 (h ) − 1                                 (2)


                                                    4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


holds for any g, i.e., we can upper-bound the unfairness of any downstream classifier trained on data
from Z by computing the balanced accuracy of the optimal adversary h? . Shen et al. (2021) also
discuss connection between the balanced accuracy and total variation.

Restricted encoders Prior work is unable to utilize Eq. (2) to ob-
tain a fairness guarantee, as using unconstrained neural network en-
coders generally makes it intractable to compute the densities p0 (z)                      BAZ0 ,Z1
and p1 (z) that define the optimal adversary h∗ . Notably, Balunović                S
et al. (2022) use normalizing flows, allowing computation of p0 (z)                           CI
and p1 (z) under the assumption of knowing corresponding densities             h∗ = hi
in the original distribution X . In contrast, we propose a class of en-
coders for which we can derive a procedure that can upper-bound the                 h7
RHS of Eq. (2), and thus the unfairness of g, without imposing any                  ···
assumption in terms of knowledge of X . We rely only on a set of                    h12
samples (z, s) ∼ Z, obtained by applying f to samples (x, s) ∼ X ,
which are readily available in the form of a given dataset.                          h3
Namely, we hypothesize that restricting the space of representations
can still lead to favorable fairness-accuracy tradeoffs. Based on this, Figure 2: Restricted rep-
we propose restricted encoders f : Rd → {z1 , . . . , zk }, i.e., encoders resentations enable upper-
                                                                0                                   ?
that map each x to one of k possible values (cells) zi ∈ Rd . As now bounding of BAZ0 ,Z1 (h ).
there is a finite number of possible values for a representation, we
can use samples from Z to analyze the optimal adversary h∗ on each
possible z. Moreover, we can upper-bound its balanced accuracy on the whole distribution Z with
some value S with high probability, using confidence intervals (CI) (as illustrated in Fig. 2). Finally,
we can apply Eq. (2) to obtain the bound ∆DP Z0 ,Z1 (g) ≤ 2S − 1 = T .

A detailed presentation of our upper-bounding procedure follows. In Sections 5 and 6 we demon-
strate how to design practical and efficient restricted encoders, by describing and evaluating our
instantiation based on decision trees, which, as we later discuss, are naturally suited to this problem.

Upper-bounding the balanced accuracy Starting from Eq. (1), we reformulate the balanced ac-
curacy of the optimal adversary as follows:
                       k                             k
                                                                            !
            ∗     1 X                     ∗
                                                    X
                                                                     ∗
BAZ0 ,Z1 (h ) =          p0 (zi ) · [1 − h (zi )] +     p1 (zi ) · [h (zi )]    (E of discrete RV)
                  2 i=1                             i=1
                       k
                                                  !
                  1 X
               =         max (p0 (zi ), p1 (zi ))                             (Optimal adversary)
                  2 i=1
                                                                           
                  Xk
               =     p(zi ) · max (1/2q(0)) ·qi (0), (1/2q(1)) ·qi (1) ,           (Bayes’ rule)
                                      | {z }            | {z }
                  i=1                     α0                α1

where applications of Bayes’ rule are p0 (zi ) = qi (0)p(zi )/q(0) and p1 (zi ) = qi (1)p(zi )/q(1). As
we do not know Z, but instead have access to n samples (z (j) , s(j) ) ∼ Z, we will aim to upper-
bound BAZ0 ,Z1 (h∗ ) with high probability. In particular, we focus on the final expression above, the
prior-weighted (i.e., weighted by p(zi )) per-cell balanced accuracy (i.e., max(α0 qi (0), α1 qi (1)) for
each cell i), where we define α0 = 1/2q(0) and α1 = 1/2q(1).
Next, we introduce 3 lemmas, and later combine them to obtain the desired upper bound. We use
B(p; v, w) to denote the p-th quantile of a beta distribution with parameters v and w. Note that for
Lemma 1 we do not use the values z (j) in the proof, but still introduce them for consistency.
Lemma 1 (Bounding base rates). Given n independent samples {(z (1) , s(1) ), . . . , (z (n) , s(n) )} ∼ Z
and a parameter  b , for α0 and α1 as defined above, it holds that
                            1                                      1
          α0 <                         , and α1 <                                   ,
               2B(  2b ; m, n − m + 1)             2(1 − B(1 −  2b ; m + 1, n − m))
with confidence 1 −  b , where m = j=1 1{s(j) = 0}.
                                   Pn


                                                   5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Proof. We define n independent Bernoulli random variables X (j) := 1{s(j) = 0} with same un-
known success probability q(0). Using the Clopper-Pearson binomial CI (Clopper & Pearson, 1934)
(Appendix A) to estimate the probability q(0) we get P (q(0) ≤ B(  2b ; m, n − m + 1)) ≤  b /2 and
P (q(0) ≥ B(1 −  2b ; m + 1, n − m)) ≤  b /2. Substituting q(0) = 1 − q(1) in the latter, as well as
the definitions of α0 and α1 in both inequalities, produces the inequalities from the lemma statement,
which per union bound simultaneously hold with confidence 1 −  b .
Lemma 2 (Bounding balanced accuracy for each cell). Given n independent samples
{(z (1) , s(1) ), . . . , (z (n) , s(n) )} ∼ Z, parameter  c , and constants α¯0 and α¯1 such that α0 < α¯0
and α1 < α¯1 , it holds for each cell i ∈ {1, . . . , k}, with total confidence 1 −  c , that
                                              max(α0 · qi (0), α1 · qi (1)) ≤ ti ,                              (3)
                                     c                                        c

where ti = max α¯0 B( 2k               ; mi , ni − mi + 1), α¯1 (1 − B(1 − 2k    ; mi + 1, ni − mi )) . In this ex-
pression, ni = |Zi |, and mi = j∈Zi 1{s(j) = 0}, where we denote Zi = |{j|z (j) = zi }|.
                                          P


Proof. As in Lemma 1, for each cell we use the Clopper-Pearson CI to estimate qi (0) with samples
indexed by Zi and confidence 1 −  c /k. As before, we apply qi (0) = 1 − qi (1) to arrive at a set of
k inequalities of the form Eq. (3), which per union bound jointly hold with confidence 1 −  c .
Lemma 3 (Bounding the sum). Given n independent samples {(z (1) , s(1) ), . . . , (z (n) , s(n) )} ∼ Z,
where for each j ∈ {1, . . . , n} we define a function idx(z (j) ) = i such that z (j) = zi (cell index),
parameter  s , and a set of real-valued constants {t1 , . . . , tk }, it holds that
              k
                               !                               n                        r
            X                                            1X                               − log  s
        P        p(zi )ti ≤ S ≥ 1 −  s , where S =                 tidx(z(j) ) + (b − a)           ,  (4)
            i=1
                                                         n j=1                              2n
and we denote a = min{t1 , . . . , tk } and b = max{t1 , . . . , tk }.

Proof. For each j let X (j) := tidx(z(j) ) denote a random variable. As for all j, X (j) ∈ [a, b] with
probability 1 and X (j) are independent, we can apply Hoeffding’s inequality (Hoeffding, 1963) (re-
                                                                                    Pk
stated in Appendix A) to upper-bound the difference between the population mean i=1 p(zi )ti =
                                              n
Ez∼Z tidx(z) and its empirical estimate n1 j=1 X (j) . Setting the upper bound such that the error is
                                            P
below  s directly recovers S and the statement of the lemma.

Applying the lemmas Finally, we describe how we apply the lemmas in practice to upper-bound
BAZ0 ,Z1 (h? ), and in turn upper-bound ∆DP    Z0 ,Z1 (g) for any downstream classifier g trained on repre-
sentations learned by a restricted encoder. We assume a standard setting, where a set D of datapoints
{(x(j) , s(j) )} from X is split into a training set Dtrain , used to train f , validation set Dval , held-out
for the upper-bounding procedure (and not used in training of f in any capacity), and a test set Dtest ,
used to evaluate the empirical accuracy and fairness of downstream classifiers.
After training the encoder and applying it to produce representations (z (j) , s(j) ) ∼ Z for all three
data subsets, we aim to derive an upper bound on ∆DP    Z0 ,Z1 (g) for any g, that holds with confidence
at least 1 −  , where   is the hyperparameter of the procedure (we use   = 0.05). To this end, we
heuristically choose some decomposition   =  b +  c +  s , and apply Lemma 1 on Dtrain to obtain
upper bounds α0 < α¯0 and α1 < α¯1 with error probability  b . As mentioned above, using Dtrain in
this step is sound as estimated probabilities q(0) and q(1) are independent of the encoder f . Next,
we use α¯0 , α¯1 and Dval in Lemma 2, to obtain upper bounds t1 , . . . , tk on per-cell accuracy that
                                                                           Pk
jointly hold with error probability  c . Finally, we upper-bound the sum i=1 p(zi )ti ≤ S with error
probability  s using Lemma 3 on Dtest with previously computed t1 , . . . , tk . Combining this with
Eq. (2) finally gives the desired upper bound
                          ∆DP                           ?
                           Z0 ,Z1 (g) ≤ 2 · BAZ0 ,Z1 (h ) − 1 ≤ 2S − 1 = T,                          (5)
which per union bound holds with desired error probability  , with respect to the sampling process.
This completes the upper-bounding procedure, enabling provable fair representation learning with
no restrictive assumptions, which addresses a major limitation of prior work. Our procedure can
be applied to representations produced by any restricted encoder. In the following sections, we
will describe a particular instantiation based on decision trees, and experimentally demonstrate that
applying the above procedure produces tight unfairness upper bounds on real datasets.


                                                        6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


5    R ESTRICTED R EPRESENTATIONS WITH FAIR D ECISION T REES

Next, we describe a practical restricted encoder, enabling a favorable accuracy-fairness tradeoff
(similar to prior work), while allowing application of our results from Section 4 to provably bound
the fairness of downstream classifiers trained on the representations (unique to our work).
Our encoder is based on decision trees, a choice motivated by strong results of tree-based models on
tabular data (Borisov et al., 2021), as well as their feature space splitting procedure, whose discrete
behavior is inherently suitable for our requirement of restricted representations. In particular, we
train a classification tree f with k leaves, and encode all examples that end up in leaf i to the same
representation zi . We construct zi based on the set of training examples in leaf i, taking the median
value for continuous, and the most common value for categorical features (thus in our case, d0 = d).

Fairness-aware criterion Common splitting criteria are aimed at maximizing accuracy by making
the distribution of y in each leaf highly unbalanced, e.g., Giniy (D) = 2py (1 − py ) ∈ [0, 0.5] where
py = (x,y)∈D 1{y = 1}/|D|. Aiming to use such a tree as an encoder generally leads to high
       P

unfairness, making it necessary to introduce a direct way to prioritize more fair tree structures.
To this end, similar to Kamiran et al. (2010) and others (see discussion of related work in Section 2),
we use the criterion F airGini(D) = (1 − γ)Giniy (D) + γ(0.5 − Ginis (D)) ∈ [0, 0.5], where
Ginis is defined analogously to Giniy . The second term aims to maximize Ginis (D), i.e., make the
distribution of s in each leaf i as close to uniform (making it challenging for the adversary to infer
the value of s based on zi ), while the hyperparameter γ controls the accuracy-fairness tradeoff.

Fairness-aware categorical splits While usual splits of the form xj ≤ v (see Section 3) are suit-
able for continuous, they are inefficient for categorical (usually one-hot) variables, as only 1 category
can be isolated. Consequently, this increases the number of cells and makes our fairness bounds
loose. Instead, we represent nj categories for feature j as integers c P     ∈ {1, 2, ..., nj }. To avoid
evaluating all 2nj − 1 possible partitions, we sort the values by py (c) = (x,y)∈Dc 1{y = 1}/|Dc |
where Dc = {x ∈ D | xj = c}, and consider all prefix-suffix partitions (Breiman shortcut).
This ordering focuses on accuracy and is provably optimal for F airGini(D) with γ = 0 (Breiman
et al., 1984). However, as it ignores fairness, it is inefficient for γ > 0. To alleviate this, we gener-
alize the Breiman shortcut, and explore all prefix-suffix partitions under several orderings. Namely,
for several values of the parameter q, we split the set of categories {1, 2, . . . , nj } in q-quantiles with
respect to ps (c) (defined analogous to py (c)), and sort each quantile by py (c) as before, interspersing
q obtained arrays to obtain the final ordering. Note that while this offers no optimality guarantees, it
is an efficient way to consider both objectives, complementing our fairness-aware criterion.
We defer the discussion of the hyperparameters of our encoder to Appendix B.


6    E XPERIMENTAL E VALUATION

We evaluate our method, FARE, on several common fairness datasets, demonstrating that it pro-
duces representations with fairness-accuracy tradeoffs comparable to prior work, while for the first
time offering provable fairness bounds. We further provide more insights into FARE, discuss the
interpretability of the representations, and provide additional experiments on transfer learning.

Experimental setup We consider common fairness datasets: Health (Kaggle, 2012) and two vari-
ants of ACSIncome (Ding et al., 2021), ACSIncome-CA (only California), and ACSIncome-US
(US-wide, larger but more difficult due to distribution shift). The sensitive attributes are age and
sex, respectively. We compare our method with the following recent FRL baselines (described
in Section 2): LAFTR (Madras et al., 2018), CVIB (Moyer et al., 2018), FCRL (Gupta et al., 2021),
FNF (Balunović et al., 2022), sIPM-LFR (Kim et al., 2022), and FairPath (Shui et al., 2022). We
provide all omitted details regarding datasets, baselines, and our experimental setup, in Appendix B.

Main experiments We explore the fairness-accuracy tradeoff of each method by running it with
various hyperparameters. Each run produces representations, used to train a 1-hidden-layer neural

                                                     7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                                  Unfair Baseline                                                                                            Unfair Baseline
                                                  CVIB                                                                                                       CVIB
                                                  FCRL                                                                                                       FCRL
                                    0.20          FNF                                                                  0.20                                  FNF


      Demographic Parity Distance


                                                                                         Demographic Parity Distance
                                                  sIPM-LFR                                                                                                   sIPM-LFR
                                                  FARE (Upper Bound)                                                                                         FARE (Upper Bound)
                                                  FARE (Empirical)                                                                                           FARE (Empirical)
                                    0.15                                                                               0.15



                                    0.10                                                                               0.10



                                    0.05                                                                               0.05



                                    0.00                                                                               0.00
                                           0.65           0.70         0.75   0.80                                                                          0.70      0.73        0.76      0.79    0.82
                                                                 Accuracy                                                                                                     Accuracy


   Figure 3: Evaluation of FRL methods on ACSIncome-CA (left) and ACSIncome-US (right).

                                                                                                                                                                      Unfair Baseline
                                                                                                                                                                      CVIB
network (1-NN) for the prediction task using a standard                                                                                                     0.5
                                                                                                                                                                      FCRL
training procedure (same for each method), and plot its de-                                                                                                           FNF


                                                                                                                              Demographic Parity Distance
                                                                                                                                                                      sIPM-LFR
mographic parity (DP) distance and prediction accuracy.                                                                                                     0.4       FARE (Upper Bound)
                                                                                                                                                                      FARE (Empirical)
Following Kim et al. (2022), we show a test set Pareto front
                                                                                                                                                            0.3
for each method. Further, for FARE we independently show
a Pareto front of a 95% confidence provable upper bound
                                                                                                                                                            0.2
on DP distance (following Section 4), which is a key fea-
ture of our approach and cannot be produced by any other
method. Finally, we include an Unfair Baseline, which uses                                                                                                  0.1

an identity encoder. The results are shown in Figs. 3 and 4.
We omit FairPath and LAFTR from the main plots (see ex-                                                                                                     0.0
                                                                                                                                                                       0.74        0.76      0.78    0.80   0.82
tended results in Appendix C), as LAFTR has stability and                                                                                                                              Accuracy

convergence issues (Gupta et al., 2021; Kim et al., 2022),
and FairPath uses a different metric to us (Shui et al., 2022).                                                                                              Figure 4: Evaluation on Health.
We observe that FARE can achieve a better (Fig. 3) or comparable (Fig. 4) accuracy-fairness tradeoff
compared to baselines. Crucially, other methods cannot guarantee that there is no classifier with a
worse DP distance when trained on their representations. This cannot happen for our method—we
produce a provable upper bound on DP distance of any classifier trained on our representations. The
results indicate that our provable upper bound is often comparable to empirical values of baselines.
Note that there is a small gap (up to 1.5%) between the maximum accuracy of FARE and the unfair
baseline, indicating a tradeoff of restricted encoders—FARE obtains provable bounds, but loses
some information, limiting the predictive power of downstream classifiers. This is rarely an issue
in practice, as obtaining meaningful fairness improvements generally requires a non-trivial accuracy
loss, especially when s is correlated with the task label. Finally, another advantage of FARE is its
efficiency, with runtime of several seconds, as opposed to minutes or hours for baselines.

Exploring downstream classifiers In Fig. 5 (left), we show a representative point from Fig. 4, its
fairness guarantee, and 24 diverse downstream classifiers (see Appendix B) trained on same repre-
sentations, where half are trained to maximize accuracy, and half to maximize unfairness. The latter
(left cluster) can reach higher unfairness than initially suggested, reaffirming a known limitation of
prior work (Xu et al., 2020; Gupta et al., 2021): evaluating representations with some model class
(here, a 1-NN) does not reliably estimate unfairness, as other classifiers (perhaps intentionally cre-
ated by a malicious actor) might be more unfair. This highlights the value of FARE which provides
a provable unfairness upper bound—all unfairness values still remain below a known upper bound.
Similarly, we explore a point from Fig. 3 (right), with accuracy 75.1% and DP distance of 0.005.
As here k = 6, i.e., the possible representations are {z1 , . . . , z6 }, the previous investigation of
downstream classifiers simplifies. Instead of choosing a model class, we can enumerate all 26 = 64
possible classifiers, and directly confirm that each DP distance is below the upper bound, as shown
in Fig. 5 (middle). Note that in the original experiment, all baseline methods have DP distance
≥ 0.04 at similar accuracy of ≈ 75%, implying that the FARE bound is in this case very tight.


                                                                                     8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                                                                                                                                                                                 FARE (Upper Bound)
                                                                                                                                                                                                 Upper Bound with M=2
                                                                                                                                                                              0.20               Upper Bound with M=4


                                                                                                                                                Demographic Parity Distance
Demographic Parity Distance                 FARE (Upper Bound)                                                   FARE (Upper Bound)                                                              Upper Bound with M=8


                                                                     Demographic Parity Distance
                              0.40          Downstream Classifiers                                               Downstream Classifiers
                                                                                                                                                                                                 Upper Bound with M=16
                                                                                                   0.02
                                                                                                                                                                              0.15               Upper Bound with M=32
                                                                                                                                                                                                 FARE (Empirical)
                              0.35
                                                                                                                                                                              0.10
                                                                                                   0.01
                              0.30
                                                                                                                                                                              0.05

                              0.25
                                                                                                   0.00
                                     0.25     0.50          0.75                                          0.25     0.50          0.75                                         0.00
                                                                                                                                                                                     0.70           0.73       0.76      0.79    0.82
                                            Accuracy                                                             Accuracy                                                                                    Accuracy


Figure 5: Comparing trained downstream classifiers with the FARE upper bound (left and middle).
The impact of increasing the dataset size M times on the fairness upper bound tightness (right).


Data improves bounds In Fig. 3 we see that the FARE bounds are tighter for ACSIncome-US,
as using more samples improves the bounding procedure. To investigate this further, we choose a
representative set of FARE points from Fig. 3 (left), and repeat the upper-bounding procedure with
the dataset repeated M times, showing the resulting upper bounds for M ∈ {2, 4, 8, 16, 32} in Fig. 5
(right). We can observe a significant improvement in the provable upper bound for larger dataset
sizes, indicating that FARE is well-suited for large datasets and will benefit from ever-increasing
amounts of data used in real-world machine learning deployments (Villalobos & Ho, 2022).

Interpretability Another advantage of FARE is that its tree-based encoder enables direct inter-
pretation of representations. To illustrate this, for representations with k = 6 analyzed in Fig. 5
(middle) we can easily find that, for example, the representation z6 is assigned to each person older
that 24, with at least a Bachelor’s degree, and an occupation in management, business or science.

Transfer learning Finally, we analyze the transfer-                                                                                        y        ∆DP
                                                                                                                                                     Z0 ,Z1                                  T       FARE       FCRL     FNF    sIPM
ability of learned representations across tasks. We pro-                                                                                  MIS
                                                                                                                                                        ≤ 0.20                              0.64      79.3       78.6    78.9   79.8
duce a diverse set of representations on the Health                                                                                                     ≤ 0.05                              0.54      78.7       78.6    78.7   78.6

dataset with each method, and following the procedure                                                                                                   ≤ 0.20                              0.64      73.2       72.4    71.9   76.6
                                                                                                                                          NEU
                                                                                                                                                        ≤ 0.05                              0.42      72.1       71.4    71.7    /
from prior work (Madras et al., 2018; Balunović et al.,                                                                                                ≤ 0.20                              0.41      74.4       70.7    68.9   78.3
2022; Kim et al., 2022) evaluate them on five unseen                                                                                      ART
                                                                                                                                                        ≤ 0.05                              0.23      69.5       69.5    68.5    /
tasks y (see Appendix B for details), where for each                                                                                                    ≤ 0.20                              0.46      69.8       69.2    75.0    /
                                                                                                                                          MET
the goal is to predict a certain primary condition group.                                                                                               ≤ 0.05                              0.12      66.1       65.3     /      /
For each task and each method, we identify the high-                                                                                                    ≤ 0.20                              0.53      67.2       70.5    73.0    /
                                                                                                                                          MSC
                                                                                                                                                        ≤ 0.05                              0.12      63.0        /       /      /
est accuracy obtained while keeping ∆DP   Z0 ,Z1 not above
0.20 (or 0.05). Moreover, we show T , the provable DP
                                                                                                                                           Table 1: Transfer learning on Health.
distance upper bound of FARE.
The results are shown in Table 1. First, we observe that some methods are unable to reduce ∆DP     Z0 ,Z1
below the given threshold. Our method can always reduce the ∆DP      Z0 ,Z1 sufficiently, but due to our
restriction on representations which enables provable upper bounds, we often lose more accuracy
than other methods for high ∆DPZ0 ,Z1 thresholds. Future work could focus on investigating alternative
restricted encoders with better fairness-accuracy tradeoffs in the transfer learning setting.

7                                C ONCLUSION
We introduced FARE, a method for provably fair representation learning. The key idea was that
using restricted encoders enables a practical statistical procedure for computing a provable upper
bound on unfairness of downstream classifiers trained on these representations. We instantiated this
idea with a tree-based encoder, and experimentally demonstrated that FARE can for the first time
obtain tight fairness bounds on several datasets, while simultaneously producing empirical fairness-
accuracy tradeoffs similar to prior work which offers no guarantees.



                                                                                                                         9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


R EPRODUCIBILITY S TATEMENT
To foster reproducibility, all of our code, datasets and scripts are provided in the Openreview dis-
cussion. All of our experiments presented in Section 6 can be run using the instructions we provide
in the Readme file that accompanies our code. The hyperparameters used for our runs are described
in Appendix B and further detailed in the Readme.

R EFERENCES
Seyum Assefa Abebe, Claudio Lucchese, and Salvatore Orlando. Eifffel: enforcing fairness in
  forests by flipping leaves. In SAC, 2022.
Sina Aghaei, Mohammad Javad Azizi, and Phebe Vayanos. Learning optimal and fair decision trees
  for non-discriminative decision-making. In AAAI, 2019.
Mislav Balunović, Anian Ruoss, and Martin T. Vechev. Fair normalizing flows. In ICLR, 2022.
António Pereira Barata and Cor J. Veenman. Fair tree learning. CoRR, 2021.
Solon Barocas and Andrew D. Selbst. Big data’s disparate impact. California Law Review, 2016.
Nathan Benaich and Ian Hogarth. State of ai report 2021. 2021. https://www.stateof.ai/
  2021, accessed: 2022-09-26.
Vadim Borisov, Tobias Leemann, Kathrin Seßler, Johannes Haug, Martin Pawelczyk, and Gjergji
  Kasneci. Deep neural networks and tabular data: A survey. arXiv, 2021.
Leo Breiman, J. H. Friedman, R. A. Olshen, and C. J. Stone. Classification and Regression Trees.
  Wadsworth, 1984.
Tim Brennan, William Dieterich, and Beate Ehret. Evaluating the predictive validity of the compas
  risk and needs assessment system. Criminal Justice and Behavior, 2009.
Joy Buolamwini and Timnit Gebru. Gender shades: Intersectional accuracy disparities in commer-
  cial gender classification. In FAccT, 2018.
Flávio P. Calmon, Dennis Wei, Bhanukiran Vinzamuri, Karthikeyan Natesan Ramamurthy, and
   Kush R. Varshney. Optimized pre-processing for discrimination prevention. In NeurIPS, 2017.
L. Elisa Celis, Lingxiao Huang, Vijay Keswani, and Nisheeth K. Vishnoi. Classification with fair-
  ness constraints: A meta-algorithm with provable guarantees. In FAT, 2019.
Mattia Cerrato, Marius Köppel, Alexander Segner, and Stefan Kramer. Fair group-shared represen-
 tations with normalizing flows. CoRR, 2022.
Michael Chui, Bryce Hall, Alex Singla, and Alex Sukharevsky. The state of ai in
 2021.    2021.   https://www.mckinsey.com/capabilities/quantumblack/
 our-insights/global-survey-the-state-of-ai-in-2021, accessed: 2022-09-
 26.
C. J. Clopper and E. S. Pearson. The use of confidence or fiducial limits illustrated in the case of the
  binomial. Biometrika, 1934.
Sam Corbett-Davies, Emma Pierson, Avi Feller, Sharad Goel, and Aziz Huq. Algorithmic decision
  making and the cost of fairness. In ACM SIGKDD, 2017.
Frances Ding, Moritz Hardt, John Miller, and Ludwig Schmidt. Retiring adult: New datasets for fair
  machine learning. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 34, 2021.
Michele Donini, Luca Oneto, Shai Ben-David, John Shawe-Taylor, and Massimiliano Pontil. Em-
 pirical risk minimization under fairness constraints. In NeurIPS, pp. 2796–2806, 2018.
Cynthia Dwork, Moritz Hardt, Toniann Pitassi, Omer Reingold, and Richard S. Zemel. Fairness
  through awareness. In ITCS, 2012.


                                                  10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Harrison Edwards and Amos J. Storkey. Censoring representations with an adversary. In ICLR,
  2016.
Yanai Elazar and Yoav Goldberg. Adversarial removal of demographic attributes from text data. In
  EMNLP, 2018.
EU. Proposal for a regulation laying down harmonised rules on artificial intelligence, 2021.
Michael Feldman, Sorelle A. Friedler, John Moeller, Carlos Scheidegger, and Suresh Venkatasubra-
 manian. Certifying and removing disparate impact. In KDD, 2015.
Rui Feng, Yang Yang, Yuehan Lyu, Chenhao Tan, Yizhou Sun, and Chunping Wang. Learning fair
  representations via an adversarial framework. CoRR, 2019.
FTC.   Aiming for truth, fairness, and equity in your companys use of ai, 2021.
  https://www.ftc.gov/news-events/blogs/business-blog/2021/04/
  aiming-truth-fairness-equity-your-companys-use-ai, accessed: 2022-09-
  26.
Xavier Gitiaux and Huzefa Rangwala. Sofair: Single shot fair representation learning. In IJCAI,
  2022.
Vincent Grari, Boris Ruf, Sylvain Lamprier, and Marcin Detyniecki. Achieving fairness with deci-
  sion trees: An adversarial approach. Data Sci. Eng., 2020.
Steffen Grünewälder and Azadeh Khaleghi. Oblivious data for fairness with kernels. J. Mach. Learn.
  Res., 22:208:1–208:36, 2021.
Umang Gupta, Aaron M. Ferber, Bistra Dilkina, and Greg Ver Steeg. Controllable guarantees for
 fair outcomes via contrastive information estimation. In AAAI, 2021.
Moritz Hardt, Eric Price, and Nati Srebro. Equality of opportunity in supervised learning. In
 NeurIPS, 2016.
Wassily Hoeffding. Probability inequalities for sums of bounded random variables. JSTOR, (301),
 1963.
Ayush Jaiswal, Daniel Moyer, Greg Ver Steeg, Wael AbdAlmageed, and Premkumar Natarajan.
  Invariant representations through adversarial forgetting. In AAAI, 2020.
Jiayin Jin, Zeru Zhang, Yang Zhou, and Lingfei Wu. Input-agnostic certified group fairness via
   gaussian parameter smoothing. In ICML, 2022.
Kaggle. Health heritage prize, 2012. URL https://www.kaggle.com/c/hhp.
Peter Kairouz, Jiachun Liao, Chong Huang, Maunil Vyas, Monica Welfert, and Lalitha Sankar.
  Generating fair universal representations using adversarial models. IEEE TIFS, 2022.
Faisal Kamiran, Toon Calders, and Mykola Pechenizkiy. Discrimination aware decision tree learn-
  ing. In ICDM, 2010.
Mintong Kang, Linyi Li, Maurice Weber, Yang Liu, Ce Zhang, and Bo Li. Certifying some distri-
 butional fairness with subpopulation decomposition. CoRR, 2022.
Amir E Khandani, Adlar J Kim, and Andrew W Lo. Consumer credit-risk models via machine-
 learning algorithms. Journal of Banking & Finance, 2010.
Dongha Kim, Kunwoong Kim, Insung Kong, Ilsang Ohn, and Yongdai Kim. Learning fair repre-
  sentation with a parametric integral probability metric. In ICML, 2022.
Jon Kleinberg, Sendhil Mullainathan, and Manish Raghavan. Inherent trade-offs in the fair determi-
  nation of risk scores. In ITCS, 2017.
Nikola Konstantinov and Christoph H. Lampert. Fairness through regularization for learning to rank.
  CoRR, 2021.


                                                11
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Preethi Lahoti, Krishna P. Gummadi, and Gerhard Weikum. ifair: Learning individually fair data
  representations for algorithmic decision making. In ICDE, 2019.
Ji Liu, Zenan Li, Yuan Yao, Feng Xu, Xiaoxing Ma, Miao Xu, and Hanghang Tong. Fair represen-
   tation learning: An alternative to mutual information. In KDD, 2022.
Christos Louizos, Kevin Swersky, Yujia Li, Max Welling, and Richard S. Zemel. The variational
  fair autoencoder. In ICLR, 2016.
David Madras, Elliot Creager, Toniann Pitassi, and Richard S. Zemel. Learning adversarially fair
  and transferable representations. In ICML, 2018.
Daniel McNamara, Cheng Soon Ong, and Robert C. Williamson. Provably fair representations.
  CoRR, abs/1710.04394, 2017.
Anna P. Meyer, Aws Albarghouthi, and Loris D’Antoni. Certifying robustness to programmable
  data bias in decision trees. In NeurIPS, 2021.
Daniel Moyer, Shuyang Gao, Rob Brekelmans, Aram Galstyan, and Greg Ver Steeg. Invariant
  representations without adversarial training. In NeurIPS, 2018.
Changdae Oh, Heeji Won, Junhyuk So, Taero Kim, Yewon Kim, Hosik Choi, and Kyungwoo Song.
  Learning fair representation via distributional contrastive disentanglement. In KDD, 2022.
Luca Oneto, Michele Donini, Massimiliano Pontil, and Andreas Maurer. Learning fair and transfer-
  able representations with theoretical guarantees. In DSAA, 2020.
Felix Petersen, Debarghya Mukherjee, Yuekai Sun, and Mikhail Yurochkin. Post-processing for
  individual fairness. In NeurIPS, 2021.
Momchil Peychev, Anian Ruoss, Mislav Balunovic, Maximilian Baader, and Martin T. Vechev.
 Latent space smoothing for individually fair representations. CoRR, 2021.
Edward Raff, Jared Sylvester, and Steven Mills. Fair forests: Regularized tree induction to minimize
  model bias. In AIES, 2018.
Francesco Ranzato, Caterina Urban, and Marco Zanella. Fair training of decision tree classifiers.
  CoRR, 2021.
Proteek Chandan Roy and Vishnu Naresh Boddeti. Mitigating information leakage in image repre-
  sentations: A maximum entropy approach. In CVPR, 2019.
Anian Ruoss, Mislav Balunovic, Marc Fischer, and Martin T. Vechev. Learning certified individually
  fair representations. In NeurIPS, 2020.
Mhd Hasan Sarhan, Nassir Navab, Abouzar Eslami, and Shadi Albarqouni. Fairness by learning
 orthogonal disentangled representations. In ECCV, 2020.
Xudong Shen, Yongkang Wong, and Mohan S. Kankanhalli. Fair representation: Guaranteeing
  approximate multiple group fairness for unknown tasks. CoRR, abs/2109.00545, 2021.
Changjian Shui, Qi Chen, Jiaqi Li, Boyu Wang, and Christian Gagné. Fair representation learning
  through implicit path alignment. In ICML, 2022.
Congzheng Song and Vitaly Shmatikov. Overlearning reveals sensitive attributes. In ICLR, 2020.
Jiaming Song, Pratyusha Kalluri, Aditya Grover, Shengjia Zhao, and Stefano Ermon. Learning
   controllable fair representations. In AISTATS, 2019.
Zilong Tan, Samuel Yeom, Matt Fredrikson, and Ameet Talwalkar. Learning fair representations
  for kernel models. In AISTATS, volume 108 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pp.
  155–166. PMLR, 2020.
Rachael Tatman and Conner Kasten. Effects of talker dialect, gender & race on accuracy of bing
  speech and youtube automatic captions. In INTERSPEECH, 2017.


                                                12
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Pablo Villalobos and Anson Ho. Trends in training dataset sizes. https://epochai.org/
  blog/trends-in-training-dataset-sizes, 2022. Accessed: 2022-09-28.
Jingbo Wang, Yannan Li, and Chao Wang. Synthesizing fair decision trees via iterative constraint
   solving. In CAV, 2022.
Qizhe Xie, Zihang Dai, Yulun Du, Eduard H. Hovy, and Graham Neubig. Controllable invariance
  through adversarial feature learning. In NIPS, pp. 585–596, 2017.
Yilun Xu, Shengjia Zhao, Jiaming Song, Russell Stewart, and Stefano Ermon. A theory of usable
  information under computational constraints. In ICLR, 2020.
Richard S. Zemel, Yu Wu, Kevin Swersky, Toniann Pitassi, and Cynthia Dwork. Learning fair
  representations. In ICML, 2013.
Wenbin Zhang and Eirini Ntoutsi. FAHT: an adaptive fairness-aware decision tree classifier. In
 IJCAI, 2019.
Han Zhao, Amanda Coston, Tameem Adel, and Geoffrey J. Gordon. Conditional learning of fair
  representations. In ICLR. OpenReview.net, 2020.


                                              13
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


            Dataset             Training size    Test size   Base rate (s)    Base rate (y)
            ACSIncome-CA        165 546          18 395      0.46             0.64
            ACSIncome-US        1 429 070        158 786     0.48             0.68
            Health              174 732          43 683      0.35             0.68

                               Table 2: Statistics of evaluated datasets.

A    M ATHEMATICAL T OOLS
We first derive Eq. (2). More details can be found in Madras et al. (2018), and here we provide an
overview:


                        ∆DP
                         Z0 ,Z1 (g) = |Ez∼Z0 [g(z)] − Ez∼Z1 [g(z)]|
                                    = |Ez∼Z0 [−g(z)] + Ez∼Z1 [g(z)]|
                                    = |Ez∼Z0 [1 − g(z)] + Ez∼Z1 [g(z)] − 1|
                                    = |2BAZ0 ,Z1 (g) − 1|
From this, we can argue that we can drop the absolute value and bound the balanced accuracy of g
with the balanced accuracy of h∗ , finally arriving at Equation 2.
Then, we formally state the Hoeffding’s inequality and the Clopper-Pearson binomial confidence
intervals, used in our upper-bounding procedure in Section 4.
Hoeffding’s inequality (Hoeffding, 1963): Let X (1) , . . . , X (n) be independent random variables such
                                               (1)     (n)
that P (X (j) ∈ [a(j) , b(j) ]) = 1. Let µ̂ = X +...X
                                                   n       and µ = E[µ̂]. It holds that:
                                                              −2n2 t2

                               P (µ − µ̂ ≥ t) ≤ exp Pn           (i) − a(i) )2
                                                                                 .
                                                          i=1 (b

Clopper-Pearson binomial proportion confidence intervals (Clopper & Pearson, 1934): Assume a
binomial distribution with an unknown success probability θ. Given m successes out of n experi-
ments, it holds that:
                           α                               α
                       B( ; m, n − m + 1) < θ < B(1 − ; m + 1, n − m)                           (6)
                           2                               2
with confidence at least 1 − α over the sampling process, where B(p; v, w) denotes the p-th quantile
of a beta distribution with parameters v and w.

B    D ETAILS OF EXPERIMENTAL EVALUATION
In this section we provide details of our experimental evaluation omitted from the main text.

Datasets As mentioned in Section 6, we perform our experiments on ACSIncome (Ding et al.,
2021) and Health (Kaggle, 2012) datasets. In Table 2 we show some general statistics about the
datasets: size of the training and test set, base rate for the sensitive attribute s (percentage of the
majority group out of the total population), and base rate for the label y (accuracy of the majority
class predictor).
ACSIncome is a dataset recently proposed by Ding et al. (2021) as an improved version of UCI
Adult, with comprehensive data from US Census collected across all states and several years (we
use 2014). The task is to predict whether an individual’s income is above $50,000, and we consider
sex as a sensitive attribute. We evaluate our method on two variants of the dataset: ACSIncome-CA,
which contains only data from California, and ACSIncome-US, which merges data from all states
and is thus significantly larger but also more difficult, due to distribution shift. 10% of the total
dataset is used as the test set. We also use the Health dataset (Kaggle, 2012), where the goal is
to predict the Charlson Comorbidity Index, and we consider age as a sensitive attribute (binarized
by thresholding at 60 years). For this dataset perform the same preprocessing as Balunović et al.
(2022), and use 20% of the total dataset as the test set.


                                                  14
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                              Unfair Baseline                                                                    Unfair Baseline
                                              CVIB                                                                               CVIB
                                              FCRL                                                                               FCRL
                                              FNF                                                                                FNF
                                    0.20      sIPM-LFR                                                                    0.20   sIPM-LFR


      Demographic Parity Distance


                                                                                            Demographic Parity Distance
                                              FairPath                                                                           FairPath
                                              LAFTR                                                                              LAFTR
                                              FARE (Upper Bound)                                                                 FARE (Upper Bound)
                                              FARE (Empirical)                                                                   FARE (Empirical)
                                    0.15                                                                                  0.15



                                    0.10                                                                                  0.10



                                    0.05                                                                                  0.05



                                    0.00                                                                                  0.00
                                           0.65           0.70           0.75   0.80                                                   0.70                          0.73       0.76        0.79      0.82
                                                                   Accuracy                                                                                                 Accuracy


                  Figure 6: Extended evaluation on ACSIncome-CA (left) and ACSIncome-US (right).



Evaluation procedure For our main experiments, as a downstream classifier we use a 1-hidden-
layer neural network with hidden layer size 50, trained until convergence on representations normal-
ized such that their mean is approximately 0 and standard deviation approximately 1. We train the
classifier 5 times and in our main figures report the average test set accuracy, and the maximal DP
distance obtained, following the procedure of Gupta et al. (2021).


Hyperparameters For baselines, we follow the instructions in respective writeups, as well as
Gupta et al. (2021) to densely explore an appropriate parameter range for each value (linearly, or
exponentially where appropriate), aiming to obtain different points on the accuracy-fairness curve.
For CVIB, we explore λ ∈ [0.01, 1] and β ∈ [0.001, 0.1]. For FCRL on ACSIncome we explore
λ = β ∈ [0.01, 2], and for Health λ ∈ [0.01, 2] and β = 0.5λ. For FNF, we explore γ ∈ [0, 1].
For sIPM-LFR, we use λ ∈ [0.0001, 1.0] and λF ∈ [0.0001, 100.0], extending the suggested ranges.
For FairPath we set the parameter κ ∈ [0, 100]. Finally, for LAFTR we use g ∈ [0.1, 50], extending
the range of [0, 4] suggested by (Gupta et al., 2021). We adjust the parameters for transfer learning
whenever supported by the method.
For FARE, there are four hyperparameters: γ (used for the criterion, where larger γ puts more focus
on fairness), k̄ (upper bound for the number of leaves), ni (lower bound for the number of examples
in a leaf), and v (the ratio of the training set to be used as a validation set). Note that all parameters
affect accuracy, empirical fairness, and the tightness of the fairness bound. For example, larger ni is
likely to improve the bound by making Lemma 2 tighter, as more samples can be used for estimation.
For the same reason, increasing v improves the tightness of the bound, but may slightly reduce the
accuracy as fewer samples remain in the training set used to train the tree. In our experiments we
investigate γ ∈ [0, 1], k ∈ [2, 200], ni ∈ [50, 1000], v ∈ {0.1, 0.2, 0.3, 0.5}. For the upper-bounding
procedure, we always set   = 0.05,  b =  s = 0.005, and thus  c = 0.04. Finally, when sorting
categorical features as described in Section 5, we use q ∈ {1, 2, 4} in all cases.


Omitted details of additional experiments For the exper-                                                                                                             Unfair Baseline
                                                                                                                                                                     CVIB
iment with alternative classifiers (Fig. 5, left) we explore the                                                                                               0.5   FCRL
                                                                                                                                                                     FNF
following classifiers: (i) 1-hidden-layer neural network (1-                                                                                                         sIPM-LFR
                                                                                                                                 Demographic Parity Distance


                                                                                                                                                                     FairPath
NN) with hidden layer sizes 50 and 200, (ii) 2-NN with hid-                                                                                                    0.4   LAFTR
                                                                                                                                                                     FARE (Upper Bound)
den layers of size (50, 50), as well as (200, 100), (iii) logistic                                                                                                   FARE (Empirical)


regression, (iv) random forest classifier with 100 and 1000 es-                                                                                                0.3
timators, (v) decision tree with 100 and an unlimited number
of leaf nodes. We train all these classifiers with a standard-                                                                                                 0.2
ization preprocessing step as described above. We further
train one variant of 1-NN, 2-NN, random forest, and logis-                                                                                                     0.1
tic regression, on unnormalized data. All described models
are trained both to predict the task label y, and to maximize                                                                                                  0.0
                                                                                                                                                                        0.74         0.76      0.78     0.80   0.82
unfairness, i.e., predict s, leading to 24 evaluated models.                                                                                                                             Accuracy


                                                                                                                                 Figure 7: Extended evaluation of
                                                                                       15                                        FRL methods on Health.
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023



                             y    ∆DP
                                   Z0 ,Z1    T     FARE   FCRL    FNF    sIPM
                                   ≤ 0.30   0.64   79.3   78.6    79.2   79.8
                            MIS
                                   ≤ 0.20   0.64   79.3   78.6    78.9   79.8
                                   ≤ 0.15   0.64   79.3   78.6    78.9   79.6
                                   ≤ 0.10   0.48   78.8   78.6    78.9   79.0
                                   ≤ 0.05   0.54   78.7   78.6    78.7   78.6
                                   ≤ 0.30   0.64   73.2   72.4    71.9   78.8
                           NEU
                                   ≤ 0.20   0.64   73.2   72.4    71.9   76.6
                                   ≤ 0.15   0.64   73.2   72.4    71.8   73.2
                                   ≤ 0.10   0.64   73.2   72.2    71.8    /
                                   ≤ 0.05   0.42   72.1   71.4    71.7    /
                                   ≤ 0.30   0.41   74.4   70.7    68.9   78.3
                           ART
                                   ≤ 0.20   0.41   74.4   70.7    68.9   78.3
                                   ≤ 0.15   0.46   74.2   70.1    68.9    /
                                   ≤ 0.10   0.23   69.5   69.6    68.7    /
                                   ≤ 0.05   0.23   69.5   69.5    68.5    /
                                   ≤ 0.30   0.47   74.0   72.5    76.2    /
                           MET
                                   ≤ 0.20   0.46   69.8   69.2    75.0    /
                                   ≤ 0.15   0.33   68.7   67.9    73.2    /
                                   ≤ 0.10   0.12   66.1   66.7    73.2    /
                                   ≤ 0.05   0.12   66.1   65.3     /      /
                                   ≤ 0.30   0.56   71.3   70.5    73.5   77.6
                           MSC
                                   ≤ 0.20   0.53   67.2   70.5    73.0    /
                                   ≤ 0.15   0.12   63.0   69.7     /      /
                                   ≤ 0.10   0.12   63.0   69.0     /      /
                                   ≤ 0.05   0.12   63.0    /       /      /

               Table 3: Extended results of transfer learning experiments on Health.


For transfer learning (Table 1), the five transfer tasks repre-
sent prediction of the following attributes from the Health
dataset: MISCHRT (MIS), NEUMENT (NEU), ARTH-
SPIN (ART), METAB3 (MET), MSC2 A 3 (MSC).


C     E XTENDED RESULTS

We provide the extended results of our main experiments, including two originally excluded meth-
ods, LAFTR and FairPath in Fig. 6 and Fig. 7, corresponding to Fig. 3 and Fig. 4.
Additionally, in Table 3 we provide extended results of our transfer learning experiments, showing
the accuracy values for thresholds ∆DP
                                    Z0 ,Z1 ∈ {0.30, 0.20, 0.15, 0.10, 0.05}. We can observe similar
trends as shown in Table 1 in the main paper.


D     A DDITIONAL E XPERIMENTS

In this section, we provide additional experimental results showing the effects which imbalance in
sensitive attribute, different downstream classifiers, and dataset size have on FARE.


D.1   E FFECT OF SENSITIVE ATTRIBUTE IMBALANCE

In this section, we demonstrate empirically what effect an imbalance in the sensitive attribute has
on the resulting fairness and accuracy of our proposed method. Let c denote the level of imbalance
of each training set (i.e., the number of data points in the larger of the two sensitive classes divided
by the total number of data points in the set). For each value of c we are interested in, we sample
a random subset of size 49 053 from the original ACSIncome-CA training dataset (out of 165 546
data points in total) and ensuring that the level of imbalance is exactly c. We use 49 053 samples, as
this is the largest number for which we can have same dataset size for each c, thus ensuring the fair
comparison.


                                                   16
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                                  0.40   FARE c=0.9 (Upper Bound)
                                                         FARE c=0.9 (Empirical)
                                                         FARE c=0.8 (Upper Bound)
                                                  0.35   FARE c=0.8 (Empirical)
                                                         FARE c=0.7 (Upper Bound)


                    Demographic Parity Distance
                                                         FARE c=0.7 (Empirical)
                                                  0.30   FARE c=0.6 (Upper Bound)
                                                         FARE c=0.6 (Empirical)
                                                         FARE c=0.5 (Upper Bound)
                                                  0.25
                                                         FARE c=0.5 (Empirical)


                                                  0.20

                                                  0.15

                                                  0.10

                                                  0.05

                                                  0.00
                                                           0.72              0.75        0.78   0.81
                                                                              Accuracy

Figure 8: Evaluation of FARE at different levels of imbalance in the sensitive attribute (denoted by
c) on randomly sampled subsets of ACSIncome-CA of the same size.


We train FARE on each subset separately and show Pareto plots, similar to those in Fig. 3, in Fig. 8.
We observe that FARE is very robust to the level of imbalance, as even for very high levels, such as
c = 0.9, we only see small difference in our Pareto curves (only at the low-accuracy regime).

D.2   E XPERIMENTS WITH DIFFERENT DOWNSTREAM CLASSIFIERS

In this section, we compare different FRL methods on ACSIncome-CA, similarly to Fig. 3 (left),
in the case when different downstream classifiers are used. In Fig. 9, we show the results on 4
additional downstream classifiers:
      • Decision Tree with maximum 2500 leaves
      • Random Forest using 100 trees
      • Logistic Regression
      • Two-layer neural network with 50 neurons per layer
We observe that the general trends observed in Fig. 3 (left) for the different FRL methods hold re-
gardless of the downstream classifier choice. We also see that the gap of our method to the maximum
achievable accuracy is the smallest when the downstream classifier is a tree. This is unsurprising
given that FARE’s own representations are based on trees. Further, we see that the more complex
feature extraction of FCRL and sIPM-LFR allow them to gain better accuracy over the unfair base-
line when using a more simple classifier such as a decision tree.

D.3   P ERFORMANCE GAP ON LARGER DATASETS

In this section, we explore whether the small performance gap we observed in Fig. 3 between
FARE’s most accurate model and the unfair baseline widens for larger datasets. To this end, we
merge two ACSIncome-US datasets from two consecutive years (2014 and 2015) and compare the
results to the single year dataset from 2014, shown in Fig. 3 (right). We note that the merged
dataset has roughly 2x the number of data points. The comparison between the merged and single-
year datasets is shown in Fig. 10. We observe almost no difference between the results on the two
datasets for the unfair baseline as well as the empirical and provable fairness of our method. This
suggests that the complexity of the dataset is a more important factor than the data volume for the
observed performance gap.


                                                                              17
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                        Unfair Baseline                                                                         Unfair Baseline
                                        CVIB                                                                                    CVIB
                                        FCRL                                                                                    FCRL
                                        FNF                                                                                     FNF
Demographic Parity Distance   0.20      sIPM-LFR
                                                                                                                      0.20      sIPM-LFR


                                                                                        Demographic Parity Distance
                                        FARE (Upper Bound)                                                                      FARE (Upper Bound)
                                        FARE (Empirical)                                                                        FARE (Empirical)


                              0.15                                                                                    0.15



                              0.10                                                                                    0.10



                              0.05                                                                                    0.05



                              0.00                                                                                    0.00
                                     0.65           0.70            0.75    0.80                                             0.65           0.70           0.75   0.80
                                                             Accuracy                                                                                Accuracy

                                                (a) Decision Tree                                                                      (b) Random Forest
                              0.40
                                        Unfair Baseline                                                                         Unfair Baseline
                                        CVIB                                                                                    CVIB
                              0.35      FCRL                                                                                    FCRL
                                        FNF                                                                                     FNF
                                        sIPM-LFR
                                                                                                                      0.20      sIPM-LFR
Demographic Parity Distance


                                                                                        Demographic Parity Distance
                              0.30      FARE (Upper Bound)                                                                      FARE (Upper Bound)
                                        FARE (Empirical)                                                                        FARE (Empirical)


                              0.25                                                                                    0.15

                              0.20

                                                                                                                      0.10
                              0.15

                              0.10
                                                                                                                      0.05
                              0.05

                              0.00                                                                                    0.00
                                     0.65           0.70           0.75    0.80                                              0.65           0.70           0.75   0.80
                                                             Accuracy                                                                                Accuracy

                                            (c) Logistic Regression                                                                    (d) Two-Layer NN

Figure 9: Comparison between different downstream classifiers on different FRL methods on
ACSIncome-CA.



E                                D IFFERENCES BETWEEN THEORETICALLY- PRINCIPLED FRL AND
                                 PROVABLY FAIR REPRESENTATION LEARNING


In this section we discuss the differences between theoretically-principled fair representation learn-
ing, which is most of the prior work, and provably fair representation learning, which is our method.


Provably fair representation learning Here, we first restate what kind of provable guarantee we
want to obtain for our learned representations.
We use a finite set of n datapoints {(x(j) , s(j) )} to learn representations z (j) = f (x(j) , s(j) ) such
that the DP distance of any classifier g trained on these representations is bounded by some value
T with confidence 1 −  . We consider practical scenarios, requiring 95% confidence, and n ranging
from 100 000 to roughly 1 000 000.
Note that this is the only type of guarantee that can provide an assurance to a practitioner that
their representations are indeed fair. The practitioner can only benefit from a provable fairness
guarantee that is obtained using a finite number of samples, and bounds that are obtained under
stronger assumptions such as perfect convergence of the training procedure are less useful.


                                                                                   18
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                                             Unfair Baseline ACSIncome 2014
                                                             Unfair Baseline ACSIncome 2014+2015
                                                   0.25      FARE ACSIncome 2014 (Upper Bound)
                                                             FARE ACSIncome 2014 (Empirical)
                                                             FARE ACSIncome 2014+2015 (Upper Bound)


                     Demographic Parity Distance
                                                             FARE ACSIncome 2014+2015 (Empirical)
                                                   0.20



                                                   0.15



                                                   0.10



                                                   0.05



                                                   0.00
                                                      0.74        0.76          0.78            0.80   0.82
                                                                                Accuracy

Figure 10: Comparison of the performance gap between FARE and the Unfair Baseline on
ACSIncome-US for a single year and two years.


Theoretically-principled FRL We now discuss theoretically-principled FRL methods from prior
work and, as argued in Section 2, explain why they cannot achieve the guarantee of provable fairness
using a finite number of samples, described above. These are the methods which use sound theory as
a basis for their representation learning algorithms. There are several works that compute bounds on
DP distance using total variation, mutual information, and other techniques. However, to make the
training practical they replace these bounds with approximations that cannot yield high-probability
certificates with a finite number of samples, which is what we call provably fair representation
learning above.
For example, Madras et al. (2018) bound demographic parity using the accuracy of the optimal ad-
versary for predicting a sensitive attribute from the learned representations (which is also closely
connected to the TV distance between the representations). However, even in the case of known
input distribution it is not possible to compute the optimal adversary for the learned representa-
tions when using standard feedforward neural network encoders (this is discussed in more detail
in Balunović et al. (2022)). In this direction, Feng et al. (2019) bound the accuracy of the optimal
Lipschitz continuous adversary (though the general optimal adversary does not have to be Lipschitz
continuous) using Wasserstein distance, which again cannot be provably bounded for finite number
of samples. Kairouz et al. (2022) formulate the optimal adversary for each type of the reconstruction
loss, but then explain that it is not possible to compute those in practice (except for the restricted case
when input distribution is e.g., a mixture of Gaussians), and they simply use it as a motivation for
min-max optimization in training. Perhaps the most advanced work in this direction is Balunović
et al. (2022) which proposes a new architecture based on normalizing flows that essentially allows
pushing the input distribution through the encoder to obtain the distribution of the latent represen-
tations which can then be used to estimate TV distance. However, in practice the input distribution
is unknown and their certificate only holds for the estimated input distribution. Zhao et al. (2020)
also show that the TV distance can bound the DP distance, but they provide no finite sample certifi-
cate. They rely on solving the min-max optimization problem where the objective is approximated
and then approximately optimized using SGD. Thus, it is impossible to know whether the resulting
representations are indeed fair for any downstream classifier.
Another idea is based on the fact that the DP distance can be bounded with an expression involving
mutual information between the representations and sensitive attribute. For example, Gupta et al.
(2021) provide one such bound, but they use it as a motivation for their training algorithm and do
not provide a way to compute this bound on finite sample dataset. Kim et al. (2022) bound the


                                                                                19
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


DP distance using IPM (integral probability metric), which again cannot be computed with high
probability using finite sample dataset. Tan et al. (2020) use classical sufficient dimension reduction
framework to construct representations as subspaces of reproducing kernel Hilbert space (RKHS),
and apply this to obtain fair Gaussian processes, but they assume existence of a fair subspace which
might not generally hold. Similarly, Grünewälder & Khaleghi (2021) generate features oblivious to
sensitive attributes using Hilbert-space-valued conditional expectation and relaxed optimization of
MMD criterion, which cannot provably guarantee fairness. All of these works fall into the category
of theoretically-principled FRL, and they cannot provide a high-probability certificate of fairness
using a finite number of samples.


                                                  20
