Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


T RANSFORMERS C AN B E T RANSLATED TO F IRST-
O RDER L OGIC WITH M AJORITY Q UANTIFIERS
 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                           A BSTRACT

         Characterizing the implicit structure of the computation within neural networks
         is a foundational problem in the area of deep learning interpretability. Can their
         inner decision process be captured symbolically in some familiar logic? We show
         that any transformer neural network can be translated into an equivalent fixed-
         size first-order logic formula which may also use majority quantifiers. The idea
         is to simulate transformers with highly uniform threshold circuits and leverage
         known theoretical connections between circuits and logic. Our findings also reveal
         the surprising fact that the entire transformer computation can be reduced merely
         to the division of two (large) integers. While our results are most pertinent for
         transformers, they apply equally to a broader class of neural network architectures,
         namely those with a fixed-depth uniform computation graph made up of standard
         neural net components, which includes feedforward and convolutional networks.


1   I NTRODUCTION
The incredible success of deep learning models, especially very large language and vision models
with tens to hundreds of billions of parameters (Brown et al., 2020; Thoppilan et al., 2022), has come
at the cost of increasingly limited understanding of how these models actually work and when they
might fail. This raises many concerns, such as around their safe deployment, fairness, and account-
ability. Is the inner working of such networks fundamentally different from classical algorithms and
symbolic systems that we understand better? Or can their computation be described symbolically
using a familiar symbolic formalism?
We derive the first, to the best of our knowledge, direct connection between a broad class of neural
networks and the well-studied classical formalism of first-order logic. Specifically, we show that
transformers—and other neural networks with a computation graph that has constant depth and a
“repetitive” or uniform structure—implement nothing but fixed-size first-order logic expressions, if
the logic is allowed to have majority quantifiers (M) in addition to the standard existential (∃) and
universal quantifiers (∀). Majority quantifiers simply take a sequence of boolean values and return
true if more than half of them are true. The resulting logic formalism is often referred to as FO(M).
Theorem 1 (Informal version of Cor. 5.1). For any neural network N with a constant-depth com-
putation graph, there is a fixed-size FO(M) formula ϕ equivalent to N .

This result immediately provides mechanistic interpretability—it demonstrates that, at least in prin-
ciple, the inner decision process of any transformer model can be efficiently translated into a fixed-
size formula (with respect to the input length) in a simple, well-defined logic. The output N (x) of
the transformer on any input x is simply the value ϕ(x) of this formula. Similar to decision trees,
FO(M) formulae have the property that each sub-expression corresponds to a logical constraint, i.e.,
a function mapping the input sequence to a truth value. In contrast, the internal modules of a trans-
former or complex circuit do not satisfy this, as they map between uninterpretable latent spaces.
We thus believe that converting transformers to FO(M) formulae could be leveraged for interpreting
their behavior in future work, although a thorough exploration of this idea lies outside the scope of
our theoretical contributions in this paper.
Thm. 1 also gives some insight about how to contrast the abilities of transformers and finite-state
machines. Classically, the regular languages can be characterized as the languages definable in terms


                                                  1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


of monadic second-order logical formulae (Büchi, 1960; Elgot, 1961). We have shown transformers
can be simulated by first-order formulae with majority quantifiers. Thus, an advantage transform-
ers have over finite-state machines is the ability to resolve majority quantifiers over their input.
However, transformers are not necessarily strictly more powerful than finite-state machines: it is
unknown whether second-order monadic quantifiers can be simulated by majority quantifiers.
We derive this connection between transformers and FO(M) by leveraging a key result in circuit
complexity theory: the equivalence of FO(M) with highly uniform threshold circuits, specifically
with a circuit class known as DLOGTIME-uniform TC0 (Barrington et al., 1990).1 Our proof builds
upon and significantly tightens prior work by Hao et al. (2022), Hahn (2020), Merrill et al. (2022),
and Merrill & Sabharwal (2022) on relating specific types of transformer networks to circuit com-
plexity classes. We improve prior analysis on two fronts. First, the class log-uniform TC0 is much
tigher than in previous results. Second, in contrast to their work, we obtain a characterization for a
fully general model of transformers without limiting assumptions. Our formal model is the first to
cover realistic design choices and sizes used in typical transformer implementations.
Specifically, we show that any transformer network with a fixed-depth computation graph can be
simulated by a highly uniform class of threshold circuits:2

Theorem 2 (Informal version of Thm. 5). For any neural network N with a constant-depth compu-
tation graph, there exists a log-uniform TC0 circuit family C = {Cn }∞
                                                                     n=0 such that, for all x of size
n, N (x) = Cn (x).

This result, in addition to helping derive Thm. 1, itself has significant implications. It provides a
much tighter class of transformer-hard problems, i.e., problems to which any transformer can be
efficiently reduced, than previously known. It shows that every problem complete for the class of
log-uniform TC0 circuits is transformer-hard. Since division (Hesse, 2001; Hesse et al., 2002) is
known to be one such problem (Aaronson et al., 2022), this leads to the following rather surprising
finding:

Corollary 2.1. For any neural network N with a constant-depth computation graph and input
x, the computation of N (x) can be efficiently reduced to integer division in the following sense:
for all j ∈ {1, . . . , |N (x)|}, there exist efficiently computable (via log-uniform circuits) integers
aj (x), bj (x), and ij such that the j-th bit of N (x) equals the ij -th bit of ⌊aj (x)/bj (x)⌋.

This again allows us to view transformers from a novel perspective: namely, computing a bit of the
output of a transformer with hundreds of billions of parameters can be easily reduced to dividing
two integers. Even very large transformers are, in this sense, ultimately simple functions operating
at a very large scale.
In summary, our findings shed new light into the inner computation of transformers (and other neural
architectures) and its connection to first-order logic. While literature on neuro-symbolic models has
often viewed symbolic and neural systems as very different from each other, our results show that
the boundaries between these two computational paradigms are not as rigid as they might seem.


Roadmap. §2 gives a definition and examples of FO(M), and then introduces relevant background
on computation graphs and circuits for our proofs. §3 presents the constructive algorithm to compile
computation graph families into threshold circuit families and justifies its correctness. Specifically,
we obtain the result that log-uniform computation graphs (with uniform node types) can be compiled
into FO(M) expressions. Then, §4 shows that transformers are uniform computation graph families,
which implies that they can be compiled into FO(M).



   1
     For brevity, we will henceforth abbreviate DLOGTIME-uniform as log-uniform.
   2
     Conceptually, our results converting transformers to logical formulae and circuits resemble empirical work
extracting discrete “subcircuits” from transformers (Elhage et al., 2021), although we use the term circuit in a
precise formal sense, rather than to mean any discrete rules summarizing model behavior.


                                                       2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


2       P RELIMINARIES
2.1     F IRST O RDER L OGIC WITH M AJORITY

Transformers can be translated into expressions in FO(M)—what do such expressions look like? We
provide a definition of first-order logic with majority as well as some examples of simple languages
definable in it.
Informally, FO(M) is first-order logic extended to also have majority (M) quantifiers. We apply
FO(M) specifically to string inputs, for which quantifiers will range over indices into the string,
over which various predicates can be applied, as in Barrington et al. (1990).
Definition 1 (FO(M) indices). The constants 1 and n are given as indices in FO(M). Other indices
can be built using addition or subtraction,3 or can be variables introduced by existential (∃), universal
(∀), or majority (M) quantifiers.
Definition 2 (FO(M) expressions). For each σ ∈ Σ and index i, X(σ, i) is a predicate that semanti-
cally represents whether the i-th token in the input sequence is σ.4 Comparing indices with = or ≤
also produces a valid expression, as does combining other expressions with the logical connectives ∧
or ∨. Finally a new expression can by generated by scoping a quantifier (∃, ∀, M) with an associated
variable over another expression.5

A formula ϕ in FO(M) is an expression with no free (i.e., unbound) variables. For every input in
Σ∗ , it evaluates to a value in {0, 1}. ϕ can thus be viewed as a function from Σ∗ to {0, 1} defining a
formal language.
Without loss of generality, we will assume multiple sub-formulae within ϕ can be labeled as ordered
outputs, thus allowing ϕ to be a function from Σ∗ to {0, 1}k for some fixed constant k bounded
above by the number of sub-formulae in ϕ.
Let Σ = {a, b}. To illustrate the formalism, we provide example languages definable in FO(M):
Example 1 (Bigram matching). The following FO(M) expression defines the regular language of
strings containing the bigram ab:
                                          ∃i [X(a, i) ∧ X(b, i + 1)] .
Example 2 (Skip-bigram matching). The following FO(M) expression defines the language of
strings containing the long-distance pattern a . . . b, resembling the form of patterns proposed by
Elhage et al. (2021) in their analysis of transformer subcircuits:
                                     ∃i [X(b, i) ∧ ∃j [j ≤ i ∧ X(a, j)]] .
Example 3 (Majority). The following FO(M) expression defines the counter language “majority”,
i.e., the set of strings with more b’s than a’s:
                                                 Mi [X(b, i)] .

Example 1 and Example 2 are definable in first-order logic (without majority), which is a special
case of FO(M). In contrast, Example 3 requires majority predicates (Furst et al., 1981).

2.2     C OMPUTATION G RAPHS

A computation graph over a datatype D ⊆ {0, 1}∗ and a countable set of primitive functions F ⊆
D∗ × D is a directed acyclic graph (DAG) where:
        1. Each node is labelled by a node type: a function f ∈ F describing the computation of this
           node.
    3
     In Barrington et al. (1990) this is not introduced as a primitive, but can be simulated using the ≤ predicate.
    4
     Barrington et al. (1990) define X(i) over a binary vocabulary. We generalize this to an arbitrary vocabulary
Σ by assuming each token is encoded in a one-hot representation. Then X(σ, i) = X(|Σ|i + s) where s is the
index of σ in the vocabulary.
   5
     Sometimes a “bit predicate” is also included in the definition of the formalism. It turns out this is not
necessary for FO(M), as it can be simulated using the other primitives (Barrington et al., 1990).


                                                        3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


       2. Each edge represents a value D flowing as output from one node into another node.
       3. F contains the special symbol input, which designates k nodes as input nodes. We refer to
          k as the arity and assume without loss of generality that nodes 0, · · · , k − 1 are inputs.6
       4. A single node is designated the output node. We assume without loss of generality that the
          output is the node with the largest index.
A computation graph G of arity k parameterizes a function fG : Dk → D in the standard way: the
input nodes are assigned the input values, and the value of each node is computed (traversing the
graph in a bottom-up topological order) a function of the values of its children until the output node
receives a value. At this point, the value of the output node is considered the output of the function.
It is worth noting that computation graphs can only process inputs of bounded length. To process
arbitrary-length inputs, we will need to generalize them to computation graph families (§2.3).
Two important properties for computation graphs are size(G) (the number of nodes) and depth(G)
(the length of the longest path from an input node to an output node). Additionally, we denote by
arity(G, i) the number of inputs to node i.

Threshold circuits. A threshold circuit is a special case of a computation graph where D = {0, 1}
and F is thePset of threshold functions of the form θ≤∆ and θ≥∆ over D∗ , defined as follows: θ≤∆ (x)
equals 1 if σ∈x σ ≤ ∆ and 0 otherwise; θ≥∆ (x) is defined analogously. Note that typical boolean
circuits with AND, OR, and NOT gates are a special case of threshold gates, as is the IDENTITY
logical gate.7
Similar to the FO(M) case, we will, without loss of generality, allow nodes with the k ′ ≥ 1 largest
indices to all be designated as (ordered) output nodes. A threshold circuit with arity k and k ′ output
                                                        ′
nodes will thus be a function from {0, 1}k to {0, 1}k . This will be convenient when simulating
neural network components which often output multiple bits.
We will find it useful to consider threshold circuits as a kind of compilation target for computation
graphs: in other words, we will be concerned with simulating computation graphs defined over more
complex functions and data types into threshold circuits.

2.3    C OMPUTATION G RAPH FAMILIES

A computation graph family over D and F is a mapping from n ∈ N to a computation graph Gn
for processing inputs of size n. Thus, G defines a function from D∗ → D, where fG (x) = f|x| (x).
Intuitively, computation graph families are useful because they generalize computation graphs to
define functions over unbounded-length strings as inputs.

Size, depth, and arity. For computation graph families, the size and depth become functions of
the input length n. We define the following functions, which naturally generalize size, depth, and
arity to computation graph families:
                                         sizeG (n) = size(Gn )
                                       depthG (n) = depth(Gn )
                                      arityG (n, i) = arity(Gn , i).

Uniformity. G is an infinite set, so a computation graph family can be more compactly represented
by two programs computing the following functions:
       1. nodeG (n, i), which returns the type of node i in Gn if i ≤ size(Gn ), and ∅ otherwise.
       2. edgeG (n, i, j), which returns the argument index of i into node j if Gn contains an edge
          i → j and −1 otherwise. edgeG (n, i, j) only needs to be defined over i, j < size(Gn )
A pair of algorithms implementing these two functions uniquely specifies a computation graph fam-
ily, as it enables building the structure of the computation graph Gn for any n.
   6
    By convention in computer science, we let computation graph nodes be zero-indexed.
   7
    For more background on threshold circuits, see Merrill & Sabharwal (2022), Merrill et al. (2022), and
Arora & Barak (2009).


                                                    4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


            Table 1: Summary of common notation for computation graph and circuit families.
             Graph               Circuit     Output Range Description
               i′                   i               Z       index of node/gate
         nodeG (n, i′ )       nodeC (n, i)         F9       type of node/gate
        edgeG (n, i′ , j ′ ) edgeC (n, i, j)        Z       argument number of edge i → j
           sizeG (n)            sizeC (n)           Z       number of nodes/gates in graph/circuit
          depthG (n)          depthC (n)            Z       longest path length in graph/circuit
                  bnode(n, i)                [0, sizeG (n)] index of the block i′ containing i
                               ′
                  bstart(n, i )              [0, sizeC (n)] index of first gate i in block i′
                   bsize(n, i′ )                    Z       size of block i′


Additionally, it is useful to introduce uniformity conditions on computation graph families. Uniform
computation graph families (generalizing uniform circuits; cf. Arora & Barak, 2009) are families
where nodeG and edgeG can be computed efficiently, i.e., under some constraints on space or time.
In this paper we focus on time-bounded uniformity:
Definition 3 (Uniformity). A computation graph family G is T (n)-uniform iff each of nodeG (n, i)
and edgeG (n, i, j) can be computed by a deterministic Turing machine in time T (n).

Specifically, we are interested in log-uniform computation graph families where T (n) = O(log n).
We also introduce a stronger notion of column uniformity that captures the highly regular structure
of a wide range of commonly used neural network architectures, including the Transformer. This
will be useful for tighter bounds by constructing smaller circuits to simulate neural networks:
Definition 4 (Column uniformity). A computation graph family G is T (n)-column-uniform iff
          • There exists a finite sequence of nodes {Ki }ℓ−10=1 such that, for 0 ≤ i ≤ sizeG (n),
            nodeG (n, i) = Ki mod ℓ .8
          • edgeG (n, i, j) can be computed by a deterministic Turing machine in time T (n).

We define log-column-uniform analogously to log-uniform, i.e., we let T (n) = O(log n).

Threshold circuit families. Threshold circuit families are families of threshold circuits. We will
be interested in simulating computation graph families with threshold circuit families.

3       S IMULATING C OMPUTATION G RAPHS WITH C IRCUITS
We provide an algorithm that constructs a circuit simulating a given computation graph. Intuitively,
the algorithm creates contiguous blocks of circuit gates simulating each node in the computation
graph, and routes inputs and outputs between blocks appropriately.

Block mapping. This algorithm depends on a block mapping, which we define as an implementa-
tion of the following three functions:
         1. The block node bnode(n, i): the index of the node that gate i’s block is simulating.
         2. The block start bstart(n, i′ ): the smallest gate index in the block simulating node i′ .
         3. The block size bsize(n, i′ ): the number of gates in the block simulating node i′ .
Further, we enforce that a valid block mapping must satisfy that, for all i, with i′ = bnode(n, i),
                               bstart(n, i′ ) ≤ i < bstart(n, i′ ) + bsize(n, i′ ).
Now, consider a computation graph G where the primitive functions are computable by log-uniform
threshold circuits. In this case, we can identify each primitive function f with a log-uniform thresh-
old circuit family T that computes f , where the first arityT (n) gates are IDENTITY gates reserved
for taking input. For such a graph, the nodeG function can be taken to return a symbol identifying a
circuit family T .
    8
        Where a mod b represents the remainder when a is divided by b.


                                                        5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Algorithm 1 Return the type of gate i in circuit Cn .
  procedure nodeC (n, i)
     if i < sizeG (n) then
          T ← nodeG (n, bnode(n, i))
          return nodeT (n, i − bstart(n, i′ ))
     else return ∅

Algorithm 2 Return argument number of edge i → j in circuit Cn . Return −1 if no edge exists.
  procedure edgeC (n, i, j)
     i′ ← bnode(n, i)
     j ′ ← bnode(n, j)
     si ← bstart(n, i′ )
     sj ← bstart(n, j ′ )
     if i′ = j ′ then                                     ▷ i, j fall within the same node of Gn
          T ← nodeG (n, i′ )
          return edgeT (n, i − si , j − sj )
     else if edgeG (n, i′ , j ′ ) ≥ 0 then                ▷ i, j fall in nodes of Gn with an edge
          Ti′ ← nodeG (n, i′ )
          bi ← i − (si + bsize(n, i′ ) − p)        ▷ adjust i relative to the output bits of Ti′ (n)
          bj ← j − (sj + p · edgeG (n, i′ , j ′ ))  ▷ adjust j relative to the input bits of Tj ′ (n)
          if bi = bj < p then return j − sj
          else return 0
     else return 0


In this case, our algorithm requires that, for all i′ , the block size of i′ must match the size of the
circuit for the type of block i′ , i.e., bsize(n, i′ ) = sizenodeG (n,i′ ) (n).
These properties allow us to meaningfully identify a graph node i′ with a block of nodes that will
simulate it. This intuition enables us to develop Algorithm 1 and Algorithm 2 for constructing a
uniform threshold circuit family from a uniform computation graph family.
Theorem 3. Let G be a computation graph over a finite set of node types F, where each T ∈ F is
specified by a log-uniform circuit family. Let bnode, bstart, and bsize be a valid block mapping in
the sense above. Then Algorithm 1 and Algorithm 2 define a circuit family C such that
      1. C and G compute the same function from D∗p → Dp , if we consider the final p gates of each
         Ci to be its output.
      2. depthC (n) ≤ depthG (n) · maxT depthT (n).
      3. sizeC (n) ≤ sizeG (n) · maxT sizeT (n).

Proof. Assume without loss of generality that the gates of C are topologically ordered. We show by
induction over circuit gates j (with j ′ = bnode(n, j)) that:
      1. For all i′ < j ′ , the last p nodes of block i′ store the value of node i′ .
      2. For all i such that bstart(n, j ′ ) ≤ i ≤ j, gate i of C (as a function of the input nodes of j ′ )
         computes gate i − bstart(n, j ′ ) of nodeG (n, j ′ ).

  Base case. We have two circuits with no gates, so the premises are trivially satisfied.

   Inductive case. Assume the premises hold up to j. We will show they hold for j + 1. Let T =
nodeG (n, j ′ ). By Premise 1, we know that the last p nodes of block i′ store the output of node i′ , for
i′ < j ′ . By Algorithm 2, for each i′ such that edgeG (n, i′ , j ′ ) = a with 0 ≤ k < arityT (n), gates kp
through k(p + 1) − 1 of block j ′ will copy the final p gates of block i′ . Thus, the first k · arityT (n)
gates of block j ′ store the inputs to node j ′ .
At this point, we use Premise 2 to conclude that the first j − bstart(n, j ′ ) gates of block j ′ compute
the same function as the first j − bstart(n, j ′ ) gates of T with respect to this input. Thus, we just
need to show that gate j + 1 is also correct. Within Algorithm 2, we fall in case i′ = j ′ , meaning
that gate j + 1 of block j ′ gates the same inputs as gate j + 1 of T . By Algorithm 1, the type of gate


                                                     6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


j + 1 in block j ′ is the type of gate j + 1 of T . We conclude that gate j + 1 in block j ′ computes
the same function of the input gates as gate j + 1 in T . If j + 1 = bsize(n, j ′ ), we further conclude
that the final p gates of block j ′ store the output of node j ′ .


Since a transformer computation graph has a constant depth and polynomial size, this theorem allows
us to relatively easily recover prior results about hard attention transformers (Hao et al., 2022; Hahn,
2020) and saturated attention transformers (Merrill et al., 2022) using a common framework. All one
has to do is show that all individual node types in such transformers can be computed by AC0 and
TC0 circuits, respectively. We omit the details of these here as later (§4) we will prove a much tighter
result showing that all node types in a broader class of neural networks can, in fact, be computed
with a much more uniform circuit class.
Formally, let XC0 denote any family of constant-depth circuits, including AC0 and TC0 .
Corollary 3.1. Let G be a computation graph family over a finite set of node types. If G has constant
depth and polynomial size, and every node type in it can be computed by XC0 circuits, then the
function computed by G is in XC0 .

3.1   PADDED B LOCK M APPING FOR U NIFORM C OMPUTATION G RAPH FAMILIES

We now implement a block mapping in the case where G is a log-uniform computation graph. We
analyze the runtime of nodeC and edgeC to show that C is a log-uniform circuit family.
Our block mapping works by simply padding each block to the maximum size needed to implement
any node type in G. We assume that there exists a polynomial function bsize(n) computable by a
Turing machine in O(log n) time such that, for each node type T , sizeT (n) ≤ bsize(n). We will
later justify this assumption for transformers in §4. Without loss of generality, we can take bsize(n)
to be a power of 2 by padding it to be the smallest power of 2 above its original value.10
We then pad each node type circuit T to have size bsize(n) by adding unused dummy nodes. We
are ready to provide a block mapping:

                                       bnode(n, i) = ⌊i/bsize(n)⌋
                                      bstart(n, i′ ) = i′ · bsize(n)
                                       bsize(n, i′ ) = bsize(n).

Since bsize(n) is a power of 2, bnode and bstart are reducible to left and right shifting over O(log n)-
bit integers, which can be implemented in O(log n) time. Thus, these functions are computable in
time O(log n). Since nodeG and edgeG are just calling bnode, bstart, and bsize with constant
overhead, it follows from Thm. 3 that
Theorem 4. Let G be a log-uniform computation graph over a finite set of node types F, where
each T ∈ F is specified by a log-uniform threshold circuit family and sizeT is computable in time
O(log n). Let bnode, bstart, bsize be the padded block mapping w.r.t F. Then G can be simulated by
a constant-depth, poly-size, log-uniform threshold circuit family via Algorithm 1 and Algorithm 2.

Following from the equivalence of log-uniform TC0 and FO(M), we obtain
Corollary 4.1. Let G be a log-uniform computation graph over a finite set of node types F, where
each T ∈ F is specified by a log-uniform threshold circuit family and sizeT is computable in time
DLOGTIME. Let bnode, bstart, bsize be the padded block mapping w.r.t F. Then G can be simulated
by an FO(M) formula.

For both Thm. 4 and Cor. 4.1, the size upper bound from Thm. 3 holds, but we omit it for brevity.
The padded block mapping scheme is wasteful in the sense that not every node type needs to receive
the maximum block size.
  10
     bsize(n) remains poly(n) because its value at most doubles. It can be computed in O(log n) time because
padding a binary number to a power of 2 simply involves prepending a 1 and converting existing bits to 0’s.


                                                     7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


4     T RANSFORMERS ARE U NIFORM C OMPUTATION G RAPH FAMILIES

The last step to make our claim about transformers go through is to justify that the transformer
architecture is a log-uniform computation graph family (over node types that can be expressed as
log-uniform threshold circuit families). For those familiar with neural networks, it should not be
surprising that our notion of a computation graph describes a neural network. In order to justify this
rigorously though, we will show that all core neural network components are computable by log-
uniform threshold circuit families, and will also derive size and depth bounds for these families.11

4.1   T RANSFORMERS

We will think of each representation in a transformer as a vector of numbers from Fp , i.e., vectors
in Fdp . In a typical transformer network (Vaswani et al., 2017; Devlin et al., 2019), one may have
p = 16 or 32 as a fixed constant determined by the GPU, input length n = 512, model dimension
d = 768, and a potentially larger feedforward dimension h. In practice, for newer, larger transformer
language models, the precision p = 16 (Brown et al., 2020; Zhang et al., 2022).
The model dimension d can be thought of as being roughly the same order of magnitude as n. Note
that this is much more aligned with practical transformers than the log-precision model of Merrill
& Sabharwal (2022), which effectively assumes dp = O(log n) and thus applies only for values of
n that are substantially larger than what’s used in practical transformers (e.g., dp in this example
setting is 12288 whereas log(n) is only 9). Our model and associated result, on the other hand,
apply directly to typical implementation choices for several neural net architectures.
The feedforward dimension h can be larger than d in practice (Vaswani et al., 2017; Raffel et al.,
2020), but is reasonably still poly(n). Rather than assuming a specific relationship between n, d, h,
will derive our characterization of transformer components in terms of these three hyperparameters.
Putting this all together, we can now define a transformer as a computation graph family N . The
transformer column KN is a transformer embedding layer followed by L transformer layers, each
of which contains a self-attention sublayer and a feedforward sublayer. These sublayers are in
turn constructed from affine transformations, activation functions, layer norms, and self-attention
modules. We define these primitives (as well as the embedding component) as the functions in FN ,
and in turn represent the transformer column as a finite sequence of these primitives.

4.2   R ESULTS

We first justify that the transformer computation graph family is log-uniform, which implies it is
log-column-uniform.
Lemma 1. Any transformer computation graph family N is log-column-uniform.

Proof. We have the column K by construction. All that remains to show is that edgeG can be
computed in DLOGTIME. All the routing of inputs and outputs between transformer components
is fixed within the column besides self-attention. For the fixed routing, we can simply store a finite
table for each i′ , j ′ mod |K| and look up the answer to answer edgeG (n, i′ , j ′ ). For routing into
a self-attention component j ′ at sequence position tj ′ , let i′ is the output of the previous layer at
position ti′ . For full attention, we simply return ti′ . For causally masked attention, we return ti′
if ti′ < tj ′ and 0 otherwise. Either way, this logic is clearly possible in DLOGTIME. Thus, we
conclude that the transformer computation graph family is column-uniform.

Next, we need to justify that each neural net component used as a node in the transformer computa-
tion graph is uniform and that its size is computable in DLOGTIME.
Lemma 2. Assume d, h, |Σ| ≤ poly(n). Each f ∈ FN is computable by a log-uniform threshold
circuit T with sizeT computable by a deterministic Turing machine in time O(log n).
  11
     While we provide this rigorous justification for transformers, similar arguments can also be made for a
broader class of neural networks made up of standard neural net components, which includes feedforward and
convolutional networks.


                                                     8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Proof. Out of all the transformer components (Vaswani et al., 2017), activation functions and resid-
ual connections are completely “local” (cf. §A), meaning they have fixed-depth, fixed-size circuits
as a function of n, d, and |Σ|. Thus, these operations are trivially uniform.
It remains to be shown that the other “global” components (embeddings, affine transformations,
layer norm, and self attention) can be computed by uniform threshold circuit families with size
computable in DLOGTIME. We do this in §B by reducing each component to summation with
uniform local functions. This allows us to derive the following:
     1. By Lem. 8, embedding the input token and position is computable by a uniform threshold
        circuit family of size at most O(|Σ|d + n).
     2. By Lem. 9, each affine transformation is computable by a uniform threshold circuit family
        of size at most O(max{d2 log d, dh log h}).
     3. by Lem. 10, the layer norm is computable by a uniform threshold circuit family of size at
        most O(d log d).
     4. By Lem. 11, self attention is computable by a uniform threshold circuit family of size at
        most O(n log n).
For each component type T , we pick a function T (n) that is both larger than the size bound for T
and computable by a deterministic Turing machine in O(log n) time. We pad T with unused nodes
to make sizeT (n) = T (n).
We conclude that each f ∈ FN is computable by a log-uniform threshold circuit T with sizeT
computable by a deterministic Turing machine in time O(log n).

This column uniformity implies standard uniformity, and that the overall size is the column size
times n. We can now directly obtain the following applying Thm. 4 to transformers:
Theorem 5. For d, h, |Σ| ≤ poly(n), let N be a transformer computation graph over vocabulary
Σ with model dimension d and feedforward dimension h. Then the function N defines over Σ∗ is
computable by a constant-depth threshold circuit family C with size at most
                         n · O |Σ|d + d2 log d + dh log h + n log n .



The n comes from the number of columns, and the other factor comes from the size of a column,
where the terms follow from the sizes of transformer components derived in Lem. 2. Practically,
in an overparameterized transformer, |Σ| or h is often the largest hyperparameter. If so, we would
expect the terms |Σ|d and dh log h to dominate the size of the threshold circuit. These correspond
to the the circuit gates simulating the embedding layer and the feedforward sublayers, respectively.
Analogously to Cor. 4.1, we show that transformers can be translated to equivalent FO(M) formulae:

Corollary 5.1. For d, h, |Σ| ≤ poly(n), let N be a transformer computation graph over vocabulary
Σ with model dimension d and feedforward dimension h. Then N can be simulated by an FO(M)
formula.

5   C ONCLUSION

We proved that any transformer model can be efficiently translated into a fixed-size FO(M) logic
formula that computes the same function as the transformer (for all input lengths). This result comes
by first simulating a transformer with a highly uniform threshold circuit family, and then leverag-
ing the established equivalence of log-uniform circuits and FO(M). Transformers and other neural
nets are often discussed in contrast with symbolic models based on logical formalisms (Garnelo &
Shanahan, 2019)—an immediate implication of our result is that it is possible to express the inner
workings of transformers also in a simple logic, challenging the premise of a rigid division between
symbolic and neural models.
It would be an interesting future direction to implement our efficient algorithms to convert trans-
formers to FO(M) formulae, and leverage this logical representation for increased interpretability of
the model. Extending our results to recursive architectures such as RNNs also remains an interesting
open problem.


                                                 9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


R EFERENCES
Scott Aaronson, Greg Kuperberg, and Oliver Habryka. TC0 : Constant depth threshold circuits,
  2022. URL https://complexityzoo.net/Complexity_Zoo:T#tc0.

Sanjeev Arora and Boaz Barak. Computational Complexity: A Modern Approach. Cam-
  bridge University Press, 2009. URL https://books.google.com/books/about/
  Computational_Complexity.html?id=8Wjqvsoo48MC.

David A. Mix Barrington, Neil Immerman, and Howard Straubing. On uniformity within NC1 .
  Journal of Computer and System Sciences, 41(3):274–306, 1990. ISSN 0022-0000. doi: https:
  //doi.org/10.1016/0022-0000(90)90022-D. URL https://www.sciencedirect.com/
  science/article/pii/002200009090022D.

Tom Brown, Benjamin Mann, Nick Ryder, Melanie Subbiah, Jared D Kaplan, Prafulla Dhari-
  wal, Arvind Neelakantan, Pranav Shyam, Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, Sandhini Agar-
  wal, Ariel Herbert-Voss, Gretchen Krueger, Tom Henighan, Rewon Child, Aditya Ramesh,
  Daniel Ziegler, Jeffrey Wu, Clemens Winter, Chris Hesse, Mark Chen, Eric Sigler, Ma-
  teusz Litwin, Scott Gray, Benjamin Chess, Jack Clark, Christopher Berner, Sam McCan-
  dlish, Alec Radford, Ilya Sutskever, and Dario Amodei. Language models are few-shot
  learners. In H. Larochelle, M. Ranzato, R. Hadsell, M.F. Balcan, and H. Lin (eds.), Ad-
  vances in Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 33, pp. 1877–1901. Curran Asso-
  ciates, Inc., 2020. URL https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper/2020/file/
  1457c0d6bfcb4967418bfb8ac142f64a-Paper.pdf.

J. Richard Büchi. Weak second-order arithmetic and finite automata. Mathematical Logic Quar-
   terly, 6(1-6):66–92, 1960. doi: https://doi.org/10.1002/malq.19600060105. URL https:
   //onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1002/malq.19600060105.

Jacob Devlin, Ming-Wei Chang, Kenton Lee, and Kristina Toutanova. BERT: Pre-training of deep
  bidirectional transformers for language understanding. In Proceedings of the 2019 Conference of
  the North American Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Human Language
  Technologies, Volume 1 (Long and Short Papers), pp. 4171–4186, Minneapolis, Minnesota, June
  2019. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/N19-1423. URL https:
  //www.aclweb.org/anthology/N19-1423.

Calvin C. Elgot. Decision problems of finite automata design and related arithmetics. Transactions
  of the American Mathematical Society, 98(1):21–51, 1961. ISSN 00029947. URL http://
  www.jstor.org/stable/1993511.

Nelson Elhage, Neel Nanda, Catherine Olsson, Tom Henighan, Nicholas Joseph, Ben Mann,
  Amanda Askell, Yuntao Bai, Anna Chen, Tom Conerly, Nova DasSarma, Dawn Drain, Deep
  Ganguli, Zac Hatfield-Dodds, Danny Hernandez, Andy Jones, Jackson Kernion, Liane Lovitt,
  Kamal Ndousse, Dario Amodei, Tom Brown, Jack Clark, Jared Kaplan, Sam McCandlish, and
  Chris Olah. A mathematical framework for transformer circuits. Transformer Circuits Thread,
  2021. https://transformer-circuits.pub/2021/framework/index.html.

Merrick Furst, James B. Saxe, and Michael Sipser. Parity, circuits, and the polynomial-time hi-
 erarchy. In Proceedings of the 22nd Annual Symposium on Foundations of Computer Science,
 SFCS ’81, pp. 260–270, USA, 1981. IEEE Computer Society. doi: 10.1109/SFCS.1981.35. URL
 https://doi.org/10.1109/SFCS.1981.35.

Marta Garnelo and Murray Shanahan. Reconciling deep learning with symbolic artificial intel-
 ligence: representing objects and relations. Current Opinion in Behavioral Sciences, 29:17–
 23, 2019. ISSN 2352-1546. doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cobeha.2018.12.010. URL https:
 //www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S2352154618301943. Ar-
 tificial Intelligence.

Michael Hahn. Theoretical limitations of self-attention in neural sequence models. Transactions
 of the Association for Computational Linguistics, 8:156–171, 2020. URL https://www.
 aclweb.org/anthology/2020.tacl-1.11.


                                               10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Yiding Hao, Dana Angluin, and Robert Frank. Formal language recognition by hard attention
  transformers: Perspectives from circuit complexity, 2022. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/
  2204.06618.
William Hesse. Division is in uniform TC0 . In International Colloquium on Automata, Languages,
 and Programming, pp. 104–114. Springer, 2001.
William Hesse, Eric Allender, and David A. Mix Barrington. Uniform constant-depth threshold cir-
 cuits for division and iterated multiplication. J. Comput. Syst. Sci., 65(4):695–716, dec 2002.
 ISSN 0022-0000. doi: 10.1016/S0022-0000(02)00025-9. URL https://doi.org/10.
 1016/S0022-0000(02)00025-9.
Neeraj Kayal. Lecture notes for topics in complexity theory, February 2015. URL
  https://www.csa.iisc.ac.in/˜chandan/courses/arithmetic_circuits/
  notes/lec5.pdf.
William Merrill and Ashish Sabharwal. Log-precision transformers are constant-depth uniform
 threshold circuits. ArXiv, abs/2207.00729, 2022.
William Merrill, Ashish Sabharwal, and Noah A. Smith. Saturated transformers are constant-depth
 threshold circuits. Transactions of the Association for Computational Linguistics, 10, 2022.
Colin Raffel, Noam M. Shazeer, Adam Roberts, Katherine Lee, Sharan Narang, Michael Matena,
  Yanqi Zhou, Wei Li, and Peter J. Liu. Exploring the limits of transfer learning with a unified
  text-to-text transformer. Journal of Machine Learning Research, 21(140), 2020.
Romal Thoppilan, Daniel De Freitas, Jamie Hall, Noam M. Shazeer, Apoorv Kulshreshtha, Heng-
  Tze Cheng, Alicia Jin, Taylor Bos, Leslie Baker, Yu Du, Yaguang Li, Hongrae Lee, Huaixiu
  Zheng, Amin Ghafouri, Marcelo Menegali, Yanping Huang, Maxim Krikun, Dmitry Lepikhin,
  James Qin, Dehao Chen, Yuanzhong Xu, Zhifeng Chen, Adam Roberts, Maarten Bosma, Yanqi
  Zhou, Chung-Ching Chang, I. A. Krivokon, Willard James Rusch, Marc Pickett, Kathleen S.
  Meier-Hellstern, Meredith Ringel Morris, Tulsee Doshi, Renelito Delos Santos, Toju Duke,
  Johnny Hartz Søraker, Ben Zevenbergen, Vinodkumar Prabhakaran, Mark Dı́az, Ben Hutchin-
  son, Kristen Olson, Alejandra Molina, Erin Hoffman-John, Josh Lee, Lora Aroyo, Ravindran Ra-
  jakumar, Alena Butryna, Matthew Lamm, V. O. Kuzmina, Joseph Fenton, Aaron Cohen, Rachel
  Bernstein, Ray Kurzweil, Blaise Aguera-Arcas, Claire Cui, Marian Croak, Ed Chi, and Quoc Le.
  Lamda: Language models for dialog applications. ArXiv, abs/2201.08239, 2022.
Ashish Vaswani, Noam Shazeer, Niki Parmar, Jakob Uszkoreit, Llion Jones, Aidan N
  Gomez, Ł ukasz Kaiser, and Illia Polosukhin. Attention is all you need. In I. Guyon,
  U. V. Luxburg, S. Bengio, H. Wallach, R. Fergus, S. Vishwanathan, and R. Garnett
  (eds.), Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 30. Curran Asso-
  ciates, Inc., 2017. URL https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper/2017/file/
  3f5ee243547dee91fbd053c1c4a845aa-Paper.pdf.
Susan Zhang, Stephen Roller, Naman Goyal, Mikel Artetxe, Moya Chen, Shuohui Chen, Christo-
  pher Dewan, Mona Diab, Xian Li, Xi Victoria Lin, Todor Mihaylov, Myle Ott, Sam Shleifer, Kurt
  Shuster, Daniel Simig, Punit Singh Koura, Anjali Sridhar, Tianlu Wang, and Luke Zettlemoyer.
  OPT: Open pre-trained transformer language models. ArXiv, abs/2205.01068, 2022.


                                              11
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


A     L OCAL AND G LOBAL F UNCTIONS

A.1   C OMPOSITION

To justify our modular decomposition of transformers, we first show that the composition of
O(log n)-uniform circuit families is also a O(log n)-uniform circuit family, assuming the sizes of
the input families in the composition are computable in DLOGTIME.
Lemma 3 (Composition). For a fixed 1 ≤ i ≤ d, let fi : Dk → D be computable by a O(log n)-
uniform computation graph Gi over D, F with sizeGi (n) computable in DLOGTIME. Let g : Dd →
D be a O(log n)-uniform computation graph over D, F. Then, for all x ∈ Dk , the following is
computable by a DLOGTIME uniform computation graph G ∗ over D, F:
                                 f ◦ g(x) = g (f1 (x), · · · , fd (x)) ,
                             ∗
where the size and depth of G are at most additive in the size of circuits computing each fi and g.

Proof. Let G ∗ be the computation graph computing the composed function. We first compute the
size of each circuit Gi in DLOGTIME and call that si . To answer nodeG ∗ and edgeG ∗ queries, we
                                                Pd
can then partition the indices between 0 and S = i=1 si to represent different fi ’s — this requires
only a finite number of cases. We use indices ≥ S to represent the nodes of g, and route the output
(last p nodes) of each fi to g as input.

A.2   L OCAL F UNCTIONS

Lemma 4 (Extended from Hao et al., 2022, Lem. 3). Any function f : {0, 1}m → {0, 1}p can be
computed by a depth-3 circuit of size at most 2m + m + p.

Proof. Similar to Hao et al. (2022), we construct a circuit using a DNF representation of f , except
that we use a combined DNF representation for all output bits of f . The DNF formula has at most
2m terms. The circuit has a NOT gate for each input bit, an AND gate for each DNF term, and, for
each of the p output bits, an OR gate combining the outputs of those AND gates (i.e., DNF terms)
for which that bit is 1.
Corollary 5.2 (Local functions). Any p-precision arithmetic function of k numbers can be computed
by a depth-3 circuit of size 2kp + kp + p.

A.3   G LOBAL F UNCTIONS

Two lemmas of Kayal (2015) on addition with threshold circuits will be useful for building circuit
families to add floats.
Lemma 5 (Extended from Kayal, 2015, Thm. 5.8). Any symmetric function {0, 1}∗ → {0, 1} can
be computed by a O(log n)-uniform threshold circuit family of depth 2 and size O(n) (where n is
the input bitstring length).

Proof. The correctness of the circuit family is shown by Kayal (2015); uniformity follows from the
constructive algorithm in their proof.
Lemma 6 (Extended from Kayal, 2015, Thm. 5.9). The sum of k integers of k bits each can be
computed by a O(log n)-uniform constant-depth threshold circuit family of size O(k 3 ).

Proof. The correctness of the circuit family is shown by Kayal (2015); uniformity follows from the
constructive algorithm in their proof.

We can use these lemmas to analyze adding k floats of precision p, which is our notion of global
computation in the transformer.
Lemma 7. The sum of k floats of p bits each can be computed by a O(log n)-uniform constant-depth
threshold circuit family of size O(k log k), with a constant depending on precision p.


                                                   12
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Proof. The proof procedes by constructing O(log n)-uniform circuit families to carry out the fol-
lowing computations, where each threshold circuit family C has sizeC computable in DLOGTIME.
The composition of these functions gives the correct sum truncated to precision p, so thus by Lem. 3
the sum is computable by a O(log n)-uniform circuit family whose size is the sum of the constituent
circuit sizes. All that remains is to justify the circuit family size for each step.

       1. Let p′ = p/2 + exp(p/2). We first map the k p-bit floats to k p′ -bit integers representing
          the same value.
       2. Sum the bits in each place value across all k integers, yielding p′ integers of size log k.
       3. Shift each place value integer so that they line up semantically, and add. This corresponds
          to adding p′ integers of size at most log k + p′ to produce a new integer s.
       4. Finally, return the first p non-zero leading bits of s as the mantissa, and the number of
          remaining bits (at most p′ − p) as the exponent.

    Step 1: Floats to ints. This involves local functions applied to each number, so its size is O(k).

  Step 2: Summing across place values. Observe that summing k bits across each place value is a
symmetric function with log k output bits. Thus, by Lem. 5, we have a a O(log n)-uniform constant-
depth threshold circuit family of size O(k) that computes each of the log k output bits for each place
value up to p′ . Summing over all log k bits and a constant number of place values, the size of the
overall circuit for this step is O(k log k).

   Step 3: Addition. We ignore the size of local functions, since they have a fixed-size circuit with
respect to k and thus take O(k) size when applied elementwise. Adding p′ integers of size at most
log k+p′ can be done by a constant-depth threshold circuit family of size 2(log k+p′ )3 = O(log3 k)
using Lem. 6.

    Step 4: Ints to floats. This involves local functions applied to the final sum, so its size is O(1).
Summing the sizes of each step yields an overall size of
                        O(k) + O(k log k) + O(log3 k) + O(1) = O(k log k).



B     T RANSFORMER C OMPONENTS

B.1     T RANSFORMER E MBEDDINGS

The initial layer of the transformer embeds a token σ from a vocabulary Σ, as well as their position
from 1 ≤ t ≤ n, into a vector e(σ, t). Let V be an embedding matrix of size |Σ| × d where each
row represents the embedding for some σ. Then,
                                           e(σ, t) = vσ + f (t).
Lemma 8. The transformer embedding layer can be computed by a constant-depth log-uniform
threshold circuit family of size O(|Σ|d + n).

Proof. The first term of the embedding mechanism can be implemented with a lookup table encoded
as a circuit of size O(|Σ|d). To build the circuit for the second term at position t, we first construct
the constant t as a log n-bit integer. We then apply Lem. 4 to compute f (t) in time

                                     2log n + log n + d = O(n + d).
Thus, the full embedding layer can be computed as a function of an input string w ∈ Σ∗ by a
constant-depth log-uniform circuit family of size O(|Σ|d + n).


                                                    13
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


B.2   A FFINE T RANSFORMATIONS

Affine transformations form the building block of neural network layers. In a transformer, they
occur in the both the self-attention sublayer as key, query, value, and output transformations, and in
the feedforward sublayer in standard neural network layers.
                                                      ′
Lemma 9. An affine transformation from Fkp to Fkp can be computed by a O(log n)-uniform circuit
family of constant depth and size O(k ′ k log k).

Proof. For the transformation Wx + b, first compute each wi ⊙ x in parallel, where ⊙ represents
elementwise multiplication. By applying Cor. 5.2 in parallel kk ′ times, this can be done with a
circuit of depth 3 and size kk ′ (22p + 3p) = O(kk ′ ). We also have k ′ circuits, each corresponding
to an index of the output, that compute the sum over the k entries of each wi ⊙ x. By Lem. 3, the
composition of these two functions is computable by a O(log n)-uniform circuit family of constant
depth and size O(kk ′ ) + k ′ O(k log k) = O(kk ′ log k).

The transformer’s key, query, value, and output affine transformations with k, k ′ ≤ d. The trans-
former also has affine transformations in the feedforward subnetwork with k, k ′ ≤ max{d, h}. So,
the size of an affine transformation circuit in the transformer is at most
               O(max{d2 log d, dh log h, hd log d}) = O(max{d2 log d, dh log h}).

B.3   L AYER N ORM
                                                                                 Pd
The layer norm is applied between sublayers in the transformer. Let µ = (1/d)       i=1 xi . The layer
norm y ∈ Fdp of a vector x ∈ Fdp is computed, for scalars a, b ∈ Fp ,

                                               x−µ
                                      y=a                 + b.
                                              ∥x − µ∥

Lemma 10. The layer norm over a vector of size d can be computed by a uniform threshold circuit
of constant depth and size O(d log d).

Proof. First compute d using summation over the constant term 1 from 1 to d. This summation has
a threshold circuit size of O(d log d) by Lem. 7. Then compute µ using a similar sum circuit, com-
posed with the circuit computing d. Finally, we need to compute ∥x − µ∥ which can be reduced to a
single summation by local functions (squaring and dividing) with O(d) overhead. Applying Lem. 3
to compose these functions yields a constant-depth uniform threshold circuit of size O(d log d).

B.4   S ELF ATTENTION

Define dk , dv ≤ d. The self attention mechanism takes a query q ∈ Fdpk , n keys ki ∈ Fdpk , and n
values vi ∈ Fdpv . It returns a new vector y of size dv computed, for 1 ≤ i ≤ n,
                                            n
                                            X
                                         y=   (αi /Z)vi .
                                                i=1
                                  Pn
where αi = exp(q · ki ) and Z =      j=1 αj .
Lemma 11. Self attention is computable by a O(log n)-uniform threshold circuit of constant depth
and size O(n log n) .

Proof. We can compute each αi using only local functions. Computing Z takes one sum circuit over
n scalars. For y, we just need an addition summation circuit over n terms and some local functions
to compute each term. We can apply Lem. 3 to conclude that the composition of these circuits is
computable by a uniform threshold circuit of constant depth and size O(n log n).


                                                  14
