Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


L EARNING WITH I NSTANCE -D EPENDENT L ABEL
N OISE : M AINTAINING ACCURACY AND FAIRNESS
 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                            A BSTRACT
         Incorrect labels hurt model performance when the model overfits to noise. Many
         state-of-the-art approaches that address label noise assume that label noise is inde-
         pendent from the input features. In practice, however, label noise is often feature
         or instance-dependent, and therefore is biased (i.e., some instances are more likely
         to be mislabeled than others). Approaches that ignore this dependence can pro-
         duce models with poor discriminative performance, and depending on the task,
         can exacerbate issues around fairness. In light of these limitations, we propose
         a two-stage approach to learn from datasets with instance-dependent label noise.
         Our approach utilizes alignment points, a small subset of data for which we know
         the observed and ground truth labels. On many tasks, our approach leads to con-
         sistent improvements over the state-of-the-art in discriminative performance (AU-
         ROC) while maintaining model fairness (area under the equalized odds curve,
         AUEOC). For example, when predicting acute respiratory failure onset on the
         MIMIC-III dataset, the harmonic mean of the AUROC and AUEOC of our ap-
         proach is 0.84 (SD 0.01) while that of the next best baseline is 0.81 (SD 0.01).
         Overall, our approach leads to learning more accurate and fair models compared
         to existing approaches in the presence of instance-dependent label noise.


1   I NTRODUCTION
Datasets used to train machine learning models can contain incorrect labels (i.e., label noise). While
label noise is widely studied, the majority of past work focuses on when the noise is independent
from an instance’s features (i.e., instance-independent label noise) [Song et al. (2020)]. However,
label noise is sometimes biased and depends on an instance’s features (i.e., instance-dependent)
[Wei et al. (2022b)], leading to different noise rates within subsets of the data. This results in model
overfitting, and in tasks where the dataset contains instances from different groups corresponding to
some sensitive attribute, this can also lead to disparities in performance [Liu (2021)]. For example,
consider the task of predicting cardiovascular disease among patients admitted to a hospital. Com-
pared to male patients, female patients may be more likely to be misdiagnosed [Maserejian et al.
(2009)] and thus mislabeled, potentially leading to worse predictions for female patients. Although
instance-dependent label noise has recently received more attention [Cheng et al. (2020b); Xia et al.
(2020); Wang et al. (2021a)], the effect of these approaches on model fairness has been relatively
understudied [Liu (2021)]. Here, we address the limitations of current approaches and propose a
novel method for learning with instance-dependent label noise, specifically examining how model-
ing assumptions affect existing issues around model fairness.
Broadly, current work addressing instance-dependent label noise falls into one of two categories: 1)
that which learns to identify mislabeled instances [Cheng et al. (2020a); Xia et al. (2022); Zhu et al.
(2022a)], and 2) that which learns to optimize a noise-robust objective function [Feng et al. (2020);
Wei et al. (2022a)]. In the first category, instances identified as mislabeled are either filtered out
[Kim et al. (2021)] or relabeled [Berthon et al. (2021)]. In some settings, this approach can have
a negative effect on model fairness. For example, when instances represent individuals belonging
to subgroups defined by a sensitive attribute, approaches that filter out mislabeled individuals could
ignore a disproportionately higher number of individuals from subgroups with more label noise.
While relabeling approaches use all available data, they can be sensitive to assumptions around the
noise distribution [Ladouceur et al. (2007)]. In the second category, current approaches rely on
objective functions that are less prone to overfitting to the noise, while using all of the data and


                                                   1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Table 1: Notation. We summarize our notation, with the notation appearing in the left column and a
description in the right column. Superscripts in parentheses represent specific instances (e.g., x(i) ).
Subscripts represents indexes into a vector (e.g., xi )

          Notation              Description                 Notation                  Description
              n            Number of instances                  d                Number of features
              c             Number of classes                  G                  Number of groups
           x ∈ Rd              Feature vector           ỹ ∈ {1, 2, ..., c}         Observed label
         ŷ ∈ [0, 1]c   Predicted class probabilities   y ∈ {1, 2, ..., c}        Ground truth label
             β̂ϕ              P (y == ỹ|ỹ, x)                A               Set of alignment points
              θ           Main model parameters                ϕ              Auxiliary model parameters


observed labels [Chen et al. (2021)]. However, like the first category, many rely on assumptions like
the memorization effect, and thus, potentially suffer from the same limitations [Wang et al. (2021a)].
In light of these limitations, we propose an approach to address instance-dependent label noise,
makes no assumptions about the noise distribution, and uses all data during training. We leverage
a set of representative points in which we have access to both the observed and ground truth labels.
While past work has used the observed labels as the ground truth labels for anchor points [Xia et al.
(2019); Wu et al. (2021)], we consider a different setting in which the ground truth and observed
labels do not agree for some points. To make the differentiation clear, we refer to these points as
‘alignment points’. Such a setting arises frequently in healthcare. Oftentimes, one labels an entire
dataset using a proxy function (obtaining observed labels) but also labels a small subset of the data
using manual review (obtaining ground truth labels). We use them to initialize the model’s decision
boundary and learn the underlying pattern of label noise in pre-training. We then add the remaining
data for fine-tuning, minimizing a weighted cross-entropy loss based on the learned noise pattern.
On synthetic and real data, we evaluate our approach in terms of discriminative performance and
model fairness, measured using the area under the receiver operator curve (AUROC) and area un-
der the equalized odds curve (AUEOC). We demonstrate that our approach improves on state-of-
the-art baselines from the noisy labels and fairness literature, such as stochastic label noise [Chen
et al. (2021)] and group-based peer loss [Wang et al. (2021b)]. Overall, our contributions are: 1) a
novel approach to learn from datasets with instance-dependent noise; 2) a systematic examination
of different settings of label noise, showing where approaches fail with respect to discriminative
performance and fairness; 3) empirical results showing that the proposed approach is robust to both
to the noise rate and amount of noise disparity between subgroups, reporting the model’s ability to
maintain discriminative performance and fairness; 4) a demonstration of how performance of the
proposed approach changes when assumptions about the alignment set are violated.


2   M ETHODS

We introduce a two-stage approach for learning with instance-dependent label noise that leverages
a small set of alignment points for which we have both observed and ground truth labels.
Notation and Problem Setup Our main notation is in Table 1. We train a model using dataset
D = {x(i) , ỹ (i) }ni=1 , where x ∈ Rd and y ∈ {1, 2, ..., c} to learn a function f : x → y that can map
unseen instances into one of c classes based on their feature vectors. In the presence of noisy labels,
ỹ is not always equal to y. For each alignment point, we know both ỹ and y. This is in contrast to
the rest of the data, where we only know ỹ. We aim to learn model parameters, θ, such that θ(x)
represents the predicted class probabilities, (i.e., ŷ). Alignment points are similar to anchor points
[Xia et al. (2019)], but we do not assume that ỹ (i) = y (i) for these points.
For the rest of the paper, we focus on the following case of instance-dependent noise. Let f be the
function used to generate the ground truth labels (i.e., f (x) = y), and let m̃ be the function used
to generate an instance’s risk of being mislabeled (i.e., y = ỹ if m̃(x) is above some threshold). In
the following toy example, suppose f (x) = 1 for true positive instances, and m̃(x) = 1 if x1 > 0.5
and 0 otherwise. Here, instances where x1 > 0.5 have noisy labels. Although f and m̃ were
deterministic for simplicity, they can also be based on probabilistic functions. We denote the set
of alignment points (i.e., the alignment set) as set A consisting of instances i such that both ỹ (i)


                                                        2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


(a) Proposed network. The model makes               (b) Proposed training pipeline. We first pretrain the model us-
class predictions, ŷ, at training and inference    ing the alignment points (i.e., data with observed and ground
time using θ. At training time, it also pre-        truth labels), then train on the noisy data. Lθ is the objective
dicts whether the observed label is correct         to train on the alignment points. Lϕ is the objective to learn
using ϕ. θ and ϕ are pre-trained using A and        the label confidence score (β̂ϕ ). L′θ is the objective to train the
then fine tuned with the complete dataset.          noisy data. α1 , α2 , and γ are hyperparameters.

                                          Figure 1: Proposed Approach


and y (i) are known and assuming that it includes instances where ỹ (i) ̸= y (i) . Although it is not
always possible to obtain alignment points, the setting above does occur in practice. For example, in
healthcare, automated labeling tools based on the structured contents of the electronic health record
are often applied to identify cohorts or outcomes of interest [Upadhyaya et al. (2017); Norton et al.
(2019); Tjandra et al. (2020); Yoo et al. (2020)]. However, it is often overlooked that such practical
definitions are not always reflective of ground truth, and thus, require validation by comparing to a
subset of the data that was chart reviewed by an expert. This subset can be derived from a randomly
chosen individuals, and thus can be constructed to be representative of the target population.
Proposed Approach We describe the proposed network and training procedure below.
Proposed Network. Our proposed network (Figure 1a) consists of two components. The first, θ,
is a feed-forward network that uses feature vector x to predict the class probabilities, ŷ = θ(x).
The second component, ϕ, is an auxiliary feed-forward network that uses observed label ỹ and the
pre-softmax output of θ to compute β̂ϕ = P (y == ỹ|ỹ, x), an instance-dependent prediction for
whether the observed label is correct based on x and ỹ. β̂ϕ can be considered as a confidence score
for the observed label, with higher values indicating higher confidence. Learning β̂ϕ learns the
underlying pattern of label noise by forcing the model to distinguish between which examples are
correctly or incorrectly labeled. This will be helpful during training, which we describe below. By
including the observed label as input to ϕ, our approach also applies to instance-independent label
noise by accounting for the case when the underlying pattern of label noise cannot be learned from
the features alone. At training time, we compute the loss using the outputs from both θ and ϕ. At
inference time, we compute the class predictions from θ only since ỹ is not available.
Training Procedure. Our procedure is summarized in Figure 1b and Appendix A. In Step 1, we
pre-train the θ and ϕ networks using the alignment points, minimizing an objective function based
on cross entropy: minθ′ ,ϕ′ Lθ + α1 Lϕ . α1 ∈ R+ is a scalar hyperparameter; θ′ and ϕ′ are the initial
parameters of θ and ϕ. Lθ , is the cross entropy loss between the class predictions and ground truth
labels, learning the weights for θ, and thus, the model’s decision boundary. I is an indicator function.
                                               c
                                     −1 X X   (i)
                                                                      (i)
                             Lθ =                 I y == j log ŷj
                                     |A|     j=1
                                              i∈A
                                                                                     (i)
Lϕ is the cross entropy loss between the predicted confidence score β̂ϕ and the actual agreement
between ỹ (i) and y (i) . It learns the weights for ϕ, and in turn, the underlying label noise pattern.
                    −1 X   (i)
                                                         (i)

                                                                                           (i)

             Lϕ =               I ỹ == y (i) log β̂ϕ + I ỹ (i) ̸= y (i) log 1 − β̂ϕ
                    |A|
                          i∈A

In Step 2, we initialize θ and ϕ using θ′ and ϕ′ from Step 1 and fine tune them using the complete
dataset, which potentially contains noisy labels. Step 2 can be further divided into two parts, Step


                                                          3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


2a and Step 2b. Each part aims to improve a specific component of the network (e.g., θ) using
another component of the network (e.g., ϕ). Throughout Step 2, we alternate between Step 2a and
Step 2b in a manner similar to expectation maximization so that we continually improve both θ and
ϕ. In Step 2a, we freeze ϕ and train θ by minimizing the objective minθ L′θ + γLθ . γ ∈ R+ is a
scalar hyperparameter. In Step 2b, we freeze θ and train ϕ using the objective minϕ L′θ + α2 Lϕ .
α2 ∈ R+ is a scalar hyperparameter. L′θ computes the cross entropy loss over the potentially noisy,
non-alignment points. Each instance is weighted by the model’s confidence in whether the observed
                       (i)
label is correct via β̂ϕ , taking advantage of the model’s learned noise pattern.
                                G               c
                           −1 X 1             X X           (i)

                                                                                  (i)
                   L′θ =                                  β̂ϕ I ỹ (i) == j log ŷj
                           |A| k=1 1 − r̂k
                                             i∈A∩gk j=1

The quantity 1 − r̂k is as follows. We introduce sets gk for k = 1, 2, ..., G to represent disjoint
subgroups of interest in the data, where ga ∩ gb = ∅ for all a = 1, 2, ..., G, b = 1, 2, ..., G Pwith a ̸= b
                                                                                             1
and ∪G   g
      k=1 k =  D.  Each   group  gk is then associated with estimated   noise  rate r̂k =  |gk |   i∈gk 1 −
  (i)                                                       1
                                                               P         (i)
β̂ϕ and estimated clean (i.e., correct) rate 1 − r̂k = |gk | i∈gk β̂ϕ . Although weighting each
instance by β̂ϕ is a form of soft filtering, weighting each group by the inverse of its overall clean
rate avoids the effect of de-emphasizing groups with higher predicted noise rates. As a result, the
expected value of L′θ with respect to β̂ϕ is equal to the cross entropy loss between the model’s
predictions and ground truth labels (see Appendix A for proof). However, this assumes accurate
estimates of β̂ϕ . Thus, we expect that the proposed approach will perform best when the alignment
set is representative of the target population (i.e., there is no dataset shift from the alignment set to
the remaining data), since this will produce the best estimate of β̂ϕ . In Section 4, we test this.
Our approach encourages fairness, as measured by equalized odds [Hardt et al. (2016)], by upweight-
ing groups with a higher estimated noise rate so that they are not dominated/ignored compared to
groups with a lower estimated noise rate. In doing so, we hypothesize that accuracy and related
metrics, such as the false positive rate, will improve, thereby improving equalized odds. We focus
on equalized odds since, in the domains of interest, metrics like the true and false positive rates are
particularly important. For example, in healthcare, we would like to correctly predict who will and
will not develop a condition so that the appropriate treatment may be used.
During Step 2a, L′θ is used to train θ by learning to predict ŷ such that it matches observed label ỹ
on instances that are predicted to be correctly labeled. During Step 2b, L′θ is used to train ϕ. Here,
since θ is frozen and ϕ is not, the network learns to predict the optimal β̂ϕ . Based on L′θ alone, there
are two possible ways to learn β̂ϕ . The first is to consistently make β̂ϕ close to 0. The second is to
learn β̂ϕ such that it is close to 1 when ŷ matches ỹ and close to 0 when ŷ does not match ỹ. Since
ỹ is used as a proxy for y in this step, the second way aligns with what we want β̂ϕ to represent. To
encourage this over the first way (i.e., consistently predicting 0 for β̂ϕ ), we include Lϕ in Step 2b,
which is not minimized by consistently predicting 0 for β̂ϕ . Note that, in order to expect a benefit
by including the noisy data in Step 2b, we rely on the cluster assumption [Singh et al. (2008)] from
semi-supervised learning, which broadly states that labeled data fall into clusters and that unlabeled
data aid in defining these clusters. In the context of Step 2b, ‘labeled’ and ‘unlabeled’ are analogous
to whether we know if the ground truth and observed labels match (i.e., alignment point versus non-
alignment point), rather than the actual class labels themselves. As a result, we rely on the alignment
set being representative of the target population here as well to avoid dataset shift.
In contrast to previous filtering approaches, our approach utilizes all data during training. Moreover,
it does not require a specialized architecture beyond the auxiliary network to compute β̂ϕ . Thus, it
can be used to augment existing architectures in a straightforward manner.

3    E XPERIMENTAL S ETUP
We empirically explore the performance of our proposed approach relative to state-of-the-art base-
lines on five benchmark prediction tasks with two different label noise settings. Implementation
details are provided in Appendices C and D.


                                                     4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Datasets We consider five different binary prediction tasks on four datasets from several domains
on synthetic and real datasets. While work in noisy-label learning often focuses on image datasets
(e.g., MNIST or CIFAR 10/100), given our emphasis on fairness, we selected datasets reflective of
tasks in which harmful biases can arise (e.g., predicting clinical outcomes, recidivism, and income).
Synthetic: We generated a dataset containing 5,000 instances as described below. Each instance had
30 features, and features were drawn from a standard normal distribution. We defined the feature at
index 0 to be a synthetic sensitive attribute. Instances with values below the 20th percentile for this
feature were considered as the ‘minority’, and the rest were considered as the ‘majority’. Features
10-19 for the majority instances and features 20-29 for the minority instances were set to 0 to provide
more contrast between the two groups. Coefficients describing the contribution of each feature to the
outcome, w, were also drawn from a standard normal distribution, and an outcome z was computed
by taking the dot product of the features and coefficients and passing it through a sigmoid. A binary
ground truth label, y, for each instance was assigned, based on z. Instances whose value for z fell
above the 50th percentile were given the label 1. All other instances were labeled 0. The positive
rates for the synthetic majority and minority groups were 37.5% and 32.3%, respectively.
MIMIC-III: Within the healthcare domain, we leverage a publicly available dataset of electronic
health record data [Johnson et al. (2016)]. We considered two separate prediction tasks: onset of
1) acute respiratory failure (ARF) and 2) shock in the ICU (intensive care unit) [Oh et al. (2019)].
MIMIC-III includes data pertaining to vital signs, medications, diagnostic and procedure codes, and
laboratory measurements. We considered the four hour prediction setup for both tasks as described
by [Tang et al. (2020)]. This resulted in 15,873 and 19,342 ICU encounters for each task, respec-
tively. After preprocessing (see Appendix B), each encounter had 16,278 and 18,186 features, for
each task respectively. We used race as a sensitive attribute, with about 70% of patients being White
(positive rate 4.5% [ARF], 4.1% [shock]) and 30% being non-White (4.4% [ARF], 3.7% [shock]).
Adult: a publicly available dataset of census data [Dua & Graf (2017)]. We considered the task of
predicting whether an individual’s income is over $50,000. This dataset includes data pertaining to
age, education, work type, work sector, race, sex, marital status, and country. Its training and test
sets contain 32,561 and 16,281 individuals, respectively. We used a pre-processed version of this
dataset1 . We only used 1,000 randomly selected individuals out of 32,561 during training and only
included features pertaining to age, education, work type, marital status, work sector, and sex to
make the task more difficult (see Appendix B). We also normalized each feature to have a range of
0-1. This resulted in 56 features per individual. We used sex as a sensitive attribute, with 67.5% of
individuals being male (positive rate 30.9%) and 32.5% being female (positive rate 11.3%).
COMPAS: a publicly available dataset collected by ProPublica from Broward County, Florida, USA
[Angwin et al. (2016)]. We considered the task of predicting recidivism within two years, i.e.,
whether a criminal defendant is likely to re-offend. COMPAS includes data pertaining to age, race,
sex, and criminal history. We used a pre-processed version of this dataset2 and also normalized each
feature to have a range of 0-1 (see Appendix B). This resulted in 6,172 individuals with 11 features
per individual. We used race as a sensitive attribute, with 65.8% of individuals being White (positive
rate 39.1%) and 34.2% being non-White (positive rate 44.5%).
Label Noise To test the robustness of our approach in different settings of label noise, we introduce
noise in two ways. Like past work [Song et al. (2020)], our setup is limited in that our noise is
synthetic and we use the labels in the real datasets as ground truth, since we do not have access
to actual ground truth labels on these public datasets. For uniform random noise, each instance
had its label flipped with a fixed probability (e.g., 0.3). The noise rates were the same between
subgroups. For instance-dependent noise, mislabeling was a function of the features. Let wm (wm ∼
N (0, 0.33)D ) and zm (zm = σ(x · wm )) denote the coefficients describing the contribution of each
feature to mislabeling and the risk of mislabeling, respectively. Whether an instance was mislabeled
was based on zm and the desired noise rate (m̃(x) = y if zm > 1 − noise rate, 1 − y otherwise).
For example, for a noise rate of 30%, instances whose value for zm was above the 70th percentile
had their labels flipped. This allowed us to vary the noise rate within subgroups in a straightforward
manner. Across datasets, we focused on cases where the noise rate in the ‘minority’ population was
always greater than or equal to that of the ‘majority’ group since this is more likely to occur.

   1
       https://github.com/AissatouPaye/Fairness-in-Classification-and-Representation-Learning
   2
       https://www.kaggle.com/danofer/compass


                                                       5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Evaluation Metrics We evaluate our proposed approach in terms of discriminative performance
and model fairness. For discriminative performance, we evaluate using the area under the receiver
operating characteristic curve (AUROC) (higher is better). For model fairness, we measure the area
under the equalized odds curve (AUEOC) [de Freitas Pereira & Marcel (2020)] (higher is better).
We use the AUEOC rather than equalized odds to avoid choosing a classification threshold to mea-
sure the true and false positive rates. For classification threshold τ , we calculate the equalized odds
(EO(τ )) between two groups, called 1 and 2, as shown below. T Pa (τ ) and F Pa (τ ) denote true and
false positive rates for group a at threshold τ , respectively. The AUEOC is obtained by plotting
the EO against all possible values of τ and calculating the area under the curve. We also compute
the harmonic mean (HM) between the AUROC and AUEOC to highlight how the approaches main-
tained discriminative performance and fairness. We compute the harmonic mean so that the overall
measure is more heavily weighted by the worse performing metric. For example, if a classifier has
AUROC=0.5 and AUEOC=1.0, we emphasize the poor discriminative performance.
                                2 − |T P1 (τ ) − T P2 (τ )| − |F P1 (τ ) − F P2 (τ )|
                     EO(τ ) =
                                                          2

Baselines We evaluate our proposed approach in the context of several baselines to test differ-
ent hypotheses. Standard does not account for label noise and assumes that ỹ = y is always
true. SLN + Filter [Chen et al. (2021)] combines filtering [Arpit et al. (2017)] and SLN [Chen
et al. (2021)] and was shown to outperform state-of-the-art approaches such as Co-Teaching [Han
et al. (2018)] and DivideMix [Li et al. (2020)]. It relies on filtering heuristics, which indirectly
rely on uniform random label noise to maintain discriminative performance and model fairness.
JS (Jensen-Shannon) Loss [Englesson & Azizpour (2021)] builds from semi-supervised learning
and encourages model consistency when predicting on perturbations of the input features and was
shown to be competitive with other state-of-the-art noise-robust loss functions [Ma et al. (2020)]. It
was proposed in the context of instance-independent label noise. Transition [Xia et al. (2020)] learns
to correct for noisy labels by learning a transition function and was shown outperform state-of-the-
art approaches such as MentorNet [Jiang et al. (2018)]. It applies to instance-dependent label noise,
but it assumes that the contributions of each feature to mislabeling and input reconstruction are
identical. CSIDN (confidence-scored instance-dependent noise) [Berthon et al. (2021)] also learns a
transition function and was shown outperform state-of-the-art approaches such as forward correction
[Patrini et al. (2017)]. Like our approach, CSIDN uses the concept of ‘confidence’ in the observed
label to help with training. Unlike our approach, CSIDN uses the model’s class predictions directly
as confidence scores (instead predicting them via an auxiliary network) and uses them to learn the
transition function (as opposed to re-weighting the loss). Fair GPL [Wang et al. (2021b)] builds
on work addressing uniform random label noise [Jiang & Nachum (2020)] and uses peer loss (i.e.,
data augmentation that reduces the correlation between the observed label and model’s predictions)
within subgroups defined by a sensitive attribute [Wang et al. (2021b)]. It assumes that label noise
depends on only the sensitive attribute. We also train a model using the ground truth labels (referred
to as Clean Labels) as an empirical upper bound for discriminative performance.

4   R ESULTS AND D ISCUSSION

We describe the results from experiments with instance-dependent noise. For each plot, we com-
bined discriminative performance and fairness and plotted the HM of the AUROC and AUEOC to
assess general performance with respect to both of these aspects.
Is the Approach Robust to Varying Noise Levels? Here, we investigated how robust the proposed
approach and baselines were to varying amounts of instance-dependent label noise (Figure 2a). On
the synthetic dataset, we considered noise rates between 10% and 60% in the majority group. For
the minority group, we considered noise rates of that were consistently 20% higher than that of the
majority group, to keep the noise disparity level (i.e., the difference in noise rates between sub-
groups) constant. As expected, all approaches degrade as the noise rate increases, with the proposed
approach experiencing the least degradation up to a majority noise rate of 60%. The baseline Tran-
sition was also robust to the noise rate, although overall performance was generally worse than the
proposed approach. At a noise rate of 60%, it performed similarly to the proposed approach. The
other approaches experienced more degradation, likely because they were for instance-independent
label noise, highlighting the need for approaches that are designed for instance-dependent noise.


                                                   6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


(a) As the noise rate increases, the proposed ap-         (b) As the noise disparity increases, the proposed ap-
proach generally shows the least degradation.             proach generally shows the least degradation.

Figure 2: Robustness to noise rate and noise disparity in an instance dependent setting. We plot the
mean and standard deviation for 10 random seeds.


(a) As we decrease the alignment set size (proportion of training data) performance decreases. Still, at an
alignment set size of 5%, the proposed approach generally outperforms the baselines.


(b) As we vary the alignment set bias (proportion of minority instances) performance varies. The proposed
approach is generally robust to changes in the bias of the alignment set. The dashed vertical black line shows
the proportion at which the minority group occurs in the dataset (i.e., an unbiased alignment set).

Figure 3: Robustness to varying alignment sets. Mean and standard deviation for 10 random seeds.


Is the Approach Robust to Varying Noise Disparities? Here we investigated how robust the pro-
posed approach and baselines were to varying levels of noise disparity (Figure 2b). With a majority
noise rate of 20% throughout, we evaluated the approaches with minority noise rates between 20%
and 90% (i.e., from no disparity to a disparity of 70%) on the synthetic dataset. In line with our ex-
pectations, the proposed approach was robust to changes in the noise disparity. This is likely because
the objective function L′θ from Step 2 of training accounts for disparities by scaling each instance-
specific loss term with the reciprocal of its estimated group clean rate (i.e., 1 - the group noise rate).
Most of the baselines, such as SLN + Filter, which learn to filter out noisy instances, experienced
a larger drop in performance as the disparity increased. This aligns with our hypothesis. Although
the baseline Transition also demonstrated robustness to the noise disparity and outperformed the
proposed approach at minority noise rates higher than 80%, this setting is unlikely to be realistic.
Does Alignment Set Composition Matter? Our next set of experiments tests the proposed ap-
proach in settings where we relax key assumptions about the alignment set. We consider all datasets
with instance-dependent noise. The majority/minority noise rates were 20%/40%, respectively.
Part 1: Alignment set size. We varied the size of the alignment set, testing at sizes between 1% and
15% of the training set, with the alignment set representative of the test set (Figure 3a). As expected,
when the alignment set is small, performance worsens. However, the proposed method generally


                                                      7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


improves over the baselines at an alignment set size of as small as 3% of the training data. On the
real datasets, the proposed approach had a higher HM compared to the baselines at an alignment set
size of < 5%, showing improved overall performance. As the size of the alignment set increased,
some baseline approaches were able to match that of the proposed method (e.g., for MIMIC-Shock,
the baseline Transition had similar performance to the proposed method at an alignment set > 5%).
This is in line with expectations, as this makes the overall training set cleaner.
Part 2: Biased alignment set. We hypothesized that our approach works best when the alignment
points are representative of the population. Here, we test how the proposed approach performs
when this assumption is violated. We varied the amount of bias in the alignment set by changing the
proportion at which the subgroups were present. We kept the size of the alignment set constant at
10% of the training data (2% for MIMIC-III on both tasks). We observe that the proposed approach
is beneficial over a wide range of conditions, i.e., when the minority proportion is 20%-80% (Figure
3b). We hypothesize that this could be because the learned relationship between the features and
noise can generalize across groups to an extent. In scenarios where the proposed approach is less
beneficial compared to the baselines, one subgroup heavily dominated the alignment set. This is
shown in Figure 3b on the extremes of the x-axis, which correspond to an alignment set that is
heavily over-represented for one subgroup and heavily under-represented for the other. Our approach
relied, in part, on having a relatively unbiased alignment set for estimating β̂ϕ in order to avoid
introducing dataset shift between the two steps of our training pipeline. Thus, these results are in
line with our expectations and highlight a limitation of our approach. However, despite this reliance,
we observe that the our approach is still robust in some scenarios where the alignment set is biased.
Additional Experiments: We include results for experiments where we vary the proportion at which
the minority group appears in the entire dataset, results for uniform random noise, an ablation study,
and a hyperparamter sensitivity analysis in Appendix E.

5   R ELATED W ORK

Label noise is a well-studied problem in machine learning [Song et al. (2020)] and may be instance-
independent or -dependent. Regardless of the setting, past approaches fall into two broad categories.
The first aims to identify mislabeled instances via filtering heuristics or by estimating the probability
of mislabeling [Patrini et al. (2017); Li et al. (2020); Cheng et al. (2020b)]. The second adapts
regularization techniques, such as label smoothing and contrastive learning to noisy labels [Manwani
& Sastry (2013); Menon et al. (2019); Xue et al. (2022); Liu et al. (2022)]. We also examine how
label noise has been tackled in the fairness literature and how past work has used anchor points.
Identifying Mislabeled Data Approaches that learn to identify mislabeled instances fall into two
sub-categories: 1) filtering approaches and 2) relabeling approaches. Filtering approaches use
heuristics to identify mislabeled instances (e.g., MentorNet [Jiang et al. (2018)], Co-teaching [Han
et al. (2018)], FINE [Kim et al. (2021)]). Many are based on the idea that correctly labeled instances
are easier to classify than mislabeled instances (i.e., the memorization effect) [Arpit et al. (2017)].
For example, mislabeled instances could be those that the model incorrectly classifies [Verbaeten
(2002); Khoshgoftaar & Rebours (2004); Thongkam et al. (2008); Chen et al. (2019)], have a high
loss value [Yao et al. (2020a)], or significantly increase the complexity of the model [Gamberger
et al. (1996)]. Given the identified mislabeled instances, these approaches either ignore them during
training [Zhang et al. (2020)] or treat them as ‘unlabeled’ and apply techniques from semi-supervised
learning (e.g., DivideMix [Li et al. (2020)], SELF [Nguyen et al. (2020)]). Overall, these heuristics
have been shown to improve discriminative performance. However, depending on the setting, they
can disproportionately discard subsets of data, which could hurt model fairness.
For binary classification, some approaches ‘correct’ (i.e., switch) the observed label for such in-
stances [Han et al. (2020); Zheng et al. (2020)]. Building on this idea, others make use of a transition
function that estimates the probability of the observed label being correct. Model predictions can
then be adjusted by applying the function to the classifier’s predictions for each class. Some works
manually construct the transition function from expert knowledge [Patrini et al. (2017)], while oth-
ers learn it [Xiao et al. (2015); Xu et al. (2019); Yao et al. (2020b); Xia et al. (2020); Zheng et al.
(2021); Berthon et al. (2021); Jiang et al. (2022); Bae et al. (2022)]. However, such approaches often
make assumptions on the form of the noise distribution, and past work has shown that results are
sensitive to the choice of distribution [Ladouceur et al. (2007)].


                                                   8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


To date, much of the work described above assumes instance-independent label noise (i.e., misla-
beling is independent of the features). However, when this assumption is violated, the model may
overfit to label noise [Lukasik et al. (2020)]. From an emerging body of work in instance-dependent
label noise [Cheng et al. (2020b); Xia et al. (2020); Wang et al. (2021c); Zhu et al. (2022b)], current
approaches remain limited in that they still rely on filtering heuristics. Although we use soft filtering,
we filter based on the learned relationship between the features and noise rather than existing heuris-
tics and upweight groups with a higher estimated noise rate. While similar to a transition function in
some aspects, our approach requires fewer probability estimates on label correctness (two estimates
compared to c2 for a transition function) while achieving state-of-the-art performance.
Noise-Robust Loss Functions Prior work examines how regularization techniques can be adapted to
the noisy labels setting, addressing issues related to overfitting on noisy data [Menon et al. (2019);
Lukasik et al. (2020); Englesson & Azizpour (2021)]. Recently, label smoothing, and in some
cases negative label smoothing, were found to improve the accuracy on both correctly labeled and
mislabeled data [Lukasik et al. (2020); Wei et al. (2022a)]. With this approach, the observed labels
are perturbed by a small, pre-determined value, with all labels receiving the same perturbation at
every training epoch. Follow-up work found that, instead of applying the same perturbation at each
epoch, adding a small amount of Gaussian stochastic label noise (SLN) at each epoch resulted in
further improvements, as it helped to escape from local optima [Chen et al. (2021)]. However,
these approaches were most beneficial in the context of augmenting existing methods that identify
mislabeled instances (e.g., stochastic label noise is applied to instances that are identified as correctly
labeled by filtering approaches), and thus, potentially suffer from the same limitations. Alternatively,
recent work has also proposed perturbing the features instead of the labels to encourage consistency
in the model’s predictions [Englesson & Azizpour (2021)], though mainly in the context of instance-
independent label noise. Others have proposed noise-robust variations of cross entropy loss [Feng
et al. (2020); Wang et al. (2021a)] that generally relied on assumptions like the memorization effect.
Label Noise and Fairness Label noise has also been addressed within the fairness literature recently.
When the frequencies at which subgroups (defined by a sensitive attribute) appear are different
within a dataset, past work has shown that common approaches addressing label noise can increase
the prediction error for minority groups (i.e., rarer subgroups) [Liu (2021)]. Past work proposed
to re-weight instances from subgroups during training where model performance is poorer [Jiang
& Nachum (2020)] in the random noise setting. Others use peer loss [Liu & Guo (2020)] within
subgroups [Wang et al. (2021b)] but assume that noise depends only on the sensitive attribute. We
also train with a weighted loss, but weights are based on predicted label correctness rather than
performance on the observed labels. Recently, Wu et al. (2022) addressed some of the gaps of past
work by examining the instance-dependent case. Our proposed approach differs from theirs in that
we do not require our features to be grouped into distinct categories, such as root and low level
attributes.
Anchor Points for Addressing Label Noise Another related setting in past work uses anchor points.
To date, anchor points are generally used to learn a transition function [Xia et al. (2019; 2020);
Berthon et al. (2021)] or for label correction directly [Wu et al. (2021)]. We use a similar concept,
alignment points, to 1) pre-train the model, and 2) predict label correctness. The first part builds from
work in semi-supervised learning [Cascante-Bonilla et al. (2021)], which has shown improvements
from pre-training on labeled data. The second part is similar to a transition function, but differs in
that we use the correctness predictions to re-weight the loss rather than adjust the predictions. We
also assume that, for some alignment points, the ground truth and observed labels do not match.


6    C ONCLUSION

We introduced a novel approach for learning with instance-dependent noisy labels. Our two-stage
approach uses the complete dataset and learns the relationship between the features and label noise
using a small set of alignment points. On synthetic and real datasets, we showed that the proposed
approach led to improvements over state-of-the-art baselines in maintaining discriminative perfor-
mance and model fairness. Our approach is not without limitations. We demonstrated that the
success of the approach depends, in part, on the composition of the alignment set. Additionally,
we only examined one form of fairness. Nonetheless this work brings together and builds on key
aspects from the instance-dependent noisy labels literature, highlighting issues related to fairness.


                                                    9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


R EPRODUCIBILITY S TATEMENT
Section 3 describes our experimental setup, with additional details on implementation in Sections
B, C, and D of the Appendix. The code has been included as a supplemental file and will be publicly
released upon publication.

E THICS S TATEMENT
We do not believe that our paper has any ethical concerns. However, past work has shown that
machine learning models can enforce harmful systemic biases if they are not carefully implemented
Obermeyer et al. (2019). As a result, it is important to consider not only overall model performance,
but also how the outcome is measured (i.e., choice of labels).

R EFERENCES
Julia Angwin, Jeff Larson, Surya Mattu, and Lauren Kirchner. Machine bias, 2016.
Devansh Arpit, Stanislaw K Jastrzebski, Nicolas Ballas, David Krueger, Emmanuel Bengio, Maxin-
  der S Kanwal, Tegan Maharaj, Asja Fischer, Aaron C Courville, Yoshua Bengio, et al. A closer
  look at memorization in deep networks. In ICML, 2017.
HeeSun Bae, Seungjae Shin, Byeonghu Na, JoonHo Jang, Kyungwoo Song, and Il-Chul Moon.
  From noisy prediction to true label: Noisy prediction calibration via generative model. In Inter-
  national Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 1277–1297. PMLR, 2022.
Antonin Berthon, Bo Han, Gang Niu, Tongliang Liu, and Masashi Sugiyama. Confidence scores
  make instance-dependent label-noise learning possible. In International Conference on Machine
  Learning, pp. 825–836. PMLR, 2021.
Paola Cascante-Bonilla, Fuwen Tan, Yanjun Qi, and Vicente Ordonez. Curriculum labeling: Revis-
  iting pseudo-labeling for semi-supervised learning. In Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial
  Intelligence, 2021.
Pengfei Chen, Ben Ben Liao, Guangyong Chen, and Shengyu Zhang. Understanding and utilizing
  deep neural networks trained with noisy labels. In International Conference on Machine Learn-
  ing, pp. 1062–1070, 2019.
Pengfei Chen, Guangyong Chen, Junjie Ye, Jingwei Zhao, and Pheng-Ann Heng. Noise against
  noise: stochastic label noise helps combat inherent label noise. In International Conference on
  Learning Representations, 2021.
Hao Cheng, Zhaowei Zhu, Xingyu Li, Yifei Gong, Xing Sun, and Yang Liu. Learning with instance-
  dependent label noise: A sample sieve approach. In International Conference on Learning Rep-
  resentations, 2020a.
Jiacheng Cheng, Tongliang Liu, Kotagiri Ramamohanarao, and Dacheng Tao. Learning with
   bounded instance and label-dependent label noise. In International Conference on Machine
   Learning, pp. 1789–1799. PMLR, 2020b.
Tiago de Freitas Pereira and Sébastien Marcel. Fairness in biometrics: a figure of merit to assess
  biometric verification systems. arXiv e-prints, pp. arXiv–2011, 2020.
Dheeru Dua and Casey Graf. Uci machine learning repository. http://archive.ics.uci.edu/ml, 2017.
Erik Englesson and Hossein Azizpour. Generalized jensen-shannon divergence loss for learning
  with noisy labels. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 34, 2021.
Lei Feng, Senlin Shu, Zhuoyi Lin, Fengmao Lv, Li Li, and Bo An. Can cross entropy loss be robust
  to label noise? In International Joint Conferences on Artificial Intelligence, pp. 2206–2212, 2020.
Dragan Gamberger, Nada Lavrač, and Sašo Džeroski. Noise elimination in inductive concept learn-
  ing: A case study in medical diagnosis. In International Workshop on Algorithmic Learning
  Theory, pp. 199–212. Springer, 1996.


                                                 10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Bo Han, Quanming Yao, Xingrui Yu, Gang Niu, Miao Xu, Weihua Hu, Ivor Tsang, and Masashi
  Sugiyama. Co-teaching: Robust training of deep neural networks with extremely noisy labels. In
  Advances in neural information processing systems, pp. 8527–8537, 2018.

Bo Han, Gang Niu, Xingrui Yu, Quanming Yao, Miao Xu, Ivor Tsang, and Masashi Sugiyama.
  Sigua: Forgetting may make learning with noisy labels more robust. In International Conference
  on Machine Learning, pp. 4006–4016. PMLR, 2020.

Moritz Hardt, Eric Price, and Nati Srebro. Equality of opportunity in supervised learning. Advances
 in neural information processing systems, 29:3315–3323, 2016.

Heinrich Jiang and Ofir Nachum. Identifying and correcting label bias in machine learning. In
  International Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Statistics, pp. 702–712. PMLR, 2020.

Lu Jiang, Zhengyuan Zhou, Thomas Leung, Li-Jia Li, and Li Fei-Fei. Mentornet: Learning data-
  driven curriculum for very deep neural networks on corrupted labels. In International Conference
  on Machine Learning, pp. 2304–2313. PMLR, 2018.

Zhimeng Jiang, Kaixiong Zhou, Zirui Liu, Li Li, Rui Chen, Soo-Hyun Choi, and Xia Hu. An
  information fusion approach to learning with instance-dependent label noise. In International
  Conference on Learning Representations, 2022.

Alistair EW Johnson, Tom J Pollard, Lu Shen, H Lehman Li-wei, Mengling Feng, Mohammad
  Ghassemi, Benjamin Moody, Peter Szolovits, Leo Anthony Celi, and Roger G Mark. Mimic-iii,
  a freely accessible critical care database. Scientific data, 3:160035, 2016.

Taghi M Khoshgoftaar and Pierre Rebours. Generating multiple noise elimination filters with the
  ensemble-partitioning filter. In Proceedings of the 2004 IEEE International Conference on Infor-
  mation Reuse and Integration, 2004. IRI 2004., pp. 369–375. IEEE, 2004.

Taehyeon Kim, Jongwoo Ko, JinHwan Choi, Se-Young Yun, et al. Fine samples for learning with
  noisy labels. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 34, 2021.

Diederik P Kingma and Jimmy Ba. Adam: A method for stochastic optimization. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:1412.6980, 2014.

Martin Ladouceur, Elham Rahme, Christian A Pineau, and Lawrence Joseph. Robustness of preva-
 lence estimates derived from misclassified data from administrative databases. Biometrics, 63(1):
 272–279, 2007.

Junnan Li, Richard Socher, and Steven CH Hoi. Dividemix: Learning with noisy labels as semi-
  supervised learning. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2020.

Sheng Liu, Zhihui Zhu, Qing Qu, and Chong You. Robust training under label noise by over-
  parameterization. In International Conference on Machine Learning. PMLR, 2022.

Yang Liu. Understanding instance-level label noise: Disparate impacts and treatments. In Interna-
  tional Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 6725–6735. PMLR, 2021.

Yang Liu and Hongyi Guo. Peer loss functions: Learning from noisy labels without knowing noise
  rates. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 6226–6236. PMLR, 2020.

Michal Lukasik, Srinadh Bhojanapalli, Aditya Krishna Menon, and Sanjiv Kumar. Does label
 smoothing mitigate label noise? In International Conference on Machine Learning. PMLR,
 2020.

Xingjun Ma, Hanxun Huang, Yisen Wang, Simone Romano, Sarah Erfani, and James Bailey. Nor-
  malized loss functions for deep learning with noisy labels. In International Conference on Ma-
  chine Learning, pp. 6543–6553. PMLR, 2020.

Naresh Manwani and PS Sastry. Noise tolerance under risk minimization. IEEE transactions on
  cybernetics, 43(3):1146–1151, 2013.


                                                11
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Nancy N Maserejian, Carol L Link, Karen L Lutfey, Lisa D Marceau, and John B McKinlay. Dis-
  parities in physicians’ interpretations of heart disease symptoms by patient gender: results of a
  video vignette factorial experiment. Journal of women’s health, 18(10):1661–1667, 2009.
Aditya Krishna Menon, Ankit Singh Rawat, Sashank J Reddi, and Sanjiv Kumar. Can gradient
  clipping mitigate label noise? In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2019.
Duc Tam Nguyen, Chaithanya Kumar Mummadi, Thi Phuong Nhung Ngo, Thi Hoai Phuong
  Nguyen, Laura Beggel, and Thomas Brox. Self: Learning to filter noisy labels with self-
  ensembling. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2020.
Jenna M Norton, Kaltun Ali, Claudine T Jurkovitz, Krzysztof Kiryluk, Meyeon Park, Kensaku
  Kawamoto, Ning Shang, Sankar D Navaneethan, Andrew S Narva, and Paul Drawz. Development
  and validation of a pragmatic electronic phenotype for ckd. Clinical Journal of the American
  Society of Nephrology, 14(9):1306–1314, 2019.
Ziad Obermeyer, Brian Powers, Christine Vogeli, and Sendhil Mullainathan. Dissecting racial bias
  in an algorithm used to manage the health of populations. Science, 366(6464):447–453, 2019.
Jeeheh Oh, Jiaxuan Wang, Shengpu Tang, Michael W. Sjoding, and Jenna Wiens. Relaxed parameter
  sharing: Effectively modeling time-varying relationships in clinical time-series. In MLHC, 2019.
Adam Paszke, Sam Gross, Soumith Chintala, Gregory Chanan, Edward Yang, Zachary DeVito,
  Zeming Lin, Alban Desmaison, Luca Antiga, and Adam Lerer. Automatic differentiation in
  pytorch. 2017.
Giorgio Patrini, Alessandro Rozza, Aditya Krishna Menon, Richard Nock, and Lizhen Qu. Making
  deep neural networks robust to label noise: A loss correction approach. In Proceedings of the
  IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 1944–1952, 2017.
Aarti Singh, Robert Nowak, and Jerry Zhu. Unlabeled data: Now it helps, now it doesn’t. Advances
  in neural information processing systems, 21, 2008.
Hwanjun Song, Minseok Kim, Dongmin Park, and Jae-Gil Lee. Learning from noisy labels with
 deep neural networks: A survey. arXiv preprint arXiv:2007.08199, 2020.
Shengpu Tang, Parmida Davarmanesh, Yanmeng Song, Danai Koutra, Michael W Sjoding, and
  Jenna Wiens. Democratizing ehr analyses with fiddle: a flexible data-driven preprocessing
  pipeline for structured clinical data. Journal of the American Medical Informatics Association,
  27(12):1921–1934, 2020.
Jaree Thongkam, Guandong Xu, Yanchun Zhang, and Fuchun Huang. Support vector machine for
   outlier detection in breast cancer survivability prediction. In Asia-Pacific Web Conference, pp.
   99–109. Springer, 2008.
Donna Tjandra, Raymond Q Migrino, Bruno Giordani, and Jenna Wiens. Cohort discovery and risk
  stratification for alzheimer’s disease: an electronic health record-based approach. Alzheimer’s &
  Dementia: Translational Research & Clinical Interventions, 6(1):e12035, 2020.
Sudhi G Upadhyaya, Dennis H Murphree Jr, Che G Ngufor, Alison M Knight, Daniel J Cronk,
  Robert R Cima, Timothy B Curry, Jyotishman Pathak, Rickey E Carter, and Daryl J Kor. Au-
  tomated diabetes case identification using electronic health record data at a tertiary care facility.
  Mayo Clinic Proceedings: Innovations, Quality & Outcomes, 1(1):100–110, 2017.
Sofie Verbaeten. Identifying mislabeled training examples in ilp classification problems. In Pro-
  ceedings of twelfth Belgian-Dutch conference on machine learning, pp. 1–8, 2002.
Deng-Bao Wang, Yong Wen, Lujia Pan, and Min-Ling Zhang. Learning from noisy labels with
  complementary loss functions. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence,
  volume 35, pp. 10111–10119, 2021a.
Jialu Wang, Yang Liu, and Caleb Levy. Fair classification with group-dependent label noise. In
   Proceedings of the 2021 ACM Conference on Fairness, Accountability, and Transparency, pp.
   526–536, 2021b.


                                                  12
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Qizhou Wang, Bo Han, Tongliang Liu, Gang Niu, Jian Yang, and Chen Gong. Tackling instance-
  dependent label noise via a universal probabilistic model. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference
  on Artificial Intelligence, volume 35, pp. 10183–10191, 2021c.
Jiaheng Wei, Hangyu Liu, Tongliang Liu, Gang Niu, Masashi Sugiyama, and Yang Liu. To smooth
   or not? when label smoothing meets noisy labels. In International Conference on Machine Learn-
   ing. PMLR, 2022a.
Jiaheng Wei, Zhaowei Zhu, Hao Cheng, Tongliang Liu, Gang Niu, and Yang Liu. Learning with
   noisy labels revisited: A study using real-world human annotations. In International Conference
   on Learning Representations, 2022b.
Songhua Wu, Mingming Gong, Bo Han, Yang Liu, and Tongliang Liu. Fair classification with
  instance-dependent label noise. In Conference on Causal Learning and Reasoning, pp. 927–943.
  PMLR, 2022.
Yichen Wu, Jun Shu, Qi Xie, Qian Zhao, and Deyu Meng. Learning to purify noisy labels via meta
  soft label corrector. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, volume 35,
  pp. 10388–10396, 2021.
Xiaobo Xia, Tongliang Liu, Nannan Wang, Bo Han, Chen Gong, Gang Niu, and Masashi Sugiyama.
  Are anchor points really indispensable in label-noise learning? In Advances in neural information
  processing systems, pp. 6838–6849, 2019.
Xiaobo Xia, Tongliang Liu, Bo Han, Nannan Wang, Mingming Gong, Haifeng Liu, Gang Niu,
  Dacheng Tao, and Masashi Sugiyama. Part-dependent label noise: Towards instance-dependent
  label noise. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 33, 2020.
Xiaobo Xia, Tongliang Liu, Bo Han, Mingming Gong, Jun Yu, Gang Niu, and Masashi Sugiyama.
  Sample selection with uncertainty of losses for learning with noisy labels. In International Con-
  ference on Learning Representations, 2022.
Tong Xiao, Tian Xia, Yi Yang, Chang Huang, and Xiaogang Wang. Learning from massive noisy
  labeled data for image classification. In Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision
  and pattern recognition, pp. 2691–2699, 2015.
Yilun Xu, Peng Cao, Yuqing Kong, and Yizhou Wang. L dmi: An information-theoretic noise-robust
  loss function. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 32, 2019.
Yihao Xue, Kyle Whitecross, and Baharan Mirzasoleiman. Investigating why contrastive learning
  benefits robustness against label noise. In International Conference on Machine Learning. PMLR,
  2022.
Quanming Yao, Hansi Yang, Bo Han, Gang Niu, and James Tin-Yau Kwok. Searching to exploit
  memorization effect in learning with noisy labels. In International Conference on Machine Learn-
  ing, pp. 10789–10798. PMLR, 2020a.
Yu Yao, Tongliang Liu, Bo Han, Mingming Gong, Jiankang Deng, Gang Niu, and Masashi
  Sugiyama. Dual t: Reducing estimation error for transition matrix in label-noise learning. Ad-
  vances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 33, 2020b.
Jung Eun Yoo, Dong Wook Shin, Kyungdo Han, Dahye Kim, Seung-Pyo Lee, Su-Min Jeong,
  Jinkook Lee, and SangYun Kim. Blood pressure variability and the risk of dementia: a nationwide
  cohort study. Hypertension, 75(4):982–990, 2020.
Xuchao Zhang, Xian Wu, Fanglan Chen, Liang Zhao, and Chang-Tien Lu. Self-paced robust learn-
  ing for leveraging clean labels in noisy data. In AAAI, pp. 6853–6860, 2020.
Guoqing Zheng, Ahmed Hassan Awadallah, and Susan Dumais. Meta label correction for noisy
  label learning. In Proceedings of the 35th AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, 2021.
Songzhu Zheng, Pengxiang Wu, Aman Goswami, Mayank Goswami, Dimitris Metaxas, and Chao
  Chen. Error-bounded correction of noisy labels. In International Conference on Machine Learn-
  ing, pp. 11447–11457. PMLR, 2020.


                                                13
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Zhaowei Zhu, Zihao Dong, and Yang Liu. Detecting corrupted labels without training a model to
  predict. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 27412–27427. PMLR, 2022a.
Zhaowei Zhu, Jialu Wang, and Yang Liu. Beyond images: Label noise transition matrix estimation
  for tasks with lower-quality features. In International Conference on Machine Learning. PMLR,
  2022b.


                                              14
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


APPENDIX

A      P ROPOSED A PPROACH : A DDITIONAL D ETAILS

We provide additional details on our proposed approach, including a pseudocode description and a
justification on the loss of the proposed objective function.


A.1      G ENERAL OVERVIEW

We summarize our approach with pseudocode below in Algorithm 1. We begin with the dataset and
initial model parameters, and we aim to use the dataset to learn the final model paramters.


Algorithm 1 Proposed approach for learning with instance-dependent label noise. A is the set of
anchor points. θ′ and ϕ′ are the initial model parameters for the θ and ϕ networks. Here, ’stopping
criteria’ may refer to any stopping criteria, such as early stopping. The Freeze() function takes as in-
put model parameters and freezes them, and the Unfreeze() function takes as input model parameters
and unfreezes them.
                                                           ′  ′
Input: {x(i) , ỹ (i) , y (i) }i∈A , {x(i) , ỹ (i) }i∈A
                                                      / , θ ,ϕ
Output: θ, ϕ (final model parameters)
Hyperparameters: Scalars α1 , α2 , γ
                                                              ′     ′
Train ({x(i) , ỹ (i) , y (i) }i∈A , {x(i) , ỹ (i) }i∈A
                                                      / , θ ,ϕ )
 1: while ¬ stopping criteria do                                                                                                   ▷ Step 1
 2:     ŷ = θ′ (x)                                                                                                          ▷ Predict label
 3:     β̂ϕ = ϕ′ (x, ỹ)                                                                                      ▷ Predict label confidence
                   −1
                        P        Pc             (i)
                                                                            (i)
 4:     Lθ = |A| i∈A j=1 I y == j log ŷj

                   −1
                        P               (i)         (i)
                                                                     (i)                (i)         (i)
                                                                                                                        (i)
 5:     Lϕ = |A|            i∈A  I   ỹ     ==    y       log     β̂ ϕ       +    I  ỹ     ̸
                                                                                            =     y       log    1 − β̂ ϕ
 6:     Loss = Lθ + α1 Lϕ
 7:     Update model parameters
 8:     Compute stopping criteria
 9: θ, ϕ ← θ ′ , ϕ′
10: Freeze(ϕ)
11: while ¬ stopping criteria do                                                                                                   ▷ Step 2
12:     ŷ = θ′ (x)
13:     β̂ϕ = ϕ′ (x, ỹ)
                   −1
                        P        Pc             (i)
                                                                            (i)
14:     Lθ = |A|            i∈A      j=1 I y         == j log ŷj

                   −1                   (i)
                                                                     (i)                                                (i)
                                            == y (i) log β̂ϕ + I ỹ (i) ̸= y (i) log 1 − β̂ϕ
                        P
15:     Lϕ = |A|            i∈A I ỹ

                   −1
                        PG                              Pc            (i)                                   (i)
        L′θ = |A|                   1
                                          P                                      (i)

16:                         k=1 1−r̂k        i∈A∩gk         j=1 ϕ β̂      I   ỹ     ==       j   log     ŷj              ▷ Weighted loss
17:     if ϕ is frozen then                                                                                                       ▷ Step 2a
18:          Loss = Lθ′ + γLθ
19:          Unfreeze(ϕ)
20:          Freeze(θ)
21:     else                                                                                                                      ▷ Step 2b
22:          Loss = Lθ′ + α2 Lϕ
23:          Unfreeze(θ)
24:          Freeze(ϕ)
25:     Update model parameters
26:     Compute stopping criteria
    return θ, ϕ                                     ▷ Final model parameters, but only θ is used as inference time



                                                                    15
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


A.2   P ROPOSED AND C LEAN L ABEL L OSS

Here, we show that minimizing the proposed loss L′θ from step 2 of the proposed method is equal to
minimizing cross entropy on the clean labels in expectation.
                             G                     c
                        −1 X X             1 X (i)   (i)
                                                                           (i)
                   L′θ =                              β̂ϕ I ỹ == j log ŷj
                        |A| k=1         1 − r̂k j=1
                                i∈A∩gk
                                                                        
                      G                   c
                      X    X       1     X     (i)

                                                                     (i)
                   E                        β̂ I ỹ (i) == j log ŷj 
                                 1 − r̂k j=1 ϕ
                         k=1 i∈A∩gk
                         G                     c
                         X X            1 X h (i)   (i)                 i
                                                                        (i)
                   =                              E β̂ϕ I ỹ == j log ŷj
                                      1 − r̂k j=1
                         k=1 i∈A∩gk
                         G                     c
                         X X            1 X
                                                                               (i)
                   =                              (1 − r̂k )I y (i) == j log ŷj
                                      1 − r̂k j=1
                         k=1 i∈A∩gk
                     G   c
                                              (i)
                     X X X
                   =       I y (i) == j log ŷj
                         k=1 i∈A∩gk j=1

                                                                                                     (i)
As a reminder, each group gk is then associated with estimated noise rate r̂k = |g1k | i∈gk 1 − β̂ϕ
                                                                                        P
                                                                 (i)
and estimated clean (i.e., correct) rate 1 − r̂k = |g1k | i∈gk β̂ϕ . We can express the noise and clean
                                                         P
                   (i)
rates in terms of β̂ϕ since

                                 1 X   (i)
                   1 − rk =               I ỹ == y (i)
                                |gk | i∈g
                                          k

                    = P (y == ỹ|ỹ, x) f or a randomly chosen instance in gk
                       1 X
                    =           P (y (i) == ỹ (i) |ỹ (i) , x(i) )
                      |gk | i∈g
                                k


where rk and 1 − rk are the actual noise and clean rates within group k, respectively. Therefore,
since β̂ϕ is trained to predict P (y == ỹ|ỹ, x), we estimate the noise and clean rates using β̂ϕ .


B     P REPROCESSING D ETAILS

Here, we provide more detail on real dataset pre-processing.

B.1   MIMIC-III

Data were processed using the FlexIble Data Driven pipeLinE (FIDDLE), [Tang et al. (2020)],
a publicly available pre-processing tool for electronic health record data. We used the
same features as [Tang et al. (2020)] for our tasks. More information can be found at
https://physionet.org/content/mimic-eicu-fiddle-feature/1.0.0/.

B.2   A DULT

Although, we used a pre-processed version of this dataset, we omitted features pertaining to edu-
cation, work type, and work sector to make the task more difficult. More specifically, in the file
‘headers.txt’ at the repository mentioned in Footnote 1, we kept all features beginning with ‘age’,
‘workclass’, ‘education’, ‘marital status’, and ‘occupation’. We also kept the ‘Sex Female’ feature.
Values were normalized for each feature to have a range of 0-1 by subtracting by the minimum value
observed among all individuals and dividing by the range.


                                                    16
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Table 2: For each dataset, we list the range of hyperparameters considered for each dataset. For
each hyperparameter, the lower bound is shown in the top row, and the upper bound is shown in the
bottom row. For hyperparameters we did not tune, only one row is shown.

      Hyperparameter      Synthetic    MIMIC-ARF        MIMIC-Shock        Adult      COMPAS
                          0.00001        0.00001          0.000001        0.00001      0.0001
       Learning Rate
                            0.01          0.001             0.001           0.01        0.05
                           0.0001       0.000001            0.0001         0.0001      0.0001
        L2 Constant
                             0.1           0.01               0.1            0.1        0.01
         Layer Size          10            500               500            100          10
                            0.40           0.50              0.50           0.50        0.50
      Filter Threshold
                            1.00           1.00              1.00           0.90        0.90
                          0.00001        0.00001           0.00001         0.0001      0.0001
       Noise Added
                            0.01          0.001             0.001          0.001        0.01
                              1              1                 1              1           1
      Number of Parts
                             10             10                10             10          10
                            0.01            0.1             0.001           0.01        0.01
           αGP L
                             1.0            1.0               1.0            1.0         1.0
                             0.1            0.1              0.01            0.1        0.01
        α1P roposed
                            10.0           10.0              10.0           10.0        10.0
                             0.1            0.1              0.01            0.1        0.01
         γP roposed
                            10.0           10.0              10.0           10.0        10.0
                             0.1            0.1              0.01            0.1        0.01
        α2P roposed
                            10.0           10.0              10.0           10.0        10.0


B.3   COMPAS

Although, we used a pre-processed version of this dataset, we omitted the feature ‘score factor’ (i.e.,
the risk score for recidivism from the ProPublica model) to make the task more difficult. Values were
normalized for each feature to have a range of 0-1 by subtracting by the minimum value observed
among all individuals and dividing by the range.


C     N ETWORK AND T RAINING D ETAILS

Here, our ranges of hyperparameters and implementation choices for the proposed network. All
networks were trained on Intel(R) Xeon(R) CPUs, E7-4850 v3 @ 2.20GHz and Nvidia GeForce
GTX 1080 GPUs. All layers were initialized with He initialization from a uniform distribution. We
also include are source code as part of the submission in the supplemental attachment.

C.1   H YPERPARAMETER VALUES C ONSIDERED

Here, we show the range of values we considered for our random search. More details are provided
in Table 2. For any hyperparameters associated with the Adam optimizer not mentioned above, we
used the default values. We divide our training data into five batches during training. Fandom seeds
(for Pytorch, numpy, and Python’s random) were initialized with 123456789.
Not all hyperparameters were used with each approach. ‘Filter Threshold’ and ‘Noise Added’ were
only used with the baseline SLN + Filter. Here, Filter Threshold refers to the minimum value of the
predicted probability of the observed label for an instance to be considered ‘correctly labeled’. For
example, if Filter Threshold=0.5, then all examples whose predicted probability for the observed la-
bel is at least 0.5 are considered ‘correct’ and used during training. ‘Number of Parts’ was only used
with the baseline Transition. ‘αGP L ’ was only used with the baseline Fair GPL, and ‘αP roposed ’
was only used with the proposed method. Here, αP roposed corresponds to the term α that was used
to balance Lθ and Lϕ . We refer to it as αP roposed in this section to distinguish it from the α value
used by the baseline Fair GPL.


                                                  17
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


(a) Comparison of the proposed approach to baselines     (b) Comparison of the proposed approach to baselines
when varying the size of the minority set in the whole   with uniform random noise. Overall, the proposed ap-
dataset. The proposed approach outperforms the base-     proach is robust to the noise rate and is competitive
lines on minority sizes of 10% or higher.                with the baselines.

                   Figure 4: Extra experiments on different data and noise settings.


C.2    N ETWORK D ETAILS

For the overall architecture, we used a feed forward network with two hidden layers. The auxiliary
β prediction component was also implemented with two feed forward layers. All layer sizes are as
described in Table 2. In addition, we used the ReLU activation function. The complete implemen-
tation can be found in the attached code.

C.3    S OURCE C ODE

See the attached zip file. We will make the code public upon publication.

D     I MPLEMENTATION D ETAILS
For each dataset, we randomly split the data into 80/20% training/test, ensuring that data from the
same individual did not appear across splits. For the Adult dataset, we used the test set provided and
randomly selected 1,000 individuals from the training set. We then randomly selected 10% of the
training data for all datasets except MIMIC-III from each subgroup to be alignment points, thereby
ensuring that they were representative of the overall population. For the MIMIC-III dataset, 2% from
each subgroup were selected as alignment points due to the larger size of the dataset. Alignment
points were selected randomly to simulate our setting of focus, where we have a proxy labeling
function and then randomly select a subset of the data to chart review in order to validate the proxy
function. Then, for all datasets, half of the alignment points were then set aside as a validation set to
use during training for early stopping and hyperparameter selection, while the other half remained
in the training set. Later, in our experiments, we evaluate when the alignment set size varies and
when the alignment set is biased. All approaches (i.e., baselines and proposed) were given access
to ground truth labels for data in the alignment set so that some approaches did not have an
unfair advantage.
All models were trained in Python3.7 and Pytorch1.7.1 [Paszke et al. (2017)], using Adam [Kingma
& Ba (2014)]. Hyperparameters, including the learning rate, L2 regularization constant, and ob-
jective function scalars (e.g., α), were tuned using random search, with a budget of 20. We used
early stopping (patience=10) based on validation set performance, where we aimed to maximize the
HM. We report results on the held-out test set, showing the mean and standard deviation over 10
replications.

E     R ESULTS : A DDITIONAL E XPERIMENTS (S YNTHETIC DATA )
We examined performance when we varied the size of the minority group (Figure 4a) and found
that our approach is no longer beneficial at minority groups smaller than 10% of the dataset. This


                                                     18
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                             Figure 5: Ablation study of proposed approach.


        (a) We varied α1 .                  (b) We varied α2 .                (c) We varied γ.

    Figure 6: Sensitivity analysis of proposed approach on objective function hyperparameters.


presents a limitation for future work. We also examined uniform random noise (Figure 4b). At low
noise rates, all approaches achieved similar performance. At a noise rate of 40%, all approaches
outperformed the standard approach, which did not account for label noise. Our approach was still
robust to the noise rate and competitive with the baselines. However, since our approach focused on
learning the relationship between the features and label noise, we expected that our approach would
not provide as large of a benefit on random noise. This is because the only signal our approach
would learn is now based solely on the observed label, which may get diluted out if there are many
input features.
In addition, we also examine our approach more closely by conducting an ablation study and a
hyperparameter sensitivity analysis. In our ablation study (Figure 5), we began with training on only
the alignment points (i.e., Step 1 only), which achieved the worst performance. We then introduced
Step 2 and added the remaining training data (i.e., non-alignment points) but only trained using
Lθ′ . This led to an improvement in performance, but not to the level of the full approach. The
next two ablations build on the previous one. In the first one, we added continued supervision
on the alignment points with Lθ , and observed an improvement in performance, likely due to the
retention of high quality data in this step. In the second one, we added continued supervision on
the alignment points using Lϕ , and observed an even larger improvement. This is likely because
including Lθ prevented the model from learning a solution where β̂ was small for all instances, as
previously discussed. Finally, we end with our full proposed approach, which performed noticeably
better than each of the ablations, showing the importance of each component.
In our sensitivity analysis (Figure 6), we tested how performance of the (full) proposed approach
varied to changes in the hyperparameters α1 , α2 , and γ. For each of these hyperparameters, we
measured performance at values between 0.01 and 100 on a logarithmic scale while keeping the
other two values constant at 1. We found that α1 and γ were the most robust to changes in the value.
We found that α2 was more sensitive, with values between 0.1 and 10 generally working best.



                                                   19
