Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


P ERSONALIZED R EWARD L EARNING WITH
I NTERACTION -G ROUNDED L EARNING (IGL)
 Jessica Maghakian                                                  Paul Mineiro
 Stony Brook University                                             Microsoft Research NYC
 jessica.maghakian@stonybrook.edu                                   pmineiro@microsoft.com

 Kishan Panaganti                                                   Mark Rucker
 Texas A&M University                                               University of Virginia
 kpb@tamu.edu                                                       mr2an@virginia.edu

 Akanksha Saran                                                     Cheng Tan
 Microsoft Research NYC                                             Microsoft Research NYC
 akanksha.saran@microsoft.com                                       tan.cheng@microsoft.com



                                             A BSTRACT
         In an era of countless content offerings, recommender systems alleviate informa-
         tion overload by providing users with personalized content suggestions. Due to
         the scarcity of explicit user feedback, modern recommender systems typically op-
         timize for the same fixed combination of implicit feedback signals across all users.
         However, this approach disregards a growing body of work highlighting that (i)
         implicit signals can be used by users in diverse ways, signaling anything from
         satisfaction to active dislike, and (ii) different users communicate preferences in
         different ways. We propose applying the recent Interaction Grounded Learning
         (IGL) paradigm to address the challenge of learning representations of diverse
         user communication modalities. Rather than requiring a fixed, human-designed
         reward function, IGL is able to learn personalized reward functions for different
         users and then optimize directly for the latent user satisfaction. We demonstrate
         the success of IGL with experiments using simulations as well as with real-world
         production traces.

1   I NTRODUCTION
From shopping to reading the news, modern Internet users have access to an overwhelming amount
of content and choices from online services. Recommender systems offer a way to improve user
experience and decrease information overload by providing a customized selection of content. A
key challenge for recommender systems is the rarity of explicit user feedback, such as ratings or
likes/dislikes (Grčar et al., 2005). Rather than explicit feedback, practitioners typically use more
readily available implicit signals, such as clicks (Hu et al., 2008), webpage dwell time (Yi et al.,
2014), or inter-arrival times (Wu et al., 2017) as a proxy signal for user satisfaction. These implicit
signals are used as the reward objective in recommender systems, with the popular Click-Through
Rate (CTR) metric as the gold standard for the field (Silveira et al., 2019). However, directly using
implicit signals as the reward function presents several issues.
Implicit signals do not directly map to user satisfaction. Although clicks are routinely equated with
user satisfaction, there are examples of unsatisfied users interacting with content via clicks. Clickbait
exploits cognitive biases such as caption bias (Hofmann et al., 2012) or the curiosity gap (Scott,
2021) so that low quality content attracts more clicks. Direct optimization of the CTR degrades user
experience by promoting clickbait items (Wang et al., 2021). Recent work shows that users will
even click on content that they know a priori they will dislike. In a study of online news reading,
Lu et al. (2018a) discovered that 15% of the time, users would click on articles that they strongly
disliked. Similarly, although longer webpage dwell times are associated with satisfied users, a study
by Kim et al. (2014) found that dwell time is also significantly impacted by page topic, readability
and content length.


                                                   1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Different users communicate in different ways. Demographic background is known to have an im-
pact on the ways in which users engage with recommender systems. A study by Beel et al. (2013)
shows that older users have CTR more than 3x higher than their younger counterparts. Gender also
has an impact on interactions, e.g. men are more likely to leave dislikes on YouTube videos than
women (Khan, 2017). At the same time, a growing body of work shows that recommender sys-
tems do not provide consistent performance across demographic subgroups. For example, multiple
studies on ML fairness in recommender systems show that women on average receive less accurate
recommendations compared to men (Ekstrand et al., 2018; Mansoury et al., 2020). Current systems
are also unfair across different age brackets, with statistically significant recommendation utility
degradation as the age of the user increases (Neophytou et al., 2022). The work of Neophytou et
al. identifies usage features as the most predictive of mean recommender utility, hinting that the
inconsistent performance in recommendation algorithms across subgroups arises from differences
in how users interact with the recommender system.
These challenges motivate the need for personalized reward functions. However, extensively mod-
eling the ways in which implicit signals are used or how demographics impact interaction style
is costly and inefficient. Current state-of-the-art systems utilize reward functions that are manually
engineered combinations of implicit signals, typically refined through laborious trial and error meth-
ods. Yet as recommender systems and their users evolve, so do the ways in which users implicitly
communicate preferences. Any extensive models or hand tuned reward functions developed now
could easily become obsolete within a few years time.
To this end, we propose Interaction Grounded Learning (IGL) Xie et al. (2021) for personalized
reward learning (IGL-P). IGL is a learning paradigm where a learner optimizes for unobservable
rewards by interacting with the environment and associating observable feedback with the true la-
tent reward. Prior IGL approaches assume the feedback either depends on the reward alone (Xie
et al., 2021), or on the reward and action (Xie et al., 2022). These methods are unable to disam-
biguate personalized feedback that depends on the context. Other approaches such as reinforcement
learning and traditional contextual bandits suffer from the choice of reward function. However our
proposed personalized IGL, IGL-P, resolves the 2 above challenges while making minimal as-
sumptions about the value of observed user feedback. Our new approach is able to incorporate both
explicit and implicit signals, leverage ambiguous user feedback and adapt to the different ways in
which users interact with the system.
Our Contributions: We present IGL-P, the first IGL strategy for context-dependent feedback, the
first use of inverse kinematics as an IGL objective, and the first IGL strategy for more than two latent
states. Our proposed approach provides an alternative to agent learning methods which require hand-
crafted reward functions. Using simulations and real production data, we demonstrate that IGL-P
is able to learn personalized rewards when applied to the domain of online recommender systems,
which require at least 3 reward states.

2     P ROBLEM S ETTING
2.1   C ONTEXTUAL BANDITS
The contextual bandit (Auer et al., 2002; Langford & Zhang, 2007) is a statistical model of myopic
decision making which is pervasively applied in recommendation systems (Bouneffouf et al., 2020).
IGL operates via reduction to contextual bandits, hence, we briefly review contextual bandits here.
The contextual bandit problem proceeds over T rounds. At each round t ∈ [T ], the learner receives
a context xt ∈ X (the context space), selects an action at ∈ A (the action space), and then observes
a reward rt (at ), where rt : A → [0, 1] is the underlying reward function. We assume that for each
round t, conditioned on xt , rt is sampled from a distribution Prt (· | xt ). A contextual bandit (CB)
algorithm attempts to minimize the cumulative regret
                                               XT
                               RegCB (T ) :=       rt (π ⋆ (xt )) − rt (at )                        (1)
                                                t=1
relative to an optimal policy π ⋆ over a policy class Π.
In general, both the contexts x1 , . . . , xT and the distributions Pr1 , . . . , PrT can be selected in an
arbitrary, potentially adaptive fashion based on the history. In the sequel we will describe IGL in
a stochastic environment, but the reduction induces a nonstationary contextual bandit problem, and
therefore the existence of adversarial contextual bandit algorithms is relevant.


                                                      2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023

                                                                 I like this!   r

                                                        x
                                                                    y


                             a

                                           recommender system


Figure 1: IGL in the recommender system setting. The learner observes the context x, plays an
action a, and then observes a feedback y (that is dependent on the latent reward r), but not r itself.


2.2     I NTERACTION G ROUNDED L EARNING
IGL is a problem setting in which the learner’s goal is to optimally interact with the environment
with no explicit reward to ground its policies. IGL extends the contextual bandit framework by
eliding the reward from the learning algorithm and providing feedback instead (Xie et al., 2021).
We describe the stochastic setting where (xt , rt , yt ) ∼ D triples are sampled iid from an unknown
distribution; the learner receives the context xt ∈ X , selects an action at ∈ A, and then observes
the feedback yt (at ), where yt : A → [0, 1] is the underlying feedback function. Note rt (at ) is
never revealed to the algorithm: nonetheless, the regret notion remains the same as Eq. (1). An
information-theoretic argument proves assumptions relating the feedback to the underlying reward
are necessary to succeed (Xie et al., 2022).

2.2.1    S PECIALIZATION TO R ECOMMENDATION
For specific application in the recommendation domain, we depart from prior art in IGL (Xie et al.,
2021; 2022) in two ways: first, in the assumed relationship between feedback and underlying reward;
and second, in the number of latent reward states. For the remainder of the paper, we represent the
users as x (i.e., as context), content items as action a, the user satisfaction with recommended content
as r, and the feedback signals in response to the recommended content (user interactions with the
system interface) as y.

Feedback Dependence Assumption Xie et al. (2021) assumed full contextual independence of
feedback on context and chosen action, i.e. y ⊥ x, a|r. For recommender systems, this implies
that all users communicate preferences identically for all content. In a subsequent paper, Xie et al.
(2022) loosen the full conditional independence by considering context conditional independence,
i.e. y ⊥ x|a, r. For our setting, this corresponds to the user feedback varying for combinations of
preference and content, but remaining consistent across all users. Neither of these two assumptions
are natural in the recommendation setting because different users interact with recommender systems
in different ways (Beel et al., 2013; Shin, 2020). In this work, we assume y ⊥ a|x, r, i.e., the
feedback y is independent of the displayed content a given the user x and their disposition toward
the displayed content r. Thus, we assume that users may communicate in different ways, but a given
user expresses satisfaction, dissatisfaction and indifference to all content in the same way.

Number of Latent Reward States Prior work demonstrates that a binary latent reward assump-
tion, along with an assumption that rewards are rare under a known reference policy, are sufficient
for IGL to succeed. Specifically, optimizing the contrast between a learned policy and the oblivi-
ous uniform policy is able to succeed when feedback is both context and action independent (Xie
et al., 2021); and optimizing the contrast between the learned policy and all constant-action policies
succeeds when the feedback is context independent (Xie et al., 2022).
Although the binary latent reward assumption (e.g., satisfied or dissatisfied) appears reasonable for
recommendation scenarios, it fails to account for user indifference versus user dissatisfaction. This
observation was first motivated by our production data, where a 2 state IGL policy would sometimes
maximize feedback signals with obviously negative semantics. Assuming users ignore most content
most of the time (Nguyen et al., 2014), negative feedback can be as difficult to elicit as positive
feedback, and a 2 state IGL model is unable to distinguish between these extremes. Hence, we posit
a minimal latent state model for recommender systems involves 3 states: (i) r = 1, when users are
satisfied with the recommended content, (ii) r = 0, when users are indifferent or inattentive, and (iii)
r = −1, when users are dissatisfied. See Appendix A.1 and Maghakian et al. (2022) for details.


                                                   3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


3       D ERIVATIONS
Prior approaches to IGL use contrastive learning objectives (Xie et al., 2021; 2022), but the novel
feedback dependence assumption in the prior section impedes this line of attack. Essentially, given
arbitrary dependence upon x, learning must operate on each example in isolation without requiring
comparison across examples. This motivates attempting to predict the current action from the current
context and the currently observed feedback, i.e., inverse kinematics.

Inverse Kinematics Traditionally in robotics and computer animation, inverse kinematics is the
mathematical process used to recover the movement (action) of a robot/object in the world from
some other data such as the position and orientation of a robot manipulator/video of a moving object
(in our case, the other data is context and feedback). We motivate our inverse kinematics strategy
using exact expectations. When acting according to any policy P (a|x), we can imagine trying to
predict the action taken given the context and feedback; the posterior distribution is
                              P (a|x)P (y|a, x)
                P (a|y, x) =                                                    (Bayes rule)
                                   P (y|x)
                                      X P (y|r, a, x)
                            = P (a|x)                   P (r|a, x)        (Total Probability)
                                       r
                                             P (y|x)
                                      X P (y|r, x)
                            = P (a|x)                P (r|a, x)                  (y ⊥ a|x, r)
                                       r
                                           P (y|x)
                                      X P (r|y, x)
                            = P (a|x)                P (r|a, x)                 (Bayes rule)
                                       r
                                            P (r|x)

                              X                  P (r|a, x)P (a|x)
                            =     P (r|y, x) P                          . (Total Probability)      (2)
                               r                  a P (r|a, x)P (a|x)

We arrive at the inner product between a reward decoder term (P (r|y, x)) and a reward predictor
term (P (r|a, x)).

Extreme Event Detection Direct extraction of a reward predictor using maximum likelihood on
the action prediction problem with Eq. (2) is frustrated by two identifiability issues: first, this ex-
pression is invariant to a permutation of the rewards on a context dependent basis; and second, the
relative scale of two terms being
                                P multiplied is not uniquely determined by their product. To miti-
gate the first issue, we assume a P (r = 0|a, x)P (a|x) > 21 , i.e., nonzero rewards are rare under
P (a|x); and to mitigate the second issue, we assume the feedback can be perfectly decoded, i.e.,
P (r|y, x) ∈ {0, 1}. Under these assumptions, we have
                                                P (r = 0|a, x)P (a|x)
                        r = 0 =⇒ P (a|y, x) = P
                                                a P (r = 0|a, x)P (a|x)
                                            ≤ 2P (r = 0|a, x)P (a|x) ≤ 2P (a|x).                   (3)
Eq. (3) forms the basis for our extreme event detector: anytime the posterior probability of an action
is predicted to be more than twice the prior probability, we deduce r ̸= 0.
Note a feedback merely being apriori rare or frequent (i.e., the magnitude of P (y|x) under the policy
P (a|x)) does not imply that observing such feedback will induce an extreme event detection; rather
the feedback must have a probability that strongly depends upon which action is taken. Because
feedback is assumed conditionally independent of action given the reward, the only way for feedback
to help predict which action is played is via the (action dependence of the) latent reward.

Extreme Event Disambiguation With 2 latent states, r ̸= 0 =⇒ r = 1, and we can reduce to
a standard contextual bandit with inferred rewards 1(P (a|y, x) > 2P (a|x)). With 3 latent states,
r ̸= 0 =⇒ r = ±1, and additional information is necessary to disambiguate the extreme events.
We assume partial reward information is available via a “definitely negative” function1 DN : X ×
Y → {−1, 0} where P (DN(x, y) = 0|r = 1) = 1 and P (DN(x, y) = −1|r = −1) > 0. This
reduces extreme event disambiguation to one-sided learning (Bekker & Davis, 2020) applied only to
    1
        “Definitely positive” information can be incorporated analogously.


                                                         4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


extreme events, where we try to predict the underlying latent state given (x, a). We assume partial
labelling is selected completely at random Elkan & Noto (2008) and treat the (constant) negative
labelling propensity α as a hyperparameter. We arrive at our 3-state reward extractor

                           
                           0           P (a|y, x) ≤ 2P (a|x)
               ρ(x, a, y) = −α−1        P (a|y, x) > 2P (a|x) and DN(x, y) = −1 ,                  (4)
                             1
                           
                                        otherwise

equivalent to Bekker & Davis (2020, Equation 11). Setting α = 1 embeds 2-state IGL.

Algorithm 1 IGL; Inverse Kinematics; 2 or 3 Latent States; On or Off-Policy.
Input: Contextual bandit algorithm CB-Alg.
Input: Calibrated weighted multiclass classification algorithm MC-Alg.
Input: Definitely negative oracle DN.                             # DN(. . .) = 0 for 2 state IGL
Input: Negative labelling propensity α.                          # α = 1 for 2 state IGL
Input: Action set size K.
 1: π ← new CB-Alg.
 2: IK ← new MC-Alg.
 3: for t = 1, 2, . . . ; do
 4:   Observe context xt and action set At with |At | = K.
 5:   if On-Policy IGL then
 6:       P (·|xt ) ← π.predict(xt , At ).
 7:       Play at ∼ P (·|xt ) and observe feedback yt .
 8:   else
 9:       Observe (xt , at , yt , P (·|xt )).
10:   wt ← 1/(KP (at |xt )).                                     # Synthetic uniform distribution
11:   P̂ (at |yt , xt ) ← IK.predict((xt , yt ), At , at ).      # Predict action probability
12:   if K P̂ (at |yt , xt ) ≤ 2 then                            # r̂t = 0
13:       π.learn(xt , at , At , rt = 0)
14:   else                                                       # r̂t ̸= 0
15:       if DN(. . .) = 0 then
16:          π.learn(xt , at , At , rt = 1, P (·|xt ))
17:       else                                                   # Definitely negative
18:          π.learn(xt , at , At , rt = −α−1 , P (·|xt ))
19:   IK.learn((xt , yt ), At , at , wt ).


Implementation Notes In practice, P (a|x) is known but the other probabilities are estimated.
P̂ (a|y, x) is estimated online using maximum likelihood on the problem predicting a from (x, y),
i.e., on a data stream of tuples ((x, y), a). The current estimates induce ρ̂(x, a, y) based upon the
plug-in version of Eq. (4). In this manner, the original data stream of (x, a, y) tuples is transformed
into a stream of (x, a, r̂ = ρ̂(x, a, y)) tuples and reduced to a standard online CB problem.
As an additional complication, although P (a|x) is known, it is typically a good policy under which
rewards are not rare (e.g., offline learning with a good historical policy; or acting online according
to the policy being learned by the IGL procedure). Therefore, we use importance weighting to
synthesize a uniform action distribution P (a|x) from the true action distribution.2 Ultimately we
arrive at the procedure of Algorithm 1.


4   E MPIRICAL E VALUATIONS

Evaluation Settings: Settings include simulation using a supervised classification dataset, online
news recommendation on Facebook, and a production image recommendation scenario.
   2
     When the number of actions varies from round to round, we use importance weighting to synthesize a
non-uniform action distribution with low rewards, but we elide this detail for ease of exposition.


                                                  5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Abbreviations: Algorithms are denoted by the following abbreviations: Personalized IGL for 2
latent states (IGL-P(2)); Personalized IGL for 3 latent states (IGL-P(3)); Contextual Ban-
dits for the Facebook news setting that maximizes for emoji, non-like click-based reactions
(CB-emoji); Contextual Bandits for the Facebook news setting that maximizes for comment in-
teractions (CB-comment); Contextual Bandits for the production recommendation scenario that
maximizes for CTR (CB-Click).
General Evaluation Setup: At each time step t, the context xt is provided from either the simulator
(Section 4.1, Section 4.2) or the logged production data (Section 4.3). The learner then selects an
action at and receives feedback yt . In these evaluations, each user provides feedback in exactly
one interaction and different user feedback signals are mutually exclusive, so that yt is a one-hot
vector. In simulated environments, the ground truth reward is sometimes used for evaluation but
never revealed to the algorithm.
Code: Our code3 is available for all publicly replicable experiments (i.e. except production data).

4.1    C OVERTYPE IGL S IMULATION
To highlight that personalized IGL can distinguish between different user communication styles, we
create a simulated 2-state IGL scenario from a supervised classification dataset. First, we apply a
supervised-to-bandit transform to convert the dataset into a contextual bandit simulation (Bietti et al.,
2021), i.e., the algorithm is presented the example features as context, chooses one of the classes as
an action, and experiences a binary reward which indicates whether or not it matches the example
label. In the IGL simulation, this reward is experienced but not revealed to the algorithm. Instead,
the latent reward is converted into a feedback signal as follows: each example is assigned one of N
different user ids and the user id is revealed to the algorithm as part of the example features. The
simulated user will generate feedback in the form of one of M different word ids. Unknown to the
algorithm, the words are divided equally into good and bad words, and the users are divided equally
into original and shifted users. Original users indicate positive and zero reward via good and bad
words respectively, while shifted users employ the exact opposite communication convention4 .

                        User Embeddings                                Word Embeddings

         original                                                                                          good
         shifted                                                                                           bad



Figure 2: The proposed personalized IGL algorithm successfully disambiguates both different user
communication styles and different event semantics. See Section 4.1 for details.

We simulated using the Covertype (Blackard & Dean, 1999) dataset with M = N = 100, and
an (inverse kinematics) model class which embedded both user and word ids into a 2 dimensional
space. Fig. 2 demonstrates that both the user population and the words are cleanly separated into
two latent groups. Additional results showcasing the learning curves for inverse kinematics, reward
and policy learning are shown in Appendix A.2 along with detailed description of model parameters.

4.2    FAIRNESS IN FACEBOOK N EWS R ECOMMENDATION
Personalized reward learning is the key to more fair recommender systems. Previous work (Neophy-
tou et al., 2022) suggests that inconsistent performance in recommender systems across user sub-
groups arises due to differences in user communication modalities. We now test this hypothesis in
the setting of Facebook news recommendation. Our simulations are built on a dataset (Martinchek,
2016) of all posts by the official Facebook pages of 5 popular news outlets (ABC News, CBS News,
CNN, Fox News and The New York Times) that span the political spectrum. Posts range from May
to November 2016 and contain text content information, as well as logged interaction counts, which
include comments and shares, as well as diverse click-based reactions (see Fig. 3).
   3
     https://github.com/asaran/IGL-P
   4
     Our motivation arises from the phenomenon of semantic shift, where a word’s usage evolves to the point
that the original and modern meaning are dramatically different (e.g. terrific originally meant inspiring terror).


                                                        6
 Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


 Figure 3: Facebook’s click-based reactions: like, love, haha, wow, sad and angry (Meta, 2016). The
 reactions allow users to engage with content using diverse communication signals.

 Constructing a hand-engineered reward signal using these feedbacks is difficult, and Facebook itself
 came under fire for utilizing reward weights that disproportionately promote toxic, low quality news.
 One highly criticized iteration of the reward ranking algorithm treated emoji reactions as five times
 more valuable than likes (Merrill & Oremus, 2021). Future iterations of the ranking algorithm pro-
 moted comments, in an attempt to bolster “meaningful social interactions” (Hagey & Jeff Horwitz,
 2021). Our experiments evaluate the performance of CB algorithms (Li et al., 2010) using these two
 reward functions, referring to them as CB-emoji and CB-comment.
 We model the news recommendation problem as a 3 latent reward state problem, with readers of
 different news outlets as different contexts. Given a curated selection of posts, the goal of the
 learner is to select the best article to show to the reader. The learner can leverage action features
 including the post type (link, video, photo, status or event) as well as embeddings of the text content
 that were generated using pre-trained transformers (Reimers & Gurevych, 2019). User feedback is
 drawn from a fixed probability distribution (unknown to the algorithms) that depends on the user
 type and latent reward of the chosen action. As an approximation of the true latent reward signal,
 we use low dimensional embeddings of the different news outlets combined with aggregate statistics
 from the post feedback to categorize whether the users had a positive (r = 1), neutral (r = 0) or
 negative experience (r = −1) with the post. This categorization is not available to the evaluated
 algorithms. Finally, IGL-P(3) uses the angry reaction as a negative oracle.

                                                                  ,*/ 3               &% HPRML                             &% FRPPHQW
DYHUDJH UHZDUG


                         í
                         í


                                                                                   QXPEHU RI LQWHUDFWLRQV

                   Figure 4: Of the three algorithms, only IGL-P(3) consistently displays posts that users enjoy.



                                       ,*/ 3           &% HPRML       &% FRPPHQW                                         ,*/ 3         &% HPRML   &% FRPPHQW
   IUDFWLRQ RI UHZDUGV


                                                                                             IUDFWLRQ RI UHZDUGV


                                   $%&       &%6         &11      )R[       1<7                                          $%&     &%6     &11      )R[     1<7
              (a) Average fraction of rewards that are positive                                      (b) Average fraction of rewards that are negative
 Figure 5: IGL-P(3) uses personalized reward learning to achieve fair news recommendations
 across diverse reader bases. CB policies based on those used by Facebook perform inconsistently,
 with subsets of users receiving both fewer high quality and more low quality recommendations.

 Figs. 4 and 5 shows the results of our online news recommendation experiments. While the per-
 formance of both CB-emoji and CB-comment varies significantly across the different reader
 groups, IGL-P(3) provides fair performance for both positive and negative rewards. Although
 the CB-comment objective that was introduced to decrease low quality news succeeded for CBS
 readers, it significantly increased dissatisfaction among 3 of the 5 reader types (ABC News, Fox
 News and The New York Times). Additional details of this experiment, including model parameters
 and learning curves are available in Appendix A.3.


                                                                                        7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


4.3     P RODUCTION R ESULTS
Our production setting is a real world image recommendation system that serves hundreds of mil-
lions of users. In our recommendation system interface, users provide feedback in the form of clicks,
likes, dislikes or no feedback. All four signals are mutually exclusive and the user only provides one
feedback after each interaction. For these experiments, we use data that spans millions of interac-
tions. The production baseline is a contextual bandit algorithm with a hand-engineered multi-task
reward function which dominates approaches that only use click feedback5 . Any improvements over
the production policy imply improvement over any bandit algorithm optimizing for click feedback.
We implement IGL-P(2) and IGL-P(3) and report the performance as relative lift metrics over
the production baseline. Unlike the simulation setting, we no longer have access to the user’s latent
reward after each interaction. As a result, we evaluate IGL by comparing all feedback signals. An
increase in both clicks and likes, and a decrease in dislikes, are considered desirable outcomes.
Table 1 shows the results of our empirical study. IGL-P(2) exhibits an inability to avoid extreme
negative events. Although the true latent state is unknown, IGL-P(2) is Pareto-dominated due
to an increase in dislikes. IGL-P(3) does not exhibit this pathology. These results indicate the
utility of a 3 latent state model in real world recommendation systems. To clearly illustrate the
improvement of IGL-P(3) and provide an additional benchmark, we also report that IGL-P(3)
significantly outperforms a contextual bandit policy CB-Click using the industry standard CTR
reward in Table 2.

          Algorithm               Clicks                      Likes                    Dislikes
         IGL-P(3)         [0.999, 1.067, 1.152]      [0.985, 1.029, 1.054]      [0.751, 1.072, 1.274]
         IGL-P(2)         [0.926, 1.005, 1.091]      [0.914, 0.949, 0.988]      [1.141, 1.337, 1.557]

Table 1: Relative metrics lift over a production baseline. The production baseline uses a hand-
engineered reward function which is not available to IGL algorithms. Shown are point estimates
and associated bootstrap 95% confidence regions. IGL-P(2) erroneously increases dislikes to the
detriment of other metrics. IGL-P(3) is equivalent to the hand-engineered baseline.


          Algorithm               Clicks                      Likes                    Dislikes
         IGL-P(3)         [1.000, 1.010, 1.020]      [1.006, 1.026, 1.049]      [0.890, 0.918, 0.955]
         CB-Click         [0.968, 0.979, 0.990]      [0.935, 0.959, 0.977]      [1.234, 1.311, 1.348]

Table 2: Relative metrics lift over a CB policy that uses the click feedback as the reward. Point
estimates and associated bootstrap 95% confidence regions are reported. IGL-P(3) significantly
outperforms CB-Click at minimizing user dissatisfaction. Surprisingly, IGL-P(3) even outper-
forms CB-Click with respect to click feedback, providing evidence for the 3 latent state model.6

5       R ELATED W ORK
Eliminating reward engineering. Online learning algorithms in supervised learning, contextual
bandits and reinforcement learning all optimize over hand-crafted scalar rewards (Hoi et al., 2021).
Previous work in areas such as inverse reinforcement learning (Arora & Doshi, 2021), imitation
learning (Hussein et al., 2017) and robust reinforcement learning (Zhou et al., 2021; Panaganti et al.,
2022) attempt to learn from historical data without access to the underlying true reward models.
However these methods either require expert demonstration data, use hand-crafted objectives to
incorporate additional human cues (Saran et al., 2020a;b; 2022) or are incapable of generalizing to
different feedback signals (Chen et al., 2022), and generally need expensive compute and enormous
sampling capabilities for learning. In this context, IGL (Xie et al., 2021; 2022) is a novel paradigm,
where a learner’s goal is to optimally interact with the environment with no explicit reward or
    5
     The utility of multi-task learning for recommendation systems is well-established, e.g., Chen et al. (2021);
Lu et al. (2018b); Chen et al. (2019).
   6
     Data for Table 1 and Table 2 are drawn from different date ranges due to compliance limitations, so the
IGL-P(3) performance need not match.


                                                       8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


demonstrations to ground its policies. Our proposed approach to IGL, IGL-P(3), further enables
learning of personalized reward functions for different feedback signals.
Recommender systems. Traditional vanilla recommendation approaches can be divided into three
types. Content-based approaches maintain representations for users based on their content and rec-
ommend new content with good similarity metrics for particular users (Lops et al., 2019). In con-
trast, collaborative filtering approaches employ user rating predictions based on historical consumed
content and underlying user similarities (Schafer et al., 2007). Finally, there are hybrid approaches
that combine the previous two contrasting approaches to better represent user profiles for improved
recommendations (Javed et al., 2021).
Our work is a significant departure from these approaches, in that we learn representations of user’s
communication style via their content interaction history for improved diverse personalized recom-
mendations. Specifically (1) we propose a novel personalized IGL algorithm based on the inverse
kinematics strategy as described in Section 3, (2) we leverage both implicit and explicit feedback
signals and avoid the costly, inefficient, status quo process of reward engineering, and (3) we formu-
late and propose a new recommendation system based on the IGL paradigm. Unlike previous work
on IGL, we propose a personalized algorithm for recommendation systems with improved reward
predictor models, more practical assumptions on feedback signals, and more intricacies described
in Section 2.2.1.

6   D ISCUSSION
We evaluated the proposed personalized IGL approach (IGL-P) in three different settings: (1) A
simulation using a supervised classification dataset shows that IGL-P can learn to successfully dis-
tinguish between different communication modalities; (2) A simulation for online news recommen-
dation based on real data from Facebook users shows that IGL-P leverages insights about different
communication modalities to learn better policies and achieve fairness with consistent performance
among diverse user groups; (3) A real-world experiment deployed in an image recommendation
product showcases that the proposed method outperforms the hand-engineered reward baseline, and
succeeds in a practical application.
Our work assumes that users may communicate in different ways, but a given user expresses
(dis)satisfaction or indifference to all content in the same way. This assumption was critical to
deriving the inverse kinematics approach, but in practice user feedback can also depend upon con-
tent (Freeman et al., 2020). IGL with arbitrary joint content-action dependence of feedback is in-
tractable, but plausibly there exists a tractable IGL setting with a constrained joint content-action
dependence. We are very much interested in exploring this as part of future work. Additionally,
although we established the utility of a three state model over a two state model in our experiments,
perhaps more than three states is necessary for more complex recommendation scenarios.
Although we consider the application of recommender systems, personalized reward learning can
benefit any application suffering from a one-size-fits-all approach. One candidate domain is adap-
tive brain-computer and human-computer interfaces (Xie et al., 2022). An example is a self-
calibrating eye tracker where people’s response to erroneous agent control is idiosyncratic (Gao
et al., 2021; Zhang et al., 2020; Saran et al., 2018). Other domains include the detection of under-
lying medical conditions and development of new treatments and interventions. Systematic misdi-
agnoses in subpopulations with symptoms different than those of white men are tragically standard
in US medicine (Carter), with early stroke signs overlooked in women, minorities and young pa-
tients (Newman-Toker et al., 2014), underdetected multiple sclerosis in the Black community (Okai
et al., 2022), and the widespread misclassification of autism in women (Supekar & Menon, 2015).
IGL-P can empower medical practitioners to address systematic inequality by tuning diagnostic
tools via personalization and moving past a patient-oblivious diagnostic approach. Other possible
applications that can achieve improved fairness by using IGL-P include automated resume screen-
ing (Parasurama & Sedoc, 2022) and consumer lending (Dobbie et al., 2021).

7   ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
The authors thank John Langford for the valuable discussions and helpful feedback. This material
is based upon work supported by the National Science Foundation under Grant No. 1650114.


                                                  9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


E THICS S TATEMENT
In our paper, we use two real-world interaction datasets. The first is a publicly available dataset of
interactions with public Facebook news pages. All interactions are anonymous and the identities of
users are excluded from the dataset, preserving their privacy. Similarly, our production data does
not include user information and was used with the consent and permission of all relevant parties.

R EPRODUCIBILITY S TATEMENT
We have taken considerable measures to ensure the results are as reproducible as possible. We
have provided the code to replicate our experiment results (except for the production results in
Section 4.3) as part of the supplementary material. The code will be made publicly available at
{url redacted}. We used publicly available datasets for our simulated experiments in Section 4.1
(Blackard & Dean, 1999) and Section 4.2 (Martinchek, 2016). The experiment code for Section 4.1,
when executed, will automatically download the dataset. The dataset for Section 4.2 is included
as part of our supplementary material. Finally, our supplementary material also includes a conda
environment file to help future researchers recreate our development environment on their machines
when running the experiments.

R EFERENCES
Saurabh Arora and Prashant Doshi. A survey of inverse reinforcement learning: Challenges, meth-
  ods and progress. Artificial Intelligence, 297:103500, 2021.
Peter Auer, Nicolo Cesa-Bianchi, Yoav Freund, and Robert E Schapire. The nonstochastic multi-
  armed bandit problem. SIAM journal on computing, 32(1):48–77, 2002.
Joeran Beel, Stefan Langer, Andreas Nürnberger, and Marcel Genzmehr. The impact of demo-
  graphics (age and gender) and other user-characteristics on evaluating recommender systems. In
  International Conference on Theory and Practice of Digital Libraries, pp. 396–400. Springer,
  2013.
Jessa Bekker and Jesse Davis. Learning from positive and unlabeled data: A survey. Machine
  Learning, 109(4):719–760, 2020.
Alberto Bietti, Alekh Agarwal, and John Langford. A contextual bandit bake-off. J. Mach. Learn.
  Res., 22:133–1, 2021.
Jock A Blackard and Denis J Dean. Comparative accuracies of artificial neural networks and dis-
  criminant analysis in predicting forest cover types from cartographic variables. Computers and
  electronics in agriculture, 24(3):131–151, 1999.
Djallel Bouneffouf, Irina Rish, and Charu Aggarwal. Survey on applications of multi-armed and
  contextual bandits. In 2020 IEEE Congress on Evolutionary Computation (CEC), pp. 1–8. IEEE,
  2020.
Kiera Carter. The frustrating reasons why doctors constantly misdiagnose women. Prevention. URL
  https://www.prevention.com/health/a26100121/misdiagnosed-women/.
Lei Chen, Jie Cao, Guixiang Zhu, Youquan Wang, and Weichao Liang. A multi-task learning ap-
  proach for improving travel recommendation with keywords generation. Knowledge-Based Sys-
  tems, 233:107521, 2021.
Xiaocong Chen, Lina Yao, Xianzhi Wang, Aixin Sun, and Quan Z Sheng. Generative adversarial
  reward learning for generalized behavior tendency inference. IEEE Transactions on Knowledge
  and Data Engineering, 2022.
Zhongxia Chen, Xiting Wang, Xing Xie, Tong Wu, Guoqing Bu, Yining Wang, and Enhong Chen.
  Co-attentive multi-task learning for explainable recommendation. In IJCAI, pp. 2137–2143, 2019.
Will Dobbie, Andres Liberman, Daniel Paravisini, and Vikram Pathania. Measuring bias in con-
 sumer lending. The Review of Economic Studies, 88(6):2799–2832, 2021.


                                                 10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Michael D Ekstrand, Mucun Tian, Ion Madrazo Azpiazu, Jennifer D Ekstrand, Oghenemaro
 Anuyah, David McNeill, and Maria Soledad Pera. All the cool kids, how do they fit in?: Pop-
 ularity and demographic biases in recommender evaluation and effectiveness. In Conference on
 fairness, accountability and transparency, pp. 172–186. PMLR, 2018.
Charles Elkan and Keith Noto. Learning classifiers from only positive and unlabeled data. In
  Proceedings of the 14th ACM SIGKDD international conference on Knowledge discovery and
  data mining, pp. 213–220, 2008.
Cole Freeman, Hamed Alhoori, and Murtuza Shahzad. Measuring the diversity of facebook reac-
  tions to research. Proceedings of the ACM on Human-Computer Interaction, 4(GROUP):1–17,
  2020.
Jensen Gao, Siddharth Reddy, Glen Berseth, Nicholas Hardy, Nikhilesh Natraj, Karunesh Ganguly,
  Anca D. Dragan, and Sergey Levine. X2T: training an x-to-text typing interface with online
  learning from user feedback. In 9th International Conference on Learning Representations, ICLR,
  2021.
Miha Grčar, Dunja Mladenič, Blaž Fortuna, and Marko Grobelnik. Data sparsity issues in the
 collaborative filtering framework. In International workshop on knowledge discovery on the web,
 pp. 58–76. Springer, 2005.
Keach Hagey and Jeff Jeff Horwitz. Facebook tried to make its platform a healthier place. it got
  angrier instead. The Wall Street Journal, 2021. URL https://www.wsj.com/articles/
  facebook-algorithm-change-zuckerberg-11631654215.
Katja Hofmann, Fritz Behr, and Filip Radlinski. On caption bias in interleaving experiments. In Pro-
  ceedings of the 21st ACM international conference on Information and knowledge management,
  pp. 115–124, 2012.
Steven CH Hoi, Doyen Sahoo, Jing Lu, and Peilin Zhao. Online learning: A comprehensive survey.
  Neurocomputing, 459:249–289, 2021.
Yifan Hu, Yehuda Koren, and Chris Volinsky. Collaborative filtering for implicit feedback datasets.
  In 2008 Eighth IEEE international conference on data mining, pp. 263–272. Ieee, 2008.
Ahmed Hussein, Mohamed Medhat Gaber, Eyad Elyan, and Chrisina Jayne. Imitation learning: A
  survey of learning methods. ACM Computing Surveys (CSUR), 50(2):1–35, 2017.
Umair Javed, Kamran Shaukat, Ibrahim A Hameed, Farhat Iqbal, Talha Mahboob Alam, and Suhuai
 Luo. A review of content-based and context-based recommendation systems. International Jour-
 nal of Emerging Technologies in Learning (iJET), 16(3):274–306, 2021.
M Laeeq Khan. Social media engagement: What motivates user participation and consumption on
 YouTube? Computers in human behavior, 66:236–247, 2017.
Youngho Kim, Ahmed Hassan, Ryen W White, and Imed Zitouni. Modeling dwell time to predict
  click-level satisfaction. In Proceedings of the 7th ACM international conference on Web search
  and data mining, pp. 193–202, 2014.
John Langford and Tong Zhang. The epoch-greedy algorithm for contextual multi-armed bandits.
  Advances in neural information processing systems, 20(1):96–1, 2007.
Lihong Li, Wei Chu, John Langford, and Robert E Schapire. A contextual-bandit approach to
  personalized news article recommendation. In Proceedings of the 19th international conference
  on World wide web, pp. 661–670, 2010.
Pasquale Lops, Dietmar Jannach, Cataldo Musto, Toine Bogers, and Marijn Koolen. Trends in
  content-based recommendation. User Modeling and User-Adapted Interaction, 29(2):239–249,
  2019.
Hongyu Lu, Min Zhang, and Shaoping Ma. Between clicks and satisfaction: Study on multi-phase
  user preferences and satisfaction for online news reading. In The 41st International ACM SIGIR
  Conference on Research & Development in Information Retrieval, pp. 435–444, 2018a.


                                                11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Yichao Lu, Ruihai Dong, and Barry Smyth. Why i like it: multi-task learning for recommendation
  and explanation. In Proceedings of the 12th ACM Conference on Recommender Systems, pp.
  4–12, 2018b.
Jessica Maghakian, Kishan Panaganti, Paul Mineiro, Akanksha Saran, and Cheng Tan. Interaction-
  grounded learning for recommender systems. 2022.
Masoud Mansoury, Himan Abdollahpouri, Jessie Smith, Arman Dehpanah, Mykola Pechenizkiy,
 and Bamshad Mobasher. Investigating potential factors associated with gender discrimination in
 collaborative recommender systems. In The Thirty-Third International Flairs Conference, 2020.
Patrick Martinchek. 2012-2016 Facebook Posts.         https://data.world/martinchek/
  2012-2016-facebook-posts, 2016.
Jeremy Merrill and Will Oremus.   Five points for anger, one for a ‘like’: How face-
   book’s formula fostered rage and misinformation.      The Washington Post, 2021.
   URL           https://www.washingtonpost.com/technology/2021/10/26/
   facebook-angry-emoji-algorithm/.
Meta. Reactions now available globally. Facebook News, 2016. URL https://about.fb.
 com/news/2016/02/reactions-now-available-globally/.
Nicola Neophytou, Bhaskar Mitra, and Catherine Stinson. Revisiting popularity and demographic
  biases in recommender evaluation and effectiveness. In European Conference on Information
  Retrieval, pp. 641–654. Springer, 2022.
David E Newman-Toker, Ernest Moy, Ernest Valente, Rosanna Coffey, and Anika L Hines. Missed
  diagnosis of stroke in the emergency department: a cross-sectional analysis of a large population-
  based sample. Diagnosis, 1(2):155–166, 2014.
Tien T Nguyen, Pik-Mai Hui, F Maxwell Harper, Loren Terveen, and Joseph A Konstan. Exploring
  the filter bubble: the effect of using recommender systems on content diversity. In Proceedings
  of the 23rd international conference on World wide web, pp. 677–686, 2014.
Annette F Okai, Annette M Howard, Mitzi J Williams, Justine D Brink, Chiayi Chen, Tamela L
  Stuchiner, Elizabeth Baraban, Grace Jeong, and Stanley L Cohan. Advancing care and outcomes
  for african american patients with multiple sclerosis. Neurology, 98(24):1015–1020, 2022.
Kishan Panaganti, Zaiyan Xu, Dileep Kalathil, and Mohammad Ghavamzadeh. Robust reinforce-
  ment learning using offline data. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2022.
Prasanna Parasurama and João Sedoc. Gendered information in resumes and its role in algorith-
  mic and human hiring bias. In Academy of Management Proceedings, volume 2022, pp. 17133.
  Academy of Management Briarcliff Manor, NY 10510, 2022.
Nils Reimers and Iryna Gurevych. Sentence-bert: Sentence embeddings using siamese bert-
  networks. In Proceedings of the 2019 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language
  Processing. Association for Computational Linguistics, 11 2019.
Akanksha Saran, Srinjoy Majumdar, Elaine Schaertl Short, Andrea Thomaz, and Scott Niekum.
  Human gaze following for human-robot interaction. In 2018 IEEE/RSJ International Conference
  on Intelligent Robots and Systems (IROS), pp. 8615–8621. IEEE, 2018.
Akanksha Saran, Elaine Schaertl Short, Andrea Thomaz, and Scott Niekum. Understanding teacher
  gaze patterns for robot learning. In Conference on Robot Learning, pp. 1247–1258. PMLR, 2020a.
Akanksha Saran, Ruohan Zhang, Elaine Schaertl Short, and Scott Niekum. Efficiently guiding
  imitation learning agents with human gaze. arXiv preprint arXiv:2002.12500, 2020b.
Akanksha Saran, Kush Desai, Mai Lee Chang, Rudolf Lioutikov, Andrea Thomaz, and Scott
  Niekum. Understanding acoustic patterns of human teachers demonstrating manipulation tasks
  to robots. In 2022 IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems (IROS),
  pp. 9172–9179. IEEE, 2022.


                                                12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


J Ben Schafer, Dan Frankowski, Jon Herlocker, and Shilad Sen. Collaborative filtering recommender
   systems. In The adaptive web, pp. 291–324. Springer, 2007.
Kate Scott. You won’t believe what’s in this paper! Clickbait, relevance and the curiosity gap.
  Journal of pragmatics, 175:53–66, 2021.
Donghee Shin. How do users interact with algorithm recommender systems? The interaction of
  users, algorithms, and performance. Computers in Human Behavior, 109:106344, 2020.
Thiago Silveira, Min Zhang, Xiao Lin, Yiqun Liu, and Shaoping Ma. How good your recommender
  system is? A survey on evaluations in recommendation. International Journal of Machine Learn-
  ing and Cybernetics, 10(5):813–831, 2019.
Kaustubh Supekar and Vinod Menon. Sex differences in structural organization of motor systems
  and their dissociable links with repetitive/restricted behaviors in children with autism. Molecular
  Autism, 6(1):1–13, 2015.
Wenjie Wang, Fuli Feng, Xiangnan He, Hanwang Zhang, and Tat-Seng Chua. Clicks can be cheat-
 ing: Counterfactual recommendation for mitigating clickbait issue. In Proceedings of the 44th
 International ACM SIGIR Conference on Research and Development in Information Retrieval,
 pp. 1288–1297, 2021.
Qingyun Wu, Hongning Wang, Liangjie Hong, and Yue Shi. Returning is believing: Optimizing
  long-term user engagement in recommender systems. In Proceedings of the 2017 ACM on Con-
  ference on Information and Knowledge Management, pp. 1927–1936, 2017.
Tengyang Xie, John Langford, Paul Mineiro, and Ida Momennejad. Interaction-Grounded Learning.
  In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 11414–11423. PMLR, 2021.
Tengyang Xie, Akanksha Saran, Dylan J Foster, Lekan Molu, Ida Momennejad, Nan Jiang, Paul
  Mineiro, and John Langford. Interaction-Grounded Learning with Action-inclusive Feedback.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2206.08364, 2022.
Xing Yi, Liangjie Hong, Erheng Zhong, Nanthan Nan Liu, and Suju Rajan. Beyond clicks: dwell
  time for personalization. In Proceedings of the 8th ACM Conference on Recommender systems,
  pp. 113–120, 2014.
Ruohan Zhang, Akanksha Saran, Bo Liu, Yifeng Zhu, Sihang Guo, Scott Niekum, Dana Ballard,
  and Mary Hayhoe. Human gaze assisted artificial intelligence: A review. In IJCAI: Proceedings
  of the Conference, volume 2020, pp. 4951. NIH Public Access, 2020.
Zhengqing Zhou, Zhengyuan Zhou, Qinxun Bai, Linhai Qiu, Jose Blanchet, and Peter Glynn. Finite-
  sample regret bound for distributionally robust offline tabular reinforcement learning. In Interna-
  tional Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Statistics, pp. 3331–3339. PMLR, 2021.


                                                 13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


A                        A PPENDIX
A.1                          T HE 3 S TATE M ODEL FOR R ECOMMENDER S YSTEMS

Here we provide background on the 3 latent state model for recommendation systems from
Maghakian et al. (2022). In particular, we demonstrate that the traditional 2 latent state reward
model used by prior IGL methods (Xie et al., 2021; 2022) is not sufficient for the recommender sys-
tem scenario. We further illustrate that a 3 latent reward state model can overcome the limitations of
the two latent state model, and achieve personalized reward learning for recommendations.
Simulator Design. Before the start of each experiment, user profiles with fixed latent rewards for
each action are generated. Users are also assigned predetermined           communication
                                                                    generating     figs for IGL styles, with fixed
probabilities of emitting a given signal conditioned on the latent reward. The available feedback
includes a mix of explicit (likes, dislikes) and implicit (clicks, skips,jessica.maghakian
                                                                            none) signals. Despite receiving
no human input on the assumed meaning of the implicit signals, IGL can              determine which feedback
                                                                              July 2022
are associated with which latent state. In addition to policy optimization, IGL can also be a tool
for automated feature discovery. To reveal the qualitative       properties of the approach, the simulated
                                                     1 Introduction
probabilities for observing a particular feedback given the reward are chosen so that they can be
                                                                          r=0           r=1
perfectly decoded, i.e., each feedback has a nonzero emission probability          in exactly   one latent reward
state. Although production data does not obey this constraint (e.g., nonzero accidental feedback
emissions), the not perfectly decodable setting is a topic for future work.
                generating Algorithm
IGL-P(2). We implement        figs for IGL1 for 2 latent states as IGL-P(2). Our experiment shows the
                                                                      skip       none
following two results   about IGL-P(2): (i) it is abledislike
                     jessica.maghakian
                                                              to succeed   in the          clickwhen like
                                                                                    scenario           there are 2
underlying latent rewards and (ii) it can no longer do so when there are 3 latent states. Fig. 6 shows
                          July 2022
the simulator setup used,    where clicks and likes are used to communicate satisfaction, and dislikes,
skips and no feedback (none) convey (active or passive) dissatisfaction.
     1                   Introduction
                                                   r=0            r=1                                                    r=    1          r=0            r=1


                                 dislike      skip         none      click   like        dislike                              skip           none     click       like


                                             (a) 2 latent state model                                                     (b) 3 latent state model

Figure 6: Simulator settings for 2 state and 3 state latent model. In Fig. 6a, r = 0 corresponds to
anything other than the user actively enjoying the content, whereas in Fig. 6b, lack of user enjoyment
is split into indifference
                r= 1       and
                            r = 0 active dissatisfaction.
                                         r=1
                                                                                  1
Fig. 7 shows the distribution of rewards for IGL-P(2) as a function of the            number of iterations, for
both the 2 and 3 latent state model. When there are only 2 latent rewards, IGL-P(2) consistently
improves; however for 3 latent states, IGL-P(2) oscillates between r = 1 and r = −1, resulting in
much lower
         dislike average
                     skip user none
                                satisfaction.
                                         click Thelikeempirical results demonstrate that although IGL-P(2)
can successfully identify and maximize the rare feedbacks it encounters, it is unable to distinguish
between satisfied and dissatisfied users.

                                                   r=0             r=1                                                               r = −1           r=0                r=1
                       1.0                                                                                     1.0
 fraction of rewards


                                                                                         fraction of rewards


                       0.8                                                                                     0.8
                                                            1
                       0.6                                                                                     0.6
                       0.4                                                                                     0.4
                       0.2                                                                                     0.2
                       0.0                                                                                     0.0
                             0      200      400     600   800    1000 1200 1400                                     0        200      400      600   800     1000 1200 1400
                                             number of interactions                                                                     number of interactions
                                           (a) Two latent states                                                                     (b) Three latent states
Figure 7: Although IGL-P(2) is successful with the 2 state simulator, it fails on the 3 state simu-
lator and oscillates between attempting to maximize r = 1 and r = −1.


                                                                                    14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


IGL-P(3): Personalized Reward Learning for Recommendations. Since IGL-P(2) is not suf-
ficient for the recommendation system setting, we now explore the performance of IGL-P(3).
Using the same simulator as Fig. 6b, we evaluated IGL-P(3). Fig. 8a demonstrates the distribu-
tion of the rewards over the course of the experiment. IGL-P(3) quickly converged, and because
of the partial negative feedback for dislikes, never attempted to maximize the r = −1 state. Even
though users used the ambiguous skip signal to express dissatisfaction 80% of the time, IGL-P(3)
was still able to learn user preferences.
In order for IGL-P(3) to succeed, the algorithm requires direct grounding from the dislike signal.
We next examined how IGL-P(3) is impacted by increased or decreased presence of user dislikes.
Fig. 8b was generated by varying the probability p of users emitting dislikes given r = −1, and
then averaging over 10 experiments for each choice of p. While lower dislike emission probabilities
are associated with slower convergence, IGL-P(3) is able to overcome the increase in unlabeled
feedback and learn to associate the skip signal with user dissatisfaction. Once the feedback decoding
stabilizes, regardless of the dislike emission probability, IGL-P(3) enjoys strong performance for
the remainder of the experiment.

                                       r = −1         r=0          r=1                                               0.8          0.4         0.2      0.1
                       1.0                                                                          1.0
 fraction of rewards


                                                                                   average reward
                       0.8                                                                          0.8
                       0.6                                                                          0.6

                       0.4                                                                          0.4
                                                                                                    0.2
                       0.2
                                                                                                    0.0
                       0.0
                             0   200     400    600   800   1000 1200 1400                                0    200         400   600    800   1000 1200 1400
                                          number of interactions                                                           number of interactions
(a)    Ground     truth                                learning     curves,                          (b) Effect of varying P(dislike|r = −1).
P(dislike|r = −1) = 0.2.

Figure 8: Performance of IGL-P(3) in simulated environment. In Fig. 8a, IGL-P(3) suc-
cessfully maximizes user satisfaction while minimizing dissatisfaction. Fig. 8b demonstrates how
IGL-P(3) is robust to varying the frequency of partial information received, although more data
is needed for convergence when “definitely bad” events are less frequent.


A.2                          A DDITIONAL R ESULTS FOR THE C OVERTYPE IGL S IMULATION
Model Parameters For The Covertype IGL Simulation. For the Covertype IGL simulation we
trained both a CB and IK model (as shown in Algorithm 1). We use online multiclass learning to
implement the IK model, where the classes are all the possible actions and the label is the action
played. Both CB and IK are linear logistic regression models implemented in PyTorch, trained
using the cross-entropy loss. Both models used Adam to update their weights with a learning rate
of 2.5e−3 . The first layer of weights for both models had 512 weights that were initialized using a
Cauchy distribution with σ = 0.2. The learning curves are shown in Figure 9b.

                       0.6
                                                                                   IK accuracy


                                                                                                    0.4
 reward


                       0.4

                                                                                                    0.2
                       0.2

                         20      100000 200000 300000 400000 500000                                   20        100000 200000 300000 400000 500000
                                      number of interactions                                                         number of interactions

                                       (a) Reward learning.                                                   (b) Action prediction accuracy.

Figure 9: Learning curves for the Covertype simulated experiment in Sec. 4.1. Figure 9b shows the
accuracy with which the inverse kinematics model recovered the actions.


                                                                              15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


A.3                         A DDITIONAL R ESULTS FOR FACEBOOK N EWS S IMULATION
Model Parameters For The Facebook News Simulation. For the Facebook news simulation there
were 2 CB models and an IK model. All models used Adam to update their weights with a learning
rate of 10−3 , batch size 100, and cross-entropy loss function. The reward learning curves are shown
in Figures 10,11 and 12. Further details about implementation are available in provided code7 .



                                                                                    r = −1                r=0                 r=1
fraction of rewards


                                      ABC News                       CBS News                        CNN                          Fox News                      NY Times
                           1.0                            1.0                            1.0                           1.0                           1.0
                          0.75                           0.75                           0.75                          0.75                          0.75
                           0.5                            0.5                            0.5                           0.5                           0.5
                          0.25                           0.25                           0.25                          0.25                          0.25
                           0.0                            0.0                            0.0                           0.0                           0.0
                                 0k    25k   50k   75k          0k    25k   50k   75k          0k   25k   50k   75k          0k   25k   50k   75k          0k    25k   50k   75k
                                                                                    number of interactions

Figure 10: Reward learning curves for IGL-P(3) in the Facebook news recommendation exper-
iment. Over time, IGL-P(3) learns the difference between the three states and tries to minimize
r = 0 and r = −1 while maximizing r = 1 across all contexts.


                                                                                    r = −1                r=0                 r=1
fraction of rewards


                                      ABC News                       CBS News                        CNN                          Fox News                      NY Times
                           1.0                            1.0                            1.0                           1.0                           1.0
                          0.75                           0.75                           0.75                          0.75                          0.75
                           0.5                            0.5                            0.5                           0.5                           0.5
                          0.25                           0.25                           0.25                          0.25                          0.25
                           0.0                            0.0                            0.0                           0.0                           0.0
                                 0k    25k   50k   75k          0k    25k   50k   75k          0k   25k   50k   75k          0k   25k   50k   75k          0k    25k   50k   75k
                                                                                    number of interactions

Figure 11: Reward learning curves for CB-emoji in the Facebook news recommendation experi-
ment. Two of the five reader types (CBS News and CNN) communicate dissatisfaction using many
of the emoji feedback. As a result, CB-emoji ultimately maximizes r = −1 for those readers.


                                                                                    r = −1                r=0                 r=1
fraction of rewards


                                      ABC News                       CBS News                        CNN                          Fox News                      NY Times
                           1.0                            1.0                            1.0                           1.0                           1.0
                          0.75                           0.75                           0.75                          0.75                          0.75
                           0.5                            0.5                            0.5                           0.5                           0.5
                          0.25                           0.25                           0.25                          0.25                          0.25
                           0.0                            0.0                            0.0                           0.0                           0.0
                                 0k    25k   50k   75k          0k    25k   50k   75k          0k   25k   50k   75k          0k   25k   50k   75k          0k    25k   50k   75k
                                                                                    number of interactions

Figure 12: Reward learning curves for CB-comment in the Facebook news recommendation ex-
periment. Although CB-comment performs successfully with CBS News readers, it maximizes the
unhappiness of ABC News, Fox News and The New York Times readers.


                      7
                          https://github.com/asaran/IGL-P


                                                                                                    16
