Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


H IERARCHIES OF R EWARD M ACHINES
 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                            A BSTRACT
         Reward machines (RMs) are a recent formalism for representing the reward func-
         tion of a reinforcement learning task through a finite-state machine whose edges
         encode landmarks of the task using high-level events. The structure of RMs en-
         ables the decomposition of a task into simpler and independently solvable subtasks
         that help tackle long-horizon and/or sparse reward tasks. We propose a formalism
         for further abstracting the subtask structure by endowing an RM with the ability to
         call other RMs, thus composing a hierarchy of RMs (HRM). We exploit HRMs by
         treating each call to an RM as an independently solvable subtask using the options
         framework, and describe a curriculum-based method to learn HRMs from traces
         observed by the agent. Our experiments reveal that exploiting a handcrafted HRM
         leads to faster convergence than with a flat HRM, and that learning an HRM is
         feasible in cases where its equivalent flat representation is not.


1   I NTRODUCTION
More than a decade ago, Dietterich et al. (2008) argued for the need to “learn at multiple time scales
simultaneously, and with a rich structure of events and durations”. Finite-state machines (FSMs) are
a simple yet powerful formalism for abstractly representing temporal tasks in a structured manner.
One of the most prominent types of FSMs used in reinforcement learning (RL; Sutton & Barto,
2018) are reward machines (RMs; Toro Icarte et al., 2018; 2022), where each edge is labeled with
(i) a formula over a set of high-level events that capture a task’s subgoal, and (ii) a reward for
satisfying the formula. Hence, RMs fulfill the need for structuring events and durations. Hierarchical
reinforcement learning (HRL; Barto & Mahadevan, 2003) frameworks, such as options (Sutton et al.,
1999), have been applied over RMs to learn policies at two levels of abstraction: (i) select a formula
(i.e., subgoal) from a given RM state to complete the overall task, and (ii) select an action to satisfy
the chosen formula (Toro Icarte et al., 2018; Furelos-Blanco et al., 2021). Thus, RMs also allow
learning at multiple scales simultaneously. The subtask decomposition powered by HRL eases the
handling of long-horizon and sparse reward tasks. Besides, RMs can act as an external memory in
partially observable tasks by keeping track of the subgoals achieved so far and those to be achieved.
In this work, we make the following contributions:

      1. Enhance the abstraction power of RMs by defining hierarchies of RMs (HRMs), where con-
         stituent RMs can call other RMs (Section 3). We prove that any HRM can be transformed
         into an equivalent flat HRM that behaves exactly like the original RMs. We show that under
         certain conditions, the equivalent flat HRM can have exponentially more states and edges.
      2. Propose an HRL algorithm to exploit HRMs by treating each call as a subtask (Section 4).
         Learning policies in HRMs further fulfills the desiderata posed by Dietterich et al. since
         (i) there is an arbitrary number of time scales to learn across (not only two), and (ii) there
         is a richer range of increasingly abstract events and durations. Besides, hierarchies enable
         modularity and, hence, the reusability of the RMs and policies. Empirically, we show that
         leveraging a handcrafted HRM enables faster convergence than an equivalent flat HRM.
      3. Introduce a curriculum-based method for learning HRMs from traces given a set of hierar-
         chically composable tasks (Section 5). In line with the theory (Contribution 1), our exper-
         iments reveal that decomposing an RM into several is crucial to make its learning feasible
         (i.e., the flat HRM cannot be efficiently learned from scratch) since (i) the constituent RMs
         are simpler (i.e., they have fewer states and edges), and (ii) previously learned RMs can be
         used to efficiently explore the environment in the search for traces in more complex tasks.


                                                   1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


2    BACKGROUND

Given a finite set X , we use ∆(X ) to denote the probability simplex over X , X ∗ to denote (possibly
empty) sequences of elements from X , and X + to denote non-empty sequences. We also use ⊥ and
⊤ to denote the truth values false and true, respectively. 1[A] is the indicator function of event A.
We represent RL tasks as episodic labeled Markov decision processes (MDPs, Xu et al., 2020), each
consisting of a set of states S, a set of actions A, a transition function p : S × A → ∆(S), a
reward function r : (S × A)+ × S → R, a discount factor γ ∈ [0, 1), a finite set of propositions
P representing high-level events, a labeling function l : S → 2P mapping states to proposition
subsets called labels, and a termination function τ : (S × A)∗ × S → {⊥, ⊤} × {⊥, ⊤}. Hence
the transition function p is Markovian, but the reward function r and termination function τ are not.
Given a history ht = ⟨s0 , a0 , . . . , st ⟩ ∈ (S × A)∗ × S, a label trace (or trace, for short) λt =
⟨l(s0 ), . . . , l(st )⟩ ∈ (2P )+ assigns labels to all states in ht . We assume (λt , st ) captures all relevant
information about ht ; thus, the reward and transition information can be written r(ht , at , st+1 ) =
r(ht+1 ) = r(λt+1 , st+1 ) and τ (ht ) = τ (λt , st ), respectively. We aim to find a policy π : (2P )+ ×
S → A, a mapping from traces-statesPn        to actions, that maximizes the expected cumulative discounted
reward (or return) Rt = Eπ [ k=t γ k−t r(λk+1 , sk+1 )], where n is the last episode’s step.
At time t, the trace is λt ∈ (2P )+ , and the agent observes a tuple st = ⟨st , sTt , sGt ⟩, where st ∈ S
is the state and (sTt , sG                                                           T        G
                         t ) = τ (λt , st ) is the termination information, with st and st indicating
whether or not the history (λt , st ) is terminal or a goal, respectively. If the history is non-terminal,
the agent runs action at ∈ A, and the environment transitions to state st+1 ∼ p(·|st , at ). The
agent then extends the trace as λt+1 = λt ⊕ l(st+1 ), receives reward rt+1 = r(λt+1 , st+1 ),
and observes a new tuple st+1 . A trace λt is a goal trace if (sTt , sG      t ) = (⊤, ⊤), a dead-end
trace if (sTt , sG                                             T
                 t ) = (⊤, ⊥), and an incomplete trace if st = ⊥. We assume that the reward is
r(λt+1 , st+1 ) = 1[τ (λt+1 , st+1 ) = (⊤, ⊤)], i.e. 1 for goal histories and 0 otherwise.
A (simple) reward machine (RM; Toro Icarte et al., 2018; 2022) is a tuple ⟨U, P, φ, r, u0 , U A , U R ⟩,
where U is a finite set of states; P is a finite set of propositions; φ : U × U → DNFP is a state
transition function such that φ(u, u′ ) denotes the disjunctive normal form (DNF) formula over P to
be satisfied to transition from u to u′ ; r : U ×U → R is a reward transition function such that r(u, u′ )
is the reward for transitioning from u to u′ ; u0 ∈ U is an initial state; U A ⊆ U is a set of accepting
states denoting the task’s goal achievement; and U R ⊆ U is a set of rejecting states denoting the
unfeasibility of achieving the goal. Ideally, RM states should capture traces, such that (i) pairs (u, s)
of an RM state and an MDP state are sufficient to predict the future, and (ii) the reward r(u, u′ )
matches the underlying MDP’s reward. The state transition function is deterministic, i.e. at most
one formula from each state is satisfied. To verify if a formula is satisfied by a label L ⊆ P, L is
used as truth assignment where propositions in L are true, and false otherwise (e.g., {a} |= a ∧ ¬b).
Options (Sutton et al., 1999) address temporal abstraction in RL. Given an episodic labeled MDP,
an option is a tuple ω = ⟨Iω , πω , βω ⟩, where Iω ⊆ S is the option’s initiation set, πω : S → A is
the option’s policy, and βω : S → [0, 1] is the option’s termination condition. An option is available
in s ∈ S if s ∈ Iω , selects actions according to πω , and terminates in s ∈ S with probability βω (s).


3    F ORMALIZATION OF H IERARCHIES OF R EWARD M ACHINES

We here introduce our formalism for hierarchically composing reward machines, and propose the
C RAFT W ORLD domain (cf. Figure 1a) to illustrate it. In this domain, the agent ( ) can move
forward or rotate 90◦ , staying put if it moves towards a wall. Locations are labeled with propositions
from P = { , , , , , , , , , }. The agent observes propositions that it steps on (e.g.,
{ } in the top-left corner). Table 1 lists tasks that consist of observing a sequence of propositions,
where the reward is 1 if the sequence is observed and 0 otherwise. These tasks are based on those
by Andreas et al. (2017) and Toro Icarte et al. (2018), but they can be defined in terms of each other.
Reward machines (RMs) are the building blocks of our formalism. To constitute a hierarchy of
RMs, we need to endow RMs with the ability to call each other. We redefine the state transition
function as φ : U × U × M → DNFP , where M is a set of RMs. The expression φ(u, u′ , M )
denotes the disjunctive normal form (DNF) formula over P that must be satisfied to transition from
u ∈ U to u′ ∈ U by calling RM M ∈ M. We refer to the formulas φ(u, u′ , M ) as contexts


                                                       2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                                   u00                               u01        u02                         u0
                                                                                                                       ∧¬
                                          M1 | ¬         M2 | ⊤                    M⊤ |      M⊤ |
                                                                                                                  u1        u3        u4

                                    u10                             u20              u11        u12

                                          M2 | ⊤         M1 | ⊤                    M⊤ |      M⊤ |                 u2        u6        u5


                                                   u30       M⊤ |             uA
                                                                               0    uA
                                                                                     1         uA
                                                                                                2
                                                                                                                            uA
                                            M0 (root)                              M1        M2

            (a)                                                      (b)                                                 (c)

Figure 1: A C RAFT W ORLD grid (a), an HRM for B OOK (b), and an equivalent flat HRM (c). An
edge from state u to u′ of an RM Mi is of the form Mj | φi (u, u′ , Mj ), double circled states are
accepting states, and loop transitions are omitted. Calls to the leaf RM M⊤ are omitted in (c).

Table 1: List of C RAFT W ORLD tasks. Descriptions “x ; y” express sequential order (observe/do x
then y), and descriptions “x & y” express that x and y can be observed/done in any order.

   Task     h     Description       Task           h            Description                    Task         h           Description
 BATTER     1     ( & );        Q UILL             1     (    & );                         B OOK Q UILL     3   B OOK & Q UILL
 B UCKET    1       ;           S UGAR             1       ;                               M ILK B.S UGAR   3   M ILK B UCKET & S UGAR
 C OMPASS   1     ( & );        B OOK              2     (PAPER & L EATHER) ;              C AKE            4   BATTER ; M ILK B.S UGAR ;
 L EATHER   1        ;          M AP               2     (PAPER & C OMPASS) ;
 PAPER      1        ;          M ILK B UCKET      2     B UCKET ;



since they represent conditions under which calls are made. As we will see later, contexts help
preserve determinism and must be satisfied to start a call (a necessary but not sufficient condition).
The hierarchies we consider contain an RM M⊤ called the leaf RM, which solely consists of an
                              A
accepting state (i.e., U⊤ = U⊤  = {u0⊤ }), and immediately returns control to the RM that calls it.
Definition 1. A hierarchy of reward machines (HRM) is a tuple H = ⟨M, Mr , P⟩, where M =
{M0 , . . . , Mm−1 } ∪ {M⊤ } is a set of m RMs and the leaf RM M⊤ , Mr ∈ M \ {M⊤ } is the root
RM, and P is a finite set of propositions used by all constituent RMs.

We make the following assumptions: (i) HRMs do not have circular dependencies (i.e., an RM
cannot be called back from itself, including recursion), (ii) rejecting states are global (i.e., cause
the root task to fail), (iii) accepting and rejecting states do not have transitions to other states, and
(iv) the reward function of the root corresponds to the reward obtained in the underlying MDP. Given
assumption (i), each RM Mi has a height hi , which corresponds to the maximum number of nested
calls needed to reach the leaf. Formally, if i = ⊤, then hi = 0; otherwise, hi = 1 + maxj hj , where
j ranges over all RMs called by Mi (i.e., there exists (u, v) ∈ Ui × Ui such that φi (u, v, Mj ) ̸= ⊥).
Figure 1b shows B OOK’s HRM, whose root has height 2. The PAPER and L EATHER RMs, which
have height 1 and consist of observing a two-proposition sequence, can be run in any order followed
by observing . The context ¬ in the call to M1 preserves determinism, as detailed later.
In the following paragraphs, we describe how an HRM processes a label trace. To indicate where
the agent is in an HRM, we define the notion of hierarchy states.
Definition 2. Given an HRM H = ⟨M, Mr , P⟩, a hierarchy state is a tuple ⟨Mi , u, Φ, Γ⟩, where
Mi ∈ M is an RM, u ∈ Ui is a state, Φ ∈ DNFP is an accumulated context, and Γ is a call stack.
Definition 3. Given an HRM H = ⟨M, Mr , P⟩, a call stack Γ contains tuples ⟨u, v, Mi , Mj , ϕ, Φ⟩,
each denoting a call where u ∈ Ui is the state from which the call is made; v ∈ Ui is the next state in
the calling RM Mi ∈ M after reaching an accepting state of the called RM Mj ∈ M; ϕ ∈ DNFP
are the disjuncts of φi (u, v, Mj ) satisfied by a label; and Φ ∈ DNFP is the accumulated context.

Call stacks determine where to resume the execution. Each RM appears in the stack at most once
since, by assumption, HRMs have no circular dependencies. We use Γ ⊕ ⟨u, v, Mi , Mj , ϕ, Φ⟩ to
denote a stack recursively defined by a stack Γ and a top element ⟨u, v, Mi , Mj , ϕ, Φ⟩, where the
accumulated context Φ is the condition under which a call from a state u is made. The initial
hierarchy state of an HRM H = ⟨M, Mr , P⟩ is ⟨Mr , u0r , ⊤, []⟩: we are in the initial state of the
root, there is no accumulated context, and the stack is empty.


                                                                          3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


At the beginning of this section, we mention that satisfying the context of a call is a necessary but not
sufficient condition to start the call. We now introduce a sufficient condition, called exit condition.
Definition 4. Given an HRM H = ⟨M, Mr , P⟩ and a hierarchy state ⟨Mi , u, Φ, Γ⟩, the exit condi-
tion ξi,u,Φ ∈ DNFP is the formula that must be satisfied to leave that hierarchy state. Formally,
                                
                                Φ                                     if i = ⊤,
                      ξi,u,Φ = W ϕ=φ (u,v,M ), ξ 0                     otherwise,
                                         i      j    j,uj ,DNF(Φ∧ϕ)
                                        ϕ̸=⊥,v∈Ui ,Mj ∈M

where DNF(Φ ∧ ϕ) is Φ ∧ ϕ in DNF. The formula is Φ if Mi = M⊤ since it always returns control
once called. Otherwise, the formula is recursively defined as the disjunction of the exit conditions
from the initial state of the called RM. For instance, the exit condition for the initial hierarchy state
in Figure 1b is (¬ ∧ ) ∨ .
We now have everything needed to define the hierarchical transition function δH , which maps a
hierarchy state ⟨Mi , u, Φ, Γ⟩ into another given a label L. There are three cases:
      1. If u is an accepting state of Mi and the stack Γ is non-empty, pop the top element of Γ and
         return control to the previous RM, recursively applying δH in case several accepting states
         are reached simultaneously. Formally, the next hierarchy state is δH (⟨Mj , u′ , ⊤, Γ′ ⟩, ⊥) if
         u ∈ UiA , |Γ| > 0, where Γ = Γ′ ⊕ ⟨·, u′ , Mj , Mi , ·, ·⟩, ⊥ denotes a label that cannot satisfy
         any formula, and · denotes something unimportant for the case.
      2. If L satisfies the context of a call and the exit condition from the initial state of the called
         RM, push the call onto the stack and recursively apply δH until M⊤ is reached. Formally,
         the next hierarchy state is δH (⟨Mj , u0j , Φ′ , Γ ⊕ ⟨u, u′ , Mi , Mj , ϕ, Φ⟩⟩, L) if L |= ξj,u0j ,Φ′ ,
         where ϕ = φi (u, u′ , Mj )(L) and Φ′ = DNF(Φ ∧ ϕ). Here, φ(L) denotes the disjuncts of
         a DNF formula φ ∈ DNFP satisfied by L.
      3. If none of the previous conditions holds, the hierarchy state remains unchanged.
The state transition functions φ of the RMs must be such that δH is deterministic, i.e. a label cannot
simultaneously satisfy the contexts and exit conditions associated with two triplets ⟨u, v, Mi ⟩ and
⟨u, v ′ , Mj ⟩ such that either (i) v = v ′ and i ̸= j, or (ii) v ̸= v ′ . Contexts help enforce determinism
by making formulas mutually exclusive. For instance, if the call to M1 from the initial state of
M0 in Figure 1b had context ⊤ instead of ¬ , then M1 and M2 could be both started if { , }
was observed, thus making the HRM non-deterministic. Finally, we introduce hierarchy traversals,
which determine how a label trace is processed by an HRM using δH .
Definition 5. Given a label trace λ = ⟨L0 , . . . , Ln ⟩, a hierarchy traversal H(λ) = ⟨v0 , v1 , . . . ,
vn+1 ⟩ is a unique sequence of hierarchy states such that (i) v0 = ⟨Mr , u0r , ⊤, []⟩, and
(ii) δH (vi , Li ) = vi+1 for i = 0, . . . , n. An HRM H accepts λ if vn+1 = ⟨Mr , u, ⊤, []⟩ and u ∈ UrA
(i.e., an accepting state of the root is reached). Analogously, H rejects λ if vn+1 = ⟨Mk , u, ·, ·⟩ and
u ∈ UkR for any k ∈ [0, m − 1] (i.e., a rejecting state in the HRM is reached).
Example 1. The HRM in Figure 1b accepts label trace λ = ⟨{ }, { }, {}, { }, { }, { }⟩ since
the traversal is H(λ) = ⟨⟨M0 , u00 , ⊤, []⟩, ⟨M1 , u11 , ⊤, [⟨u00 , u10 , M0 , M1 , ¬ , ⊤⟩]⟩, ⟨M0 , u10 , ⊤, []⟩,
⟨M0 , u10 , ⊤, []⟩, ⟨M2 , u12 , ⊤, [⟨u10 , u30 , M0 , M2 , ⊤, ⊤⟩]⟩, ⟨M0 , u30 , ⊤, []⟩, ⟨M0 , uA
                                                                                               0 , ⊤, []⟩⟩. The step-
by-step application of the hierarchical transition function δH is shown in Appendix A.
The behavior of an HRM H can be reproduced by an equivalent flat HRM H̄; that is, (i) the root of
H̄ has height 1 and, (ii) H̄ accepts a trace iff H accepts it, rejects a trace iff H rejects it, and neither
accepts nor rejects a trace iff H does not accept it nor reject it. Flat HRMs thus capture the original
RM definition. Figure 1c shows a flat HRM for the B OOK task. We formally define equivalence and
prove the equivalence theorem below by construction in Appendix B.1.
Theorem 1. Given an HRM H, there exists an equivalent flat HRM H̄.
Given the construction used in Theorem 1, we show that the number of states and edges of the
resulting flat HRM can be exponential in the height of the root (see Theorem 2). We prove this
result in Appendix B.2 through an instance of a general HRM parametrization where the constituent
RMs are highly reused, hence illustrating the convenience of HRMs to succinctly compose existing
knowledge. In line with the theory, learning a non-flat HRM can take a few seconds, whereas
learning an equivalent flat HRM is often unfeasible (see Section 6).


                                                         4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Theorem 2. Let H = ⟨M, Mr , P⟩ be an HRM and let hr be the height of its root Mr . The number
of states and edges in an equivalent flat HRM H̄ can be exponential in hr .

4    P OLICY L EARNING IN H IERARCHIES OF R EWARD M ACHINES

In what follows, we explain how to exploit the temporal structure of an HRM H = ⟨M, Mr , P⟩
using two types of options. We describe (i) how to learn the policies of these options, (ii) when these
options terminate, and (iii) an option selection algorithm that ensures the currently running options
and the current hierarchy state are aligned. We discuss implementation details in Appendix C.
                                                                               j,ϕ
Types. Given an RM Mi ∈ M, a state u ∈ Ui and a context Φ, an option ωi,u,Φ         is derived for each
non-false disjunct ϕ of each transition φi (u, v, Mj ), where v ∈ Ui and Mj ∈ M. An option is either
(i) a formula option if j = ⊤ (i.e., M⊤ is called), or (ii) a call option otherwise. A formula option
attempts to reach a label that satisfies ϕ ∧ Φ through primitive actions, whereas a call option aims to
reach an accepting state of the called RM Mj under context ϕ ∧ Φ by invoking other options.
Policies. Policies are ϵ-greedy during training, and greedy during evaluation. A formula option’s
policy is derived from a Q-function qϕ∧Φ (s, a; θϕ∧Φ ) approximated by a deep Q-network (DQN;
Mnih et al., 2015) with parameters θϕ∧Φ , which outputs the Q-value of each action given an MDP
state. We store all options’ experiences (st , a, st+1 ) in a single replay buffer D, thus performing
intra-option learning (Sutton et al., 1998). The Q-learning update uses the following loss function:
                                                                                                2
                                                              ′     −
      E(st ,a,st+1 )∼D rϕ∧Φ (st+1 ) + γ max  ′
                                               q     (s
                                                ϕ∧Φ t+1    , a  ; θ ϕ∧Φ ) − q   (s
                                                                             ϕ∧Φ t , a; θ ϕ∧Φ )     , (1)
                                                a

where rϕ∧Φ (st+1 ) = 1[l(st+1 ) |= ϕ ∧ Φ], i.e. the reward is 1 if ϕ ∧ Φ is satisfied and 0 otherwise;
                            −
the term qϕ∧Φ (st+1 , a′ ; θϕ∧Φ ) is 0 when ϕ ∧ Φ is satisfied or a dead-end is reached (i.e., sTt+1 = ⊤
      G                −
and st+1 = ⊥); and θϕ∧Φ are the parameters of a fixed target network.
A call option’s policy is induced by a Q-function qi (s, u, Φ, ⟨Mj , ϕ⟩; θi ) associated with the called
RM Mi and approximated by a DQN with parameters θi that outputs the Q-value of each call in the
                                                                                       j,ϕ
RM given an MDP state, an RM state and a context. We store experiences (st , ωi,u,Φ         , st+k ) in a
replay buffer Di associated with Mi , and perform SMDP Q-learning using the following loss:
                     "                                                                               #            2
E(st ,ωj,ϕ                r + γ k max  qi (st+k , u′ , Φ′ , ⟨Mj ′ , ϕ′ ⟩; θi− ) − qi (st , u, Φ, ⟨Mj , ϕ⟩; θi )       ,
       i,u,Φ ,st+k )∼Di            ′ ′
                                   j ,ϕ


where k is the number of steps between st and st+k ; r is the sum of discounted rewards during this
time; u′ and Φ′ are the RM state and context after running the option; Mj ′ and ϕ′ correspond to
an outgoing transition from u′ , i.e. ϕ′ ∈ φi (u′ , ·, Mj ′ ); and θi− are the parameters of a fixed target
network. The term qi (st+k , . . .) is 0 if u′ is accepting or rejecting. Following the definition of δH ,
Φ′ is ⊤ if the hierarchy state changes; thus, Φ′ = ⊤ if u′ ̸= u, and Φ′ = Φ otherwise. Following
our assumption on the MDP reward, we define reward transition functions as ri (u, u′ ) = 1[u ∈           /
UiA ∧ u′ ∈ UiA ]. Learning a call option’s policy and lower-level option policies simultaneously can
be unstable due to non-stationarity (Levy et al., 2019), e.g. the same lower-level option may only
sometimes achieve its goal. To relax this problem, experiences are added to the buffer only when
options achieve their goal (i.e., call options assume low-level options to terminate successfully).
Due to the hierarchical structure, the policies will be recursively optimal (Dietterich, 2000) at best.
Termination. An option terminates in two cases. First, if the episode ends in a goal state or in a
dead-end state. Second, if the hierarchy state changes and either successfully completes the option
                                                           j,ϕ
or interrupts the option. Concretely, a formula option ωi,u,Φ     is only applicable in a hierarchy state
                                     j,ϕ
⟨Mi , u, Φ, Γ⟩, while a call option ωi,u,Φ always corresponds to a stack item ⟨u, ·, Mi , Mj , ϕ, Φ⟩. We
can thus analyze the hierarchy state to see if an option is still executing or should terminate.
Algorithm. An option stack ΩH stores the currently executing options. Initially, ΩH is empty. At
each step, ΩH is filled by repeatedly choosing options starting from the current hierarchy state using
call option policies until a formula option is selected. Since HRMs have, by assumption, no circular
dependencies, a formula option will eventually be chosen. After an action is selected using the


                                                        5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


formula option’s policy and applied, the DQNs associated with formula options are updated. The
new hierarchy state is then used to determine which options in ΩH have terminated. Experiences for
the terminated options that achieved their goal are pushed into the corresponding buffers, and the
DQNs associated with the call options are updated. Finally, ΩH is updated to match the call stack of
the new hierarchy state (if needed) by mapping each call stack item into an option, and adding it to
ΩH if it is not already there. By aligning the option stack with the call stack, we can update DQNs
for options that ended up being run in hindsight and which would have been otherwise ignored.


5    L EARNING H IERARCHIES OF R EWARD M ACHINES FROM T RACES

In the previous section, we explained how a given HRM can be exploited using options; however,
engineering an HRM is impractical. We here describe LHRM, a method that interleaves policy
learning with HRM learning from interaction. We consider a multi-task setting. Given T tasks and I
instances (e.g., grids) of an environment, the agent learns (i) an HRM for each task using traces from
several instances for better accuracy, and (ii) general policies to reach the goal in each task-instance
pair. Namely, the agent interacts with T × I MDPs Mij , where i ∈ [1, T ] and j ∈ [1, I]. The
learning proceeds from simpler to harder tasks such that HRMs for the latter build on the former.
In what follows, we detail the components of LHRM. We assume that (i) all MDPs share proposi-
tions P and actions A, while those defined on a given instance share states S and labeling function
l; (ii) to stabilize policy learning, dead-end traces must be common across tasks;1 (iii) the root’s
height of a task’s HRM (or task level, for brevity) is known (see Table 1 for C RAFT W ORLD); and
(iv) without loss of generality, each RM has a single accepting state and a single rejecting state.
Curriculum Learning (Bengio et al., 2009). LHRM learns the tasks’ HRMs from lower to higher
levels akin to Pierrot et al. (2019). Before starting an episode, LHRM selects an MDP Mij , where
i ∈ [1, T ] and j ∈ [1, I]. The probability of selecting an MDP Mij is determined by an estimate of
its average undiscounted return Rij such that lower returns are mapped into higher probabilities (see
details in Appendix D). Initially, only level 1 MDPs can be chosen. When the minimum average
return across MDPs up to the current level surpasses a given threshold, the current level increases by
1, hence ensuring the learned HRMs and their associated policies are reusable in higher level tasks.
Learning an HRM. The learning of an HRM is analogous to learning a flat RM (Toro Icarte et al.,
2019; Xu et al., 2020; Furelos-Blanco et al., 2021; Hasanbeig et al., 2021). The objective is to learn
the state transition function φr of the root Mr with height hr given (i) a set of states Ur , (ii) a set of
label traces Λ = ΛG ∪ ΛD ∪ ΛI , (iii) a set of propositions P, (iv) a set of RMs M with lower heights
than hr , (v) a set of callable RMs MC ⊆ M (by default, MC = M), and (vi) the maximum number
of disjuncts κ in the DNF formulas labeling the edges. The learned state transition function φr is
such that the resulting HRM H = ⟨M ∪ {Mr }, Mr , P⟩ accepts all goal traces ΛG , rejects all dead-
end traces ΛD , and neither accepts or rejects incomplete traces ΛI . The transition functions can be
represented as sets of logic rules, which are learned using the ILASP (Law et al., 2015) inductive
logic programming system (see Appendix E for details on the ILASP encoding).
Interleaving Algorithm. LHRM interleaves the induction of HRMs with policy learning akin to
Furelos-Blanco et al. (2021). Initially, the HRM’s root of each task i ∈ [1, T ] consists of 3 states
(the initial, accepting, and rejecting states) and neither accepts nor rejects anything. A new HRM is
learned when an episode’s label trace is not correctly recognized by the current HRM (i.e., if a goal
trace is not accepted, a dead-end trace is not rejected, or an incomplete trace is accepted or rejected).
The number of states in Ur increases by 1 when an HRM that covers the examples cannot be learned,
hence guaranteeing that the root has the smallest possible number of states (i.e., it is minimal) for a
specific value of κ. When an HRM for task i is learned, the returns Rij in the curriculum are set to
0 for all j ∈ [1, I]. Analogously to some RM learning methods (Toro Icarte et al., 2019; Xu et al.,
2020; Hasanbeig et al., 2021), the first HRM for a task is learned using a set of traces; in our case, the
ρs shortest traces from a set of ρ goal traces are used (empirically, short traces speed up learning).
Finally, LHRM leverages learned options to explore the environment during the collection of the ρ
goal traces, speeding up the process when labels are sparse. Specifically, options from lower height
RMs are sequentially selected uniformly at random, and their greedy policy is run until termination.
   1
     The term qϕ∧Φ (st+1 , . . .) in Equation 1 is 0 if (sTt+1 , sG
                                                                  t+1 ) = (⊤, ⊥). Since experiences (st , a, st+1 ) are
shared through the replay buffer, evaluating the condition differently can produce instabilities.


                                                          6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


6    E XPERIMENTAL R ESULTS
We evaluate the policy and HRM learning components of our approach using two domains described
below. We report the average performances across 5 runs, each consisting of a different set of 10
random instances. Learning curves show the average undiscounted return obtained by the greedy
policy every 100 episodes across instances. For other metrics (e.g., learning times), we present the
average and the standard error, with the latter in brackets. In HRM learning experiments, we set a
2-hour timeout to learn the HRMs. See Appendix F for experimental details and extended results.
Domains. We consider four grid types for the C RAFT W ORLD domain introduced in Section 3: an
open plan 7 × 7 grid (OP, Figure 1a), an open plan 7 × 7 grid with a lava location (OPL), a 13 × 13
four rooms grid (FR; Sutton et al., 1999), and a 13 × 13 four rooms grid with a lava location per
room (FRL). The lava proposition must always be avoided. WATERW ORLD (Karpathy, 2015; Sidor,
2016; Toro Icarte et al., 2018) consists of a 2D box containing 12 balls of 6 different colors (2 per
color) each moving at a constant speed in a fixed direction. The agent ball can change its velocity in
any cardinal direction. The propositions P = {r, g, b, c, m, y} are the balls’ colors. Labels consist of
the color of the balls the agent overlaps with and, unlike C RAFT W ORLD, they may contain multiple
propositions. The tasks consist in observing color sequences. We consider two settings: without
dead-ends (WOD) and with dead-ends (WD). In WD, the agent must avoid 2 balls of an extra color.
Policy Learning in Handcrafted HRMs. We compare the performance of policy learning in hand-
crafted non-flat HRMs against in flat equivalents. Remember that an equivalent flat HRM always
exists for any HRM (see Theorem 1). For fairness, the flat HRMs are minimal. Figure 2 shows the
learning curves for some C RAFT W ORLD tasks in the FRL setting. The convergence rate is similar
in the simplest task (M ILK B UCKET), but higher for non-flat HRMs in the hardest ones. As both
approaches use the same set of formula option policies, differences arise from the lack of modular-
ity in flat HRMs. Call options, which are not present in flat HRMs, constitute independent modules
that help reduce reward sparsity. M ILK B UCKET involves less high-level steps than B OOK Q UILL
and C AKE, thus reward is less sparse and non-flat HRMs are not as beneficial. The effectiveness of
non-flat HRMs is also limited when (i) the task’s goal is reachable regardless of the chosen options
(e.g., if the are no edges to rejecting states, like in OP and FR), and (ii) the reward is not too sparse,
like in OPL (the grid is small) or WATERW ORLD (the balls can easily get near the agent).


    Figure 2: Learning curves for three C RAFT W ORLD (FRL) tasks using handcrafted HRMs.

Learning of Non-Flat HRMs. Figure 3 shows the LHRM learning curves for C RAFT W ORLD
(FRL) and WATERW ORLD (WD). These settings are the most challenging due to the inclusion of
dead-ends since (i) they hinder the observation of goal examples in level 1 tasks using random walks,
(ii) the RMs must include rejecting states, (iii) formula options must avoid dead-ends, and (iv) call
options must avoid invoking options leading to rejecting states. In line with the curriculum method,
LHRM does not start learning a task of a given level until tasks in previous levels are mastered. The
convergence for high-level tasks is often fast due to the reuse of lower level HRMs and policies.
The average time (in seconds) exclusively spent on learning all HRMs is 1009.8 (122.3) for OP,
1622.6 (328.7) for OPL, 1031.6 (150.3) for FR, 1476.8 (175.3) for FRL, 35.4 (2.0) for WOD, and
67.0 (6.2) for WD. Including dead-ends (OPL, FRL, WD) incurs longer executions since (i) there is
one more proposition, (ii) there are edges to the rejecting state(s), and (iii) there are dead-end traces
to cover. We observe that the complexity of learning an HRM does not necessarily correspond with
the task complexity (e.g., the times for OP and FRL are similar). Learning in WATERW ORLD is
faster than in C RAFT W ORLD since the RMs have fewer states and there are fewer callable RMs.


                                                    7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                 1.0                                     BATTER                                1.0                                     RG [r ; g]
                                                         B UCKET                                                                       BC [b ; c]
                                                         C OMPASS                                                                      MY [m ; y]
                 0.8                                     L EATHER                              0.8                                     ————————–

Average return


                                                                              Average return
                                                                                                                                       RG & BC [ RG & BC ]
                                                         PAPER
                                                                                                                                       BC & MY [ BC & MY ]
                 0.6                                     Q UILL                                0.6                                     RG & MY [ RG & MY ]
                                                         S UGAR                                                                        RGB [ RG ; b]
                                                         B OOK                                                                         CMY [c ; MY ]
                 0.4                                     M AP                                  0.4                                     ————————–
                                                         M ILK B UCKET                                                                 RGB & CMY [ RGB & CMY ]

                 0.2                                     B OOK Q UILL                          0.2
                                                         M ILK B.S UGAR
                                                         C AKE
                 0.0                                                                           0.0
                       0.0    10.0        20.0    30.0                                               0.0    10.0        20.0    30.0
                             Number of episodes   ×104                                                     Number of episodes   ×104



Figure 3: LHRM learning curves for C RAFT W ORLD (FRL) and WATERW ORLD (WD). The leg-
end in WATERW ORLD separates tasks by level, and the subtask order (in brackets) follows that
introduced in Table 1. The dotted vertical lines correspond to episodes in which an HRM is learned.



By restricting the callable RMs to those required by the HRM (e.g., using just PAPER and L EATHER
RMs to learn B OOK’s HRM), there are fewer ways to label the edges of the induced root. Learning
is 5-7× faster using 20% fewer calls to the learner (i.e., fewer examples) in C RAFT W ORLD, and
1.5× faster in WATERW ORLD; hence, HRM learning becomes less scalable as the number of tasks
and levels grows. This is an instance of the utility problem (Minton, 1988). Refining the callable
RMs set ‘a priori’ to speed up HRM learning is a direction for future work.
We evaluate the performance of exploration with options using the number of episodes needed to
collect the ρ goal traces for a given task since the activation of its level. Intuitively, the agent will
rarely move far from a region of the state space using primitive actions only, thus taking more
time to collect the traces; in contrast, options enable the agent to explore the state space more
efficiently. In the FRL setting of C RAFT W ORLD, we observe that using primitive actions requires
128.1× more episodes than options in M ILK B UCKET, the only level 2 task for which ρ traces are
collected (although in just 2/5 runs). Likewise, primitive actions take 20.8× and 7.7× more episodes
in OPL and WD respectively. In OP and WOD options are not beneficial since episodes are relatively
long (1,000 steps), there are no dead-ends and it is easy to observe the different propositions.
Finally, we observe that using a single goal trace to learn the first HRMs (ρ = ρs = 1) incurs time-
outs across all C RAFT W ORLD settings, thus showing the value of using many short traces instead.
Learning Flat HRMs. Learning a flat HRM is often less scalable than learning a non-flat equivalent
since (i) previously learned HRMs cannot be reused, and (ii) the flat HRM usually has more states
and edges (as shown in Theorem 2, the growth can be exponential). We compare the performance of
learning (from interaction) a non-flat HRM using LHRM with that of an equivalent flat HRM using
LHRM, DeepSynth (Hasanbeig et al., 2021), LRM (Toro Icarte et al., 2019) and JIRP (Xu et al.,
2020). Akin to LHRM, JIRP induces RMs with explicit accepting states, while DeepSynth and
LRM do not. We use OP and WOD instances for C RAFT W ORLD and WATERW ORLD respectively.
The non-flat HRM for M ILK B UCKET is learned in 1.5 (0.2) seconds, whereas the flat HRMs take
longer to learn: 3.2 (0.6) w/LHRM, 325.6 (29.7) w/DeepSynth, 347.5 (64.5) w/LRM and 17.1 (5.5)
w/JIRP. LHRM and JIRP learn minimal RMs, hence producing the same RM consisting of 4 states
and 3 edges. DeepSynth and LRM do not learn a minimal RM but one that is good at predicting the
next possible label given the current one. In domains like ours where propositions can be observed
anytime (i.e., without temporal dependencies between them), these methods tend to ‘overfit’ the
input traces and produce large outputs that barely reflect the task’s structure, e.g. DeepSynth learns
RMs with 13.4 (0.4) states and 93.2 (1.7) edges. In contrast, methods learning minimal machines
exclusively from observable traces may suffer from overgeneralization (Angluin, 1980) in other do-
mains (e.g., with temporally-dependent propositions). In more complex tasks such as B OOK, LHRM
learns the non-flat HRM (see Figure 1b) in 191.2 (36.4) seconds, whereas methods learning the flat
HRM (see Figure 1c) usually time out or, in the case of DeepSynth, learn bigger representations.
The performance of DeepSynth, LRM and JIRP is poor in WATERW ORLD since they all learn RMs
whose edges are labeled with proposition sets instead of formulas, unlike LHRM; thus, the RMs
may require exponentially more edges, motivating the use of formulas for abstraction. For instance,
the flat HRM for RG requires 64 edges instead of 2, and only LHRM and JIRP can learn it on time.
All flat HRM learners time out in RG & BC, whereas the non-flat HRM is learned in 4.5 (0.3) seconds.


                                                                          8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


7   R ELATED W ORK

RMs and Composability. Our RMs differ from the original ones (Toro Icarte et al., 2018; 2022)
in that (i) an RM can call other RMs, (ii) there are explicit accepting and rejecting states (Xu et al.,
2020; Furelos-Blanco et al., 2021), and (iii) transitions are labeled with propositional logic formulas
instead of proposition sets (Furelos-Blanco et al., 2021). Recent works derive RMs (and similar
FSMs) from formal language specifications (Camacho et al., 2019; Araki et al., 2021) and expert
demonstrations (Camacho et al., 2021), or learn them from experience using discrete optimiza-
tion (Toro Icarte et al., 2019), SAT solving (Xu et al., 2020), active learning (Gaon & Brafman,
2020; Xu et al., 2021), state-merging (Xu et al., 2019; Gaon & Brafman, 2020), program synthe-
sis (Hasanbeig et al., 2021) or inductive logic programming (Furelos-Blanco et al., 2021). Prior
ways of composing RMs include (i) merging the state and reward transition functions (De Giacomo
et al., 2020), and (ii) encoding a multi-agent task using an RM, decomposing it into one RM per
agent and executing them in parallel (Neary et al., 2021). Task composability has also been modeled
using subtask sequences called sketches (Andreas et al., 2017), context-free grammars defining a
subset of English (Chevalier-Boisvert et al., 2019), formal languages (Jothimurugan et al., 2019;
León et al., 2020; Wang et al., 2020) and logic-based algebras (Nangue Tasse et al., 2020).
Hierarchical RL. Our method for exploiting HRMs resembles a hierarchy of DQNs (Kulkarni et al.,
2016). Akin to option discovery methods, LHRM induces a set of options from experience. LHRM
requires a set of propositions and tasks, which bound the number of discoverable options; similarly,
some of these methods impose an explicit bound (Bacon et al., 2017; Machado et al., 2017). LHRM
requires each task to be solved at least once before learning an HRM (and, hence, options), just
like other methods (McGovern & Barto, 2001; Stolle & Precup, 2002). The problem of discovering
options for exploration has been considered before (Bellemare et al., 2016; Machado et al., 2017;
Jinnai et al., 2019; Dabney et al., 2021). While our options are not explicitly discovered for explo-
ration, we leverage them to find goal traces in new tasks. Levy et al. (2019) learn policies from
multiple hierarchical levels in parallel by training each level as if the lower levels were optimal;
likewise, we train call option policies from experiences where invoked options achieve their goal.
HRMs are close to hierarchical abstract machines (HAMs; Parr & Russell, 1997) since both are
hierarchies of FSMs; however, there are two core differences. First, HAMs do not have reward
transition functions. Second, (H)RMs decouple the traversal from the policies, i.e. independently
of the agent’s choices, the (H)RM is followed; thus, an agent exploiting an (H)RM must be able
to interrupt its choices (see Section 4). While HAMs do not support interruption, Programmable
HAMs (Andre & Russell, 2000) extend HAMs to support it along with other program-like features.
Despite the resemblance, there are few works on learning HAMs (Leonetti et al., 2012) and there
are many on learning RMs, hence showing (H)RMs are more amenable (yet expressive) to learning.
Curriculum Learning. Pierrot et al. (2019) learn hierarchies of neural programs given the level of
each program, akin to our RMs’ height; likewise, Andreas et al. (2017) prioritize tasks consisting of
fewer high-level steps. The ‘online’ method by Matiisen et al. (2020) also keeps an estimate of each
task’s average return, but it is not applied in an HRL scenario. Wang et al. (2020) learn increasingly
complex temporal logic formulas leveraging previously learned formulas using a set of templates.

8   C ONCLUSIONS

We have here proposed (1) HRMs, a formalism that composes RMs in a hierarchy by enabling them
to call each other, (2) an HRL method that exploits the structure of an HRM, and (3) a curriculum-
based method for learning a collection of HRMs from traces. Non-flat HRMs have significant
advantages over their flat equivalents. Theoretically, we have proved that the flat equivalent of a
given HRM can have exponentially more states and edges. Empirically, we have shown that (i) our
HRL method converges faster given a non-flat HRM instead of a flat equivalent one, and (ii) in line
with the theory, learning an HRM is feasible in cases where its flat equivalent is not.
LHRM assumes that the proposition set is known, dead-end indicators are shared across tasks, there
is a fixed set of tasks and the height for each HRM is provided. Relaxing these assumptions by form-
ing the propositions from raw data, conditioning policies to dead-ends, and letting the agent propose
its own composable tasks are promising directions for future work. Other interesting extensions
include non-episodic settings and methods for learning globally optimal policies over HRMs.


                                                   9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


R EPRODUCIBILITY
To make our work more understandable and reproducible, we provide pseudo-code, proofs and
examples throughout the paper. We here outline the content covered in the appendices that help with
reproducibility:

Appendix A All the intermediate steps for the hierarchy traversal example in Section 3.
Appendix B Proofs for Theorems 1 and 2.
Appendix C The implementation details (including pseudo-code) for the policy learning algorithm
       outlined in Section 4. We include running examples of the algorithm to aid understanding.
Appendix D The implementation details for the curriculum learning mechanism introduced in Sec-
       tion 5.
Appendix E How the root of an HRM is learned using the ILASP inductive logic programming
       system, including proofs of correctness.
Appendix F Details on the experiments described in Section 6, such as computational resources,
       implementation of the domains, training and evaluation details (e.g., hyperparameters) and
       extended results (e.g., tables on which the results in the main paper are based).
Appendix G Handcrafted HRMs for the tasks used in the experiments.

We plan to release the code if the paper is accepted.

R EFERENCES
David Andre and Stuart J. Russell. Programmable Reinforcement Learning Agents. In Proceedings
  of the Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS) Conference, pp. 1019–
  1025, 2000.
Jacob Andreas, Dan Klein, and Sergey Levine. Modular Multitask Reinforcement Learning with
  Policy Sketches. In Proceedings of the International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML),
  pp. 166–175, 2017.
Dana Angluin. Inductive Inference of Formal Languages from Positive Data. Inf. Control., 45(2):
  117–135, 1980.
Brandon Araki, Xiao Li, Kiran Vodrahalli, Jonathan A. DeCastro, Micah J. Fry, and Daniela Rus.
  The Logical Options Framework. In Proceedings of the International Conference on Machine
  Learning (ICML), pp. 307–317, 2021.
Pierre-Luc Bacon, Jean Harb, and Doina Precup. The Option-Critic Architecture. In Proceedings of
  the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI), pp. 1726–1734, 2017.
Andrew G. Barto and Sridhar Mahadevan. Recent Advances in Hierarchical Reinforcement Learn-
  ing. Discrete Event Dynamic Systems, 13(4):341–379, 2003.
Marc G. Bellemare, Sriram Srinivasan, Georg Ostrovski, Tom Schaul, David Saxton, and Rémi
 Munos. Unifying Count-Based Exploration and Intrinsic Motivation. In Proceedings of the Ad-
 vances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS) Conference, pp. 1471–1479, 2016.
Yoshua Bengio, Jérôme Louradour, Ronan Collobert, and Jason Weston. Curriculum Learning. In
  Proceedings of the International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML), pp. 41–48, 2009.
Alberto Camacho, Rodrigo Toro Icarte, Toryn Q. Klassen, Richard Anthony Valenzano, and
  Sheila A. McIlraith. LTL and Beyond: Formal Languages for Reward Function Specification
  in Reinforcement Learning. In Proceedings of the International Joint Conference on Artificial
  Intelligence (IJCAI), pp. 6065–6073, 2019.
Alberto Camacho, Jacob Varley, Andy Zeng, Deepali Jain, Atil Iscen, and Dmitry Kalashnikov. Re-
  ward Machines for Vision-Based Robotic Manipulation. In Proceedings of the IEEE International
  Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA), pp. 14284–14290, 2021.


                                                 10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Maxime Chevalier-Boisvert, Lucas Willems, and Suman Pal. Minimalistic Gridworld Environment
 for OpenAI Gym. https://github.com/maximecb/gym-minigrid, 2018.
Maxime Chevalier-Boisvert, Dzmitry Bahdanau, Salem Lahlou, Lucas Willems, Chitwan Saharia,
 Thien Huu Nguyen, and Yoshua Bengio. BabyAI: A Platform to Study the Sample Efficiency
 of Grounded Language Learning. In Proceedings of the International Conference on Learning
 Representations (ICLR), 2019.
Will Dabney, Georg Ostrovski, and André Barreto. Temporally-Extended ϵ-Greedy Exploration. In
 Proceedings of the International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR), 2021.
Giuseppe De Giacomo, Marco Favorito, Luca Iocchi, Fabio Patrizi, and Alessandro Ronca. Tempo-
  ral Logic Monitoring Rewards via Transducers. In Proceedings of the International Conference
  on Principles of Knowledge Representation and Reasoning (KR), pp. 860–870, 2020.
Thomas G. Dietterich. Hierarchical Reinforcement Learning with the MAXQ Value Function De-
  composition. J. Artif. Intell. Res., 13:227–303, 2000.
Thomas G. Dietterich, Pedro M. Domingos, Lise Getoor, Stephen Muggleton, and Prasad Tadepalli.
  Structured machine learning: the next ten years. Mach. Learn., 73(1):3–23, 2008.
Thomas Eiter and Georg Gottlob. On the Computational Cost of Disjunctive Logic Programming:
  Propositional Case. Ann. Math. Artif. Intell., 15(3-4):289–323, 1995.
Daniel Furelos-Blanco, Mark Law, Anders Jonsson, Krysia Broda, and Alessandra Russo. Induction
  and Exploitation of Subgoal Automata for Reinforcement Learning. J. Artif. Intell. Res., 70:1031–
  1116, 2021.
Maor Gaon and Ronen I. Brafman. Reinforcement Learning with Non-Markovian Rewards. In
 Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI), pp. 3980–3987, 2020.
Michael Gelfond and Yulia Kahl. Knowledge Representation, Reasoning, and the Design of Intelli-
 gent Agents: The Answer-Set Programming Approach. Cambridge University Press, 2014.
Michael Gelfond and Vladimir Lifschitz. The Stable Model Semantics for Logic Programming. In
 Proceedings of the International Conference and Symposium on Logic Programming, pp. 1070–
 1080, 1988.
Mohammadhosein Hasanbeig, Natasha Yogananda Jeppu, Alessandro Abate, Tom Melham, and
 Daniel Kroening. DeepSynth: Automata Synthesis for Automatic Task Segmentation in Deep Re-
 inforcement Learning. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI),
 pp. 7647–7656, 2021.
Geoffrey Hinton, Nitish Srivastava, and Kevin Swersky. Neural Networks for Machine Learning -
  Lecture 6a: Overview of Mini-Batch Gradient Descent.
  https://www.cs.toronto.edu/˜tijmen/csc321/slides/lecture_slides_
  lec6.pdf, 2012.
Maximilian Igl, Kamil Ciosek, Yingzhen Li, Sebastian Tschiatschek, Cheng Zhang, Sam Devlin,
 and Katja Hofmann. Generalization in Reinforcement Learning with Selective Noise Injection
 and Information Bottleneck. In Proceedings of the Annual Conference on Neural Information
 Processing Systems (NeurIPS), pp. 13956–13968, 2019.
Minqi Jiang, Edward Grefenstette, and Tim Rocktäschel. Prioritized Level Replay. In Proceedings
 of the International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML), pp. 4940–4950, 2021.
Yuu Jinnai, Jee Won Park, David Abel, and George Dimitri Konidaris. Discovering Options for Ex-
  ploration by Minimizing Cover Time. In Proceedings of the International Conference on Machine
  Learning (ICML), pp. 3130–3139, 2019.
Kishor Jothimurugan, Rajeev Alur, and Osbert Bastani. A Composable Specification Language for
  Reinforcement Learning Tasks. In Proceedings of the Advances in Neural Information Processing
  Systems (NeurIPS) Conference, pp. 13021–13030, 2019.


                                                11
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Andrej Karpathy. REINFORCEjs: WaterWorld demo.
  http://cs.stanford.edu/people/karpathy/reinforcejs/waterworld.
  html, 2015.
Tejas D. Kulkarni, Karthik Narasimhan, Ardavan Saeedi, and Josh Tenenbaum. Hierarchical Deep
  Reinforcement Learning: Integrating Temporal Abstraction and Intrinsic Motivation. In Pro-
  ceedings of the Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS) Conference, pp.
  3675–3683, 2016.
Mark Law. Inductive Learning of Answer Set Programs. PhD thesis, Imperial College London, UK,
 2018.
Mark Law, Alessandra Russo, and Krysia Broda. The ILASP System for Learning Answer Set
 Programs, 2015. URL https://www.doc.ic.ac.uk/˜ml1909/ILASP.
Mark Law, Alessandra Russo, and Krysia Broda. Iterative Learning of Answer Set Programs from
 Context Dependent Examples. Theory Pract. Log. Program., 16(5-6):834–848, 2016.
Mark Law, Alessandra Russo, and Krysia Broda. The Meta-program Injection Feature in ILASP.
 Technical report, Imperial College London, June 2018. URL https://www.doc.ic.ac.
 uk/˜ml1909/ILASP/inject.pdf.
Borja G. León, Murray Shanahan, and Francesco Belardinelli. Systematic Generalisation through
  Task Temporal Logic and Deep Reinforcement Learning. CoRR, abs/2006.08767, 2020.
Matteo Leonetti, Luca Iocchi, and Fabio Patrizi. Automatic Generation and Learning of Finite-State
 Controllers. In Proceedings of the International Conference on Artificial Intelligence: Methodol-
 ogy, Systems, Applications (AIMSA), pp. 135–144, 2012.
Andrew Levy, George Dimitri Konidaris, Robert Platt Jr., and Kate Saenko. Learning Multi-Level
  Hierarchies with Hindsight. In Proceedings of the International Conference on Learning Repre-
  sentations (ICLR), 2019.
Marlos C. Machado, Marc G. Bellemare, and Michael H. Bowling. A Laplacian Framework for
 Option Discovery in Reinforcement Learning. In Proceedings of the International Conference on
 Machine Learning (ICML), pp. 2295–2304, 2017.
Tambet Matiisen, Avital Oliver, Taco Cohen, and John Schulman. Teacher-Student Curriculum
  Learning. IEEE Trans. Neural Networks Learn. Syst., 31(9):3732–3740, 2020.
Amy McGovern and Andrew G. Barto. Automatic Discovery of Subgoals in Reinforcement Learn-
 ing using Diverse Density. In Proceedings of the International Conference on Machine Learning
 (ICML), pp. 361–368, 2001.
Steven Minton. Quantitative Results Concerning the Utility of Explanation-Based Learning. In
  Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI), pp. 564–569, 1988.
Volodymyr Mnih, Koray Kavukcuoglu, David Silver, Andrei A. Rusu, Joel Veness, Marc G. Belle-
  mare, Alex Graves, Martin A. Riedmiller, Andreas Fidjeland, Georg Ostrovski, Stig Petersen,
  Charles Beattie, Amir Sadik, Ioannis Antonoglou, Helen King, Dharshan Kumaran, Daan Wier-
  stra, Shane Legg, and Demis Hassabis. Human-level control through deep reinforcement learning.
  Nature, 518(7540):529–533, 2015.
Geraud Nangue Tasse, Steven D. James, and Benjamin Rosman. A Boolean Task Algebra for Rein-
  forcement Learning. In Proceedings of the Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems
  (NeurIPS) Conference, pp. 9497–9507, 2020.
Cyrus Neary, Zhe Xu, Bo Wu, and Ufuk Topcu. Reward Machines for Cooperative Multi-Agent
  Reinforcement Learning. In Proceedings of the International Conference on Autonomous Agents
  and Multiagent Systems (AAMAS), pp. 934–942, 2021.
Ronald Parr and Stuart J. Russell. Reinforcement Learning with Hierarchies of Machines. In Pro-
  ceedings of the Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS) Conference, pp.
  1043–1049, 1997.


                                               12
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Thomas Pierrot, Guillaume Ligner, Scott E. Reed, Olivier Sigaud, Nicolas Perrin, Alexandre Laterre,
  David Kas, Karim Beguir, and Nando de Freitas. Learning Compositional Neural Programs with
  Recursive Tree Search and Planning. In Proceedings of the Advances in Neural Information
  Processing Systems (NeurIPS) Conference, pp. 14646–14656, 2019.

Szymon Sidor. Reinforcement Learning with Natural Language Signals. Master’s thesis, Mas-
  sachusetts Institute of Technology, 2016.

Michael Sipser. Introduction to the Theory of Computation. PWS Publishing Company, 1997. ISBN
 978-0-534-94728-6.

Martin Stolle and Doina Precup. Learning Options in Reinforcement Learning. In Proceedings
 of the International Symposium on Abstraction, Reformulation and Approximation (SARA), pp.
 212–223, 2002.

Richard S. Sutton and Andrew G. Barto. Reinforcement Learning: An Introduction. MIT Press,
  2018.

Richard S. Sutton, Doina Precup, and Satinder P. Singh. Intra-Option Learning about Temporally
  Abstract Actions. In Proceedings of the International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML),
  pp. 556–564, 1998.

Richard S. Sutton, Doina Precup, and Satinder P. Singh. Between MDPs and Semi-MDPs: A Frame-
  work for Temporal Abstraction in Reinforcement Learning. Artif. Intell., 112(1-2):181–211, 1999.

Rodrigo Toro Icarte, Toryn Q. Klassen, Richard Anthony Valenzano, and Sheila A. McIlraith. Us-
  ing Reward Machines for High-Level Task Specification and Decomposition in Reinforcement
  Learning. In Proceedings of the International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML), pp.
  2112–2121, 2018.

Rodrigo Toro Icarte, Ethan Waldie, Toryn Q. Klassen, Richard Anthony Valenzano, Margarita P.
  Castro, and Sheila A. McIlraith. Learning Reward Machines for Partially Observable Rein-
  forcement Learning. In Proceedings of the Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems
  (NeurIPS) Conference, pp. 15497–15508, 2019.

Rodrigo Toro Icarte, Toryn Q. Klassen, Richard Valenzano, and Sheila A. McIlraith. Reward Ma-
  chines: Exploiting Reward Function Structure in Reinforcement Learning. J. Artif. Intell. Res.,
  73:173–208, 2022.

Hado van Hasselt, Arthur Guez, and David Silver. Deep Reinforcement Learning with Double
  Q-Learning. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI), pp. 2094–
  2100, 2016.

Guan Wang, Carl Trimbach, Jun Ki Lee, Mark K. Ho, and Michael L. Littman. Teaching a Robot
  Tasks of Arbitrary Complexity via Human Feedback. In Proceedings of the ACM/IEEE Interna-
  tional Conference on Human-Robot Interaction (HRI), pp. 649–657, 2020.

Zhe Xu, Ivan Gavran, Yousef Ahmad, Rupak Majumdar, Daniel Neider, Ufuk Topcu, and
  Bo Wu. Joint Inference of Reward Machines and Policies for Reinforcement Learning. CoRR,
  abs/1909.05912, 2019.

Zhe Xu, Ivan Gavran, Yousef Ahmad, Rupak Majumdar, Daniel Neider, Ufuk Topcu, and Bo Wu.
  Joint Inference of Reward Machines and Policies for Reinforcement Learning. In Proceedings
  of the International Conference on Automated Planning and Scheduling (ICAPS), pp. 590–598,
  2020.

Zhe Xu, Bo Wu, Aditya Ojha, Daniel Neider, and Ufuk Topcu. Active Finite Reward Automaton
  Inference and Reinforcement Learning Using Queries and Counterexamples. In Proceedings of
  the International Cross-Domain Conference for Machine Learning and Knowledge Extraction
  (CD-MAKE), pp. 115–135, 2021.


                                                13
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


A    H IERARCHY T RAVERSAL E XAMPLE
The HRM in Figure 1b accepts trace λ = ⟨{ }, { }, {}, { }, { }, { }⟩, whose traversal is
H(λ) = ⟨v0 , v1 , v2 , v3 , v4 , v5 , v6 ⟩, where:
    v0 = ⟨M0 , u00 , ⊤, []⟩,
    v1 = δH (v0 , { })
       = δH (⟨M0 , u00 , ⊤, []⟩, { })
       = δH (⟨M1 , u01 , ¬ , [⟨u00 , u10 , M0 , M1 , ¬ , ⊤⟩]⟩, { })
       = δH (⟨M⊤ , u0⊤ , ¬ ∧ , [⟨u00 , u10 , M0 , M1 , ¬ , ⊤⟩, ⟨u01 , u11 , M1 , M⊤ , , ¬ ⟩]⟩, { })
       = δH (⟨M1 , u11 , ⊤, [⟨u00 , u10 , M0 , M1 , ¬ , ⊤⟩]⟩, ⊥)
       = ⟨M1 , u11 , ⊤, [⟨u00 , u10 , M0 , M1 , ¬ , ⊤⟩]⟩,
    v2 = δH (v1 , { })
       = δH (⟨M1 , u11 , ⊤, [⟨u00 , u10 , M0 , M1 , ¬ , ⊤⟩]⟩, { })
       = δH (⟨M⊤ , u0⊤ , , [⟨u00 , u10 , M0 , M1 , ¬ , ⊤⟩, ⟨u11 , uA
                                                                   1 , M1 , M⊤ , , ⊤⟩]⟩, { })
       = δH (⟨M1 , uA         0    1
                    1 , ⊤, [⟨u0 , u0 , M0 , M1 , ¬ , ⊤⟩]⟩, ⊥)
       = δH (⟨M0 , u10 , ⊤, []⟩, ⊥)
       = ⟨M0 , u10 , ⊤, []⟩,
    v3 = δH (v2 , {})
       = δH (⟨M0 , u10 , ⊤, []⟩, {})
       = ⟨M0 , u10 , ⊤, []⟩,
    v4 = δH (v3 , { })
       = δH (⟨M0 , u10 , ⊤, []⟩, { })
       = δH (⟨M2 , u02 , ⊤, [⟨u10 , u30 , M0 , M2 , ⊤, ⊤⟩]⟩, { })
       = δH (⟨M⊤ , u0⊤ , , [⟨u10 , u30 , M0 , M2 , ⊤, ⊤⟩, ⟨u02 , u12 , M2 , M⊤ , , ⊤⟩]⟩, { })
       = δH (⟨M2 , u12 , ⊤, [⟨u10 , u30 , M0 , M2 , ⊤, ⊤⟩]⟩, ⊥)
       = ⟨M2 , u12 , ⊤, [⟨u10 , u30 , M0 , M2 , ⊤, ⊤⟩]⟩,
    v5 = δH (v4 , { })
       = δH (⟨M2 , u12 , ⊤, [⟨u10 , u30 , M0 , M2 , ⊤, ⊤⟩]⟩, { })
       = δH (⟨M⊤ , u0⊤ , , [⟨u10 , u30 , M0 , M2 , ⊤, ⊤⟩, ⟨u12 , uA
                                                                  2 , M2 , M⊤ , , ⊤⟩]⟩, { })
       = δH (⟨M2 , uA         1    3
                    2 , ⊤, [⟨u0 , u0 , M0 , M2 , ⊤, ⊤⟩]⟩, ⊥)
       = δH (⟨M0 , u30 , ⊤, []⟩, ⊥)
       = ⟨M0 , u30 , ⊤, []⟩,
    v6 = δH (v5 , { })
       = δH (⟨M0 , u30 , ⊤, []⟩, { })
       = δH (⟨M⊤ , u0⊤ , , [⟨u30 , uA
                                    0 , M0 , M⊤ , , ⊤⟩]⟩, { })
       = δH (⟨M0 , uA
                    0 , ⊤, []⟩, ⊥)
       = ⟨M0 , uA
                0 , ⊤, []⟩.
Example 1 shows the traversal but omits the intermediate applications of the hierarchical transition
function δH .

B    E QUIVALENCE TO F LAT H IERARCHIES OF R EWARD M ACHINES
In this section, we prove the theorems introduced in Section 3 regarding the equivalence of an
arbitrary HRM to a flat HRM.


                                                       14
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


B.1      P ROOF OF T HEOREM 1

We formally show that any HRM can be transformed into an equivalent one consisting of a single
non-leaf RM. The latter HRM type is called flat since there is a single hierarchy level.
Definition 6. Given an HRM H = ⟨M, Mr , P⟩, a constituent RM Mi ∈ M is flat if its height hi
is 1.
Definition 7. An HRM H = ⟨M, Mr , P⟩ is flat if the root RM Mr is flat.

We now define what it means for two HRMs to be equivalent. This definition is based on that used
in automaton theory (Sipser, 1997).
Definition 8. Given a set of propositions P and a labeling function l, two HRMs H = ⟨M, Mr , P⟩
and H ′ = ⟨M′ , Mr′ , P⟩ are equivalent if for any label trace λ one of the following conditions holds:
(i) both HRMs accept λ, (ii) both HRMs reject λ, or (iii) neither of the HRMs accepts or rejects λ.

We now have all the required definitions to prove Theorem 1, which is restated below.
Theorem 1. Given an HRM H, there exists an equivalent flat HRM H̄.

To prove the theorem, we introduce an algorithm for flattening any HRM. Without loss of generality,
we work on the case of an HRM with two hierarchy levels; that is, an HRM consisting of a root
RM that calls flat RMs. Note that an HRM with an arbitrary number of levels can be flattened by
considering the RMs in two levels at a time. We start flattening RMs in the second level (i.e., with
height 2), which use RMs in the first level (by definition, these are already flat), and once the second
level RMs are flat, we repeat the process with the levels above until the root is reached. This process
is applicable since, by assumption, the hierarchies do not have cyclic dependencies nor recursion.
For simplicity, we use the MDP reward assumption made in Section 2, i.e. the reward transition
function of any RM Mi is ri (u, u′ ) = 1[u ∈ / UiA ∧ u′ ∈ UiA ] like in Section 4. However, the proof
below could be adapted to arbitrary definitions of ri (u, u′ ).
Preliminary Transformation Algorithm. Before proving Theorem 1, we introduce an interme-
diate step that transforms a flat HRM into an equivalent one that takes contexts with which it may
be called into account. Remember that a call to an RM is associated with a context. In the case of
two-level HRMs such as the ones we are considering in this flattening process, the context and the
exit condition from the called flat RM must be satisfied. Crucially, the context must only be satisfied
at the time of the call; that is, it only lasts for a single transition. Therefore, if we revisit the initial
state of the called RM by taking an edge to it, the context should not be checked anymore.
To make the need for this transformation clearer, we use the HRM illustrated in Figure 4a. The
flattening algorithm described later embeds the called RM into the caller one; crucially, the context
of the call is taken into account by putting it in conjunction with the outgoing edges from the initial
state of the called RM.2 Figure 4b is a flat HRM obtained using the flattening algorithm; however,
it does not behave like the HRM in Figure 4a. Following the definition of the hierarchical transition
function δH , the context of a call only lasts for a single transition in the called RM in Figure 4a
(i.e., a ∧ ¬c is only checked when M1 is started), but the context is kept permanently in Figure 4b,
which is problematic if we go back to the initial state at some point. We later come back to this
example after presenting the transformation algorithm.
To deal with the situation above, we need to transform an RM to ensure that contexts are only
checked once from the initial state. We describe this transformation as follows. Given a flat HRM
H = ⟨M, Mr , P⟩ with root Mr = ⟨Ur , P, φr , rr , u0r , UrA , UrR ⟩, we construct a new HRM H ′ =
⟨M′ , Mr′ , P⟩ with root Mr′ = ⟨Ur′ , P, φ′r , rr′ , u0r , UrA , UrR ⟩ such that:

          • Ur′ = Ur ∪ {û0r }, where û0r plays the role of the initial state after the first transition is taken.
          • The state transition function φ′r is built by copying φr and applying the following changes:
              1. Remove the edges to the actual initial state from any state v ∈ Ur′ : φ′r (v, u0r , M⊤ ) =
                 ⊥. Note that since the RM is flat, the only callable RM is the leaf M⊤ .
              2. Add edges to the dummy initial state û0r from all states v ∈ Ur′ that had an edge to the
                 actual initial state: φ′r (v, û0r , M⊤ ) = φr (v, u0r , M⊤ ).
   2
       We refer the reader to the ‘Flattening Algorithm’ description introduced later for specific details.


                                                          15
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


            u00                      u01
                                                                                            u00
      M1 | ¬c               M⊤ | a          M⊤ | b
                                                                               M⊤ | a ∧ ¬c M⊤ | b
            uA
             0                       u11      M⊤ | c ∧ ¬b     uA
                                                               1
                                                                                            u11     M⊤ | c ∧ ¬b    uA
                                                                                                                    0
       M0                                      M1
                  (a) Original HRM with root M0 .                         (b) Flattened HRM without transforming M1 .


                            u01                                                                     u00

                           M⊤ | a                                                        M⊤ | a ∧ ¬c
                  M⊤ | b                                                              M⊤ | b
     û01                   u11      M⊤ | c ∧ ¬b        uA
                                                         1                     û01                 u11   M⊤ | c ∧ ¬b     uA
                                                                                                                           0

              M⊤ | a                                                                  M⊤ | a

              (c) Transformed M1 from (a).                                    (d) Flattened HRM after transforming M1 .

             Figure 4: Example to justify the need for the preliminary transformation algorithm.


                   3. Add edges from the dummy initial state û0r to all those states v ∈ Ur′ that the actual
                      initial state u0r points to: φ′r (û0r , v, M⊤ ) = φ′r (u0r , v, M⊤ ).
                                                                / UrA ∧ u′ ∈ UrA ] is defined as stated at the
            • The reward transition function rr′ (u, u′ ) = 1[u ∈
              beginning of the section.

The HRM H ′ is such that M′ = {Mr′ , M⊤ }. Note that this transformation is only required in HRMs
where the RMs have initial states with incoming edges.
We now prove that this transformation is correct; that is, the HRMs are equivalent. There are two
cases depending on whether the initial state has incoming edges or not. First, if the initial state
u0r does not have incoming edges, step 1 does not remove any edges going to u0r , and step 2 does
not add any edges going to û0r , making it unreachable. Even though edges from û0r to other states
may be added, it is irrelevant since it is unreachable. Therefore, we can safely say that in this case,
the transformed HRM is equivalent to the original one. Second, if the initial state has incoming
edges, we prove equivalence by examining the traversals H(λ) and H ′ (λ) for the original HRM
H = ⟨M, Mr , P⟩ and the transformed one H ′ = ⟨M′ , Mr′ , P⟩ given a generic label trace λ =
⟨L0 , . . . , Ln ⟩. By construction, both H(λ) and H ′ (λ) will be identical until reaching a state w with
an outgoing transition to u0r in the case of H and the dummy initial state û0r in the case of H ′ . More
specifically, upon reaching w and satisfying an outgoing formula to the aforementioned states, the
traversals are:
                                           H(λ) = ⟨⟨Mr , u0r , ⊤, []⟩, . . . , ⟨Mr , w, ⊤, []⟩⟩,
                                       H ′ (λ) = ⟨⟨Mr′ , u0r , ⊤, []⟩, . . . , ⟨Mr′ , w, ⊤, []⟩⟩.
By construction, state w is in both HRMs, and both of the aforementioned transitions from this state
are associated with the same formula, i.e. φr (w, u0r , M⊤ ) = φ′r (w, û0r , M⊤ ). Therefore, if one of
them is satisfied, the other will be too, and the traversals will become:
                             H(λ) = ⟨⟨Mr , u0r , ⊤, []⟩, . . . , ⟨Mr , w, ⊤, []⟩, ⟨Mr , u0r , ⊤, []⟩⟩,
                            H ′ (λ) = ⟨⟨Mr′ , u0r , ⊤, []⟩, . . . , ⟨Mr′ , w, ⊤, []⟩, ⟨Mr′ , û0r , ⊤, []⟩⟩.
We stay in u0r and û0r until a transition to a state w′ is satisfied. By construction, w′ is in both HRMs
and the same formula is satisfied, i.e., φr (u0r , w′ , M⊤ ) = φ′r (û0 , w′ , M⊤ ). The hierarchy traversals
then become:
 H(λ) = ⟨⟨Mr , u0r , ⊤, []⟩, . . . , ⟨Mr , w, ⊤, []⟩, ⟨Mr , u0r , ⊤, []⟩, . . . , ⟨Mr , u0r , ⊤, []⟩, ⟨Mr , w′ , ⊤, []⟩⟩,
H ′ (λ) = ⟨⟨Mr′ , u0r , ⊤, []⟩, . . . , ⟨Mr′ , w, ⊤, []⟩, ⟨Mr′ , û0r , ⊤, []⟩, . . . , ⟨Mr′ , û0r , ⊤, []⟩, ⟨Mr′ , w′ , ⊤, []⟩⟩.


                                                                   16
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


From here both traversals will be the same until transitions to u0r and û0r are respectively satisfied
again (if any) in H and H ′ . Clearly, the only change in H(λ) with respect to H ′ (λ) (except for
the different roots) is that the hierarchy states of the form ⟨Mr′ , û0r , ⊤, []⟩ in the latter appear as
⟨Mr , u0r , ⊤, []⟩ in the former. We now check if the equivalence conditions from Definition 8 hold:

       • If H(λ) ends with state u0r , H ′ (λ) ends with state û0r following the reasoning above. By
         construction, neither of these states is accepting or rejecting; therefore, neither of these
         HRMs accepts or rejects λ.
       • If H(λ) ends with state w, H ′ (λ) will also end with this state following the reasoning
         above. Therefore, if w is an accepting state, both HRMs accept λ; if w is a rejecting state,
         both HRMs reject λ; and if w is not an accepting or rejecting state, neither of the HRMs
         accepts or rejects λ.

Since all equivalence conditions are satisfied for any trace λ, H and H ′ are equivalent.
Figure 4c exemplifies the output of the transformation algorithm given M1 in Figure 4a as input,
whereas Figure 4d is the output of the flattening algorithm discussed next, which properly handles
the context unlike the HRM in Figure 4b.
Flattening Algorithm. We describe the algorithm for flattening an HRM. As previously stated, we
assume without loss of generality that the HRM to be flattened consists of two hierarchy levels (i.e.,
the root calls flat RMs). We also assume that the flat RMs have the form produced by the previously
presented transformation algorithm.
Given an HRM H = ⟨M, Mr , P⟩ with root Mr = ⟨Ur , P, φr , rr , u0r , UrA , UrR ⟩, we build a flat RM
M̄r = ⟨Ūr , P, φ̄r , r̄r , ū0r , ŪrA , ŪrR ⟩ using the following steps:

      1. Copy the sets of states and initial state from Mr (i.e., Ūr = Ur , ū0r = u0r , ŪrA = UrA , ŪrR =
         UrR ).
      2. Loop through the non-false entries of the transition function φr and decide what to
         copy. That is, for each triplet (u, u′ , Mj ) where u, u′ ∈ Ur and Mj ∈ M such that
         φr (u, u′ , Mj ) ̸= ⊥:
           (a) If Mj = M⊤ (i.e., the called RM is the leaf), we copy the transition: φ̄r (u, u′ , M⊤ ) =
               φr (u, u′ , M⊤ ).
           (b) If Mj ̸= M⊤ , we embed the transition function of Mj = ⟨Uj , P, φj , rj , u0j , UjA , UjR ⟩
               into M̄r . Remember that Mj is flat. To do so, we run the following steps:
                i. Update the set of states by adding all non-initial and non-accepting states from
                   Mj . Similarly, the set of rejecting states is also updated by adding all rejecting
                   states of the called RM. The initial and accepting states from Mj are unimportant:
                   their roles are played by u and u′ respectively. In contrast, the rejecting states are
                   important since, by assumption, they are global. Note that the added states v are
                   renamed to vu,u′ ,j in order to take into account the edge being embedded: if the
                   same state v was reused for another edge, then we would not be able to distinguish
                   them.

                                      Ūr = Ūr ∪ vu,u′ ,j | v ∈ Uj \ {u0j } ∪ UjA

                                                                                       ,
                                       R      R                   R

                                     Ūr = Ūr ∪ vu,u′ ,j | v ∈ Uj .

                ii. Embed the transition function φj of Mj into φ̄r . Since Mj is flat, we can make
                    copies of the transitions straightaway: the only important thing is to check whether
                    these transitions involve initial or accepting states which, as stated before, are
                    going to be replaced by u and u′ accordingly. Given a triplet (v, w, M⊤ ) such that
                    v, w ∈ Uj and for which φj (v, w, M⊤ ) = ϕ and ϕ ̸= ⊥ we update φ̄r as follows:3

     3
       We do not to cover the case where v is an accepting state since, by assumption, there are no outgoing
transitions from it. In the case of rejecting states, we keep all of them as explained in the previous case and,
therefore, there are no substitutions to be made. We also do not cover the case where w = u0j since the input
flat machines never have edges to their initial states, but to the dummy initial state.


                                                      17
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                A. If v = u0j and w ∈ / UjA , then φ̄r (u, wu,u′ ,j , M⊤ ) = DNF(ϕ ∧ φr (u, u′ , Mj )).
                   The initial state of Mj has been substituted by u, we use the clone of w asso-
                   ciated with the call (wu,u′ ,j ), and append the context of the call to Mj to the
                   formula ϕ.
                B. If v = u0j and w ∈ UjA , then φ̄r (u, u′ , M⊤ ) = DNF(ϕ ∧ φr (u, u′ , Mj )). Like
                   the previous case but performing two substitutions: u replaces v and u′ replaces
                   w. The context is appended since it is a transition from the initial state of Mj .
                C. If v ̸= u0j and w ∈ UjA , then φ̄r (vu,u′ ,j , u′ , M⊤ ) = ϕ. We substitute the
                   accepting state w by u′ , and use the clone of v associated with the call (vu,u′ ,j ).
                   This time the call’s context is not added since v is not the initial state of Mj .
                D. If none of the previous cases holds, there are no substitutions to be made nor
                   contexts to be taken into account. Hence, φ̄r (vu,u′ ,j , wu,u′ ,j , M⊤ ) = ϕ. We
                   just use the clones of v and w corresponding to the call (vu,u′ ,j and wu,u′ ,j ).
      3. We apply the transformation algorithm we described before, and form a new flat HRM
         H̄ = ⟨{M̄r , M⊤ }, M̄r , P⟩ with the flattened (and transformed) root M̄r .

The reward transition function rr′ (u, u′ ) = 1[u ∈
                                                  / ŪrA ∧u′ ∈ ŪrA ] is defined as stated at the beginning
of the section. Note that u might not necessarily be a state of the non-flat root, but derived from an
RM with lower height.
We now have everything to prove the previous theorem. Without loss of generality and for simplicity,
we assume that the transformation algorithm has not been applied over the flattened root (we have
already shown that the transformation produces an equivalent flat machine).
Theorem 1. Given an HRM H, there exists an equivalent flat HRM H̄.

Proof. Let us assume that an HRM H̄ = ⟨M̄, M̄r , P⟩, where M̄r = ⟨Ūr , P, φ̄r , r̄r , ū0r , ŪrA , ŪrR ⟩,
is a flat HRM that results from applying the flattening algorithm on an HRM H = ⟨M, Mr , P⟩,
where Mr = ⟨Ur , P, φr , rr , u0r , UrA , UrR ⟩. For these HRMs to be equivalent, any label trace λ =
⟨L0 , . . . , Ln ⟩ must satisfy one of the conditions in Definition 8. To prove the equivalence, we
examine the hierarchy traversals H(λ) and H̄(λ) given a generic label trace λ.
Let u ∈ Ur be a state in the root Mr of H and let φr (u, u′ , M⊤ ) be a satisfied transition from that
state. By construction, u is also in the root M̄r of the flat hierarchy H̄, and M̄r has an identical
transition φ̄r (u, u′ , M⊤ ), which must also be satisfied. If the hierarchy states are ⟨Mr , u, ⊤, []⟩ and
⟨M̄r , u, ⊤, []⟩ for H and H̄ respectively, then the next hierarchy states upon application of δH will
be ⟨Mr , u′ , ⊤, []⟩ and ⟨M̄r , u′ , ⊤, []⟩. Therefore, both HRMs behave equivalently when calls to the
leaf RM are made.
We now examine what occurs when a non-leaf RM is called in H. Let φr (u, u′ , Mj ) be a satisfied
transition in Mr , and let φj (u0j , w, M⊤ ) be a satisfied transition from Mj ’s initial state. By con-
struction, M̄r contains a transition whose associated formula is the conjunction of the previous two,
i.e. φr (u, u′ , Mj ) ∧ φj (u0j , w, M⊤ ). Now, the hierarchy traversals will be different depending on w:

       • If w ∈ / UjA (i.e., w is not an accepting state of Mj ), by construction, M̄r contains the
         transition φ̄r (u, wu,u′ ,j , M⊤ ) = φr (u, u′ , Mj ) ∧ φj (u0j , w, M⊤ ). If the current hierarchy
         states are (the equivalent) ⟨Mr , u, ⊤, []⟩ and ⟨M̄r , u, ⊤, []⟩ for H and H̄, then the next hi-
         erarchy states upon application of δH are ⟨Mj , w, ⊤, [⟨u, u′ , Mr , Mj , φr (u, u′ , Mj ), ⊤⟩]⟩
         and ⟨M̄r , wu,u′ ,j , ⊤, []⟩. These hierarchy states are equivalent since wu,u′ ,j is a clone of w
         that saves all the call information (i.e., a call to machine Mj for transitioning from u to u′ ).

       • If w ∈ UjA (i.e., w is an accepting state of Mj ), by construction, M̄r contains the transition
         φ̄r (u, u′ , M⊤ ) = φr (u, u′ , Mj ) ∧ φj (u0j , w, M⊤ ). If the current hierarchy states are (the
         equivalent) ⟨Mr , u, ⊤, []⟩ and ⟨M̄r , u, ⊤, []⟩ for H and H̄, then the next hierarchy states
         upon application of δH are ⟨Mr , u′ , ⊤, []⟩ and ⟨M̄r , u′ , ⊤, []⟩. These hierarchy states are
         clearly equivalent since the machine states are exactly the same.

We now check the case in which we are inside a called RM. Let φr (u, u′ , Mj ) be the transition that
caused H to start running Mj , and let φj (v, w, M⊤ ) be a satisfied transition within Mj such that


                                                    18
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


v ̸= u0j . By construction, M̄r contains a transition associated with the same formula φj (v, w, M⊤ ).
The hierarchy traversals vary depending on w:

       • If w ∈ / UjA (i.e., w is not an accepting state of Mj ), by construction, M̄r contains the
         transition φ̄r (vu,u′ ,j , wu,u′ ,j , M⊤ ) = φj (v, w, M⊤ ). For the transition to be taken in H,
         the hierarchy state must be ⟨Mj , v, ⊤, [⟨u, u′ , Mr , Mj , φr (u, u′ , Mj ), ⊤⟩]⟩, whereas in H̄
         it will be ⟨M̄r , vu,u′ ,j , ⊤, []⟩. These hierarchy states are clearly equivalent: vu,u′ ,j is a
         clone of v that saves all information related to the call being made (the called machine,
         and the starting and resulting states in the transition). Upon application of δH , the hier-
         archy states will remain equivalent: ⟨Mj , w, ⊤, [⟨u, u′ , Mr , Mj , φr (u, u′ , Mj ), ⊤⟩]⟩ and
         ⟨M̄r , wu,u′ ,j , ⊤, []⟩ (again wu,u′ ,j saves all the call information, just like the stack).

       • If w ∈ UjA (i.e., w is an accepting state of Mj ), by construction, M̄r contains the tran-
         sition φ̄r (vu,u′ ,j , u′ , M⊤ ) = φj (v, w, M⊤ ). This case corresponds to that where control
         is returned to the calling RM. Like in the previous case, for the transition to be taken in
         H, the hierarchy state must be ⟨Mj , v, ⊤, [⟨u, u′ , Mr , Mj , φr (u, u′ , Mj ), ⊤⟩]⟩, whereas in
         H̄ it will be ⟨M̄r , vu,u′ ,j , ⊤, []⟩. The resulting hierarchy states then become ⟨Mr , u′ , ⊤, []⟩
         and ⟨M̄r , u′ , ⊤, []⟩ respectively, which are clearly equivalent (the state is exactly the same
         and both come from equivalent hierarchy states).

We have shown both HRMs have equivalent traversals for any given trace, implying that both will
accept, reject, or not accept nor reject a trace. Therefore, the HRMs are equivalent.

Figure 5a shows the result of applying the flattening algorithm on the B OOK HRM shown in Fig-
ure 1b. Note that the resulting HRM can be compressed: there are two states having an edge with
the same label to a specific state. Indeed, the presented algorithm might not produce the smallest
possible flat equivalent. Figure 5b shows the resulting compressed HRM, which is like Figure 1c
but naming the states following the algorithm for clarity. Estimating how much a flat HRM (or any
HRM) can be compressed and designing an algorithm to perform such compression are left as future
work.

                         u00                                                     u00

                               ∧¬                                                         ∧¬

               u11:0,1              u12:0,2                           u11:0,1   u12:1,3        u12:0,2



       u10                                         u20

                                                                        u10      u30            u20

               u12:1,3              u11:2,3



                         u30                  uA
                                               0                                 uA
                                                                                  0



             (a) Without compression.                                  (b) With compression.

Figure 5: Results of flattening the HRM in Figure 1b. The notation uij:x,y denotes the i-th state of
RM j in the call between states x and y in the parent RM. Note that x and y appear only if that state
comes from a called RM. The blue states and edges in (a) can be compressed as shown in (b).


B.2   P ROOF OF T HEOREM 2

We prove Theorem 2 by first characterizing an HRM H using a set of abstract parameters. Then, we
describe how the number of states and edges in an HRM and its corresponding flat equivalent are
computed, and use these quantities to give an example for which the theorem holds. The parameters
are the following:


                                                         19
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


       • The height of the root hr .
       • The number of RMs with height i, N (i) .
       • The number of states in RMs with height i, U (i) .
       • The number of edges from each state in RMs with height i, E (i) .

We assume that (i) RMs with height i only call RMs with height i − 1; (ii) all RMs have a single
accepting state and no rejecting states; (iii) all RMs except for the root are called; and (iv) the HRM
is well-formed (i.e., it behaves deterministically and there are no cyclic dependencies). Note that
N (hr ) = 1 since there is a single root. Assumption (i) can be made since for the root to have
height hr we need it to call at least one RM with height hr − 1. Considering that all called RMs
are have the same height simplifies the analysis since we can characterize the RMs at each height
independently. Assumption (ii) is safe to make since a single accepting state is enough, and helps
simplify the counting since only some RMs could have rejecting states. Assumption (iii) ensures
that the flat HRM will comprise all RMs in the original HRM. This is also a fair assumption: if a
given RM is not called by any RM in the hierarchy, we could remove it beforehand.
The number of states |H| in the HRM H is obtained by summing the number of states of each RM:
                                                  hr
                                                  X
                                        |H| =           N (i) U (i) .
                                                  i=1


The number of states |H̄| in the flat HRM H̄ is given by the number of states in the flattened root
RM
                                          |H̄| = Ū (hr ) ,
where Ū (i) is the number of states in the flattened representation of an RM with height i, which is
recursively defined as:
                               (i)
                        (i)    U                                         if i = 1,
                      Ū =
                               U (i) + Ū (i−1) − 2 U (i) − 1 E (i) if i > 1.
That is, the number of states in a flattened RM with height i has all states that the non-flat HRM had.
In addition, for each of the U (i) − 1 non-accepting states in the non-flat RM, there are E (i) edges,
each of which calls an RM with height i − 1 whose number of states is Ū (i−1) . These edges are
replaced by the called RM except for the initial and accepting states, whose role is now played by
the states involved in the substituted edge (hence the −2). This construction process corresponds to
the one used to prove Theorem 1.
The total of number of edges in an HRM is given by:
                                       hr
                                       X
                                             N (i) (U (i) − 1)E (i) ,
                                       i=1

          (i)       (i)
where (U − 1)E is the total number of edges in an RM with height i (the −1 is because the
accepting state is discarded), so N (i) (U (i) − 1)E (i) determines how many edges there are across
RMs with height i.
The total number of edges in the flat HRM is given by the total number of edges in the flattened root
RM, Ē (hr ) , where Ē (i) is the total number of edges in the flattened representation of an RM with
height i, which is recursively defined as follows:
                                            (i)
                                           (U − 1)E (i)              if i = 1,
                                 Ē (i) =
                                           (U (i) − 1)E (i) Ē (i−1) if i > 1.

That is, each of the (U (i) − 1)E (i) edges in an RM with height i is replaced by Ē (i−1) edges given
by an RM with height i − 1 (if any).
The key intuition is that an HRM with root height hr > 1 is beneficial representation-wise if the
number of calls across RMs with height i is higher than the number of RMs with height i − 1; in


                                                     20
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


other words, RMs with lower heights are being reused. Numerically, the total number of edges/calls
in an RM with height i is (U (i) − 1)E (i) and, therefore, the total number of calls across RMs with
height i is (U (i) − 1)E (i) N (i) . If this quantity is higher than N (i−1) , then RMs with lower heights
are reused, and therefore having RMs with different heights is beneficial.
Theorem 2. Let H = ⟨M, Mr , P⟩ be an HRM and let hr be the height of its root Mr . The number
of states and edges in an equivalent flat HRM H̄ can be exponential in hr .

Proof. By example. Let H = ⟨M, Mr , P⟩ be an HRM whose root Mr has height hr and is param-
eterized by N (i) = 1, U (i) = 3, E (i) = 1 for i = 1, . . . , hr . Figure 6 shows an instance of this
hierarchy. Let us write the number of states in the flat RMs of each level:
            Ū (1) = U (1) = 3,

            Ū (2) = U (2) + Ū (1) − 2 U (2) − 1 E (2) = 3 + (3 − 2) (3 − 1) 1 = 5,

            Ū (3) = U (3) + Ū (2) − 2 U (3) − 1 E (3) = 3 + (5 − 2) (3 − 1) 1 = 9,
                 ..
                  .
             Ū (i) = 2Ū (i−1) − 1 = 2i + 1.
Hence, the number of states in the flat HRM is |H̄| = Ū (hr ) = 2hr + 1, showing that the number
of states in the flat HRM grows exponentially with the height of the root. In contrast, the number of
                                                                    Phr                  Phr
states in the HRM grows linearly with the height of the root, |H| = i=1     N (i) U (i) = i=1  1·3 =
3hr .

       u0i   Mi−1 | ⊤     u1i    Mi−1 | ⊤       uA
                                                 i            u01     M⊤ | a        u11   M⊤ | b     uA
                                                                                                      1

                 Mi , 1 < i ≤ hr                                               M1
     Figure 6: Example of an HRM whose root has height hr used in the proof of Theorem 2.

In the case of the total number of edges, we again write some iterations to derive a general expres-
sion:
                          Ē (1) = (U (1) − 1)E (1) = (3 − 1)1 = 2,
                          Ē (2) = (U (2) − 1)E (2) Ē (1) = (3 − 1) · 1 · 2 = 4,
                          Ē (3) = (U (3) − 1)E (3) Ē (2) = (3 − 1) · 1 · 4 = 8,
                                ..
                                 .
                          Ē (i) = 2Ē (i−1) = 2i .
Therefore, the total number of edges in the flat HRM is Ē (hr ) = 2hr . In contrast, the total number
                                     Phr                            Phr
of edges in the HRM grows linearly: i=1     N (i) (U (i) − 1)E (i) = i=1   1(3 − 1)1 = 2hr .
Finally, we emphasize that the resulting flat HRM cannot be compressed, unlike the HRM in Fig-
ure 5: each state has at most one incoming edge, so there are not multiple paths that can be merged.
We have thus shown that there are HRMs whose equivalent flat HRM has a number of states and
edges that grows exponentially with the height of the root.

Using the aforementioned intuition, we observe that the hierarchical structure is actually expected
to be useful: the number of calls across RMs with height i is (U (i) − 1)E (i) = (3 − 1)1 = 2, which
is greater than the number of RMs with height i − 1 (only 1).
There are cases where having a multi-level hierarchy (i.e., with hr > 1) is not beneficial. For
instance, given an HRM whose root has height hr and parameterized by N (i) = 1, U (i) = 2 and
E (i) = 1, the number of states in the equivalent flat HRM is constant (2), whereas in the HRM itself
it grows linearly with hr . The same occurs with the number of edges. By checking the previously
introduced intuition, we observe that (U (i) − 1)E (i) N (i) = (2 − 1) · 1 · 1 = 1 ̸> N (i−1) = 1, which
verifies that having non-reused RMs with multiple heights is not useful.


                                                      21
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


C     P OLICY L EARNING I MPLEMENTATION D ETAILS
In this appendix, we describe some implementation details that were omitted in Section 4 for sim-
plicity. First, we start by describing some methods used in policy learning. Second, we explain the
option selection algorithm step-by-step and provide examples to ease its understanding.

C.1   P OLICIES

Deep Q-networks (DQNs; Mnih et al., 2015). We use Double DQNs (van Hasselt et al., 2016)
for both formula and call options. The DQNs associated with formula options simply take an MDP
state and output a Q-value for each action. In contrast, the DQNs associated with call options also
take an RM state and a context, which are encoded as follows:

       • The RM state is encoded using a one-hot vector. The size of the vector is given by the
         number of states in the RM.
       • The context, which is either ⊤ or a DNF formula with a single disjunct/conjunction, is
         encoded using a vector whose size is the number of propositions |P|. Each vector position
         corresponds to a proposition p ∈ P whose value depends on how p appears in the context:
         (i) +1 if p appears positively, (ii) -1 if p appears negatively, or (iii) 0 if p does not appear.
         Note that if the context is ⊤, the vector solely consists of zeros.

These DQNs output a value for each possible call in the RM; however, some of these values must
be masked if the corresponding calls are not available from the RM state-context used as input.
For instance, the DQN for M0 in Figure 1b outputs a value for ⟨M1 , ¬ ⟩, ⟨M2 , ⊤⟩, ⟨M1 , ⊤⟩, and
⟨M⊤ , ⟩. If the RM state was u00 and the context was ⊤, only the values for the first two calls are
relevant. Just like unavailable calls, we also mask unsatisfiable calls (i.e., calls whose context cannot
be satisfied in conjunction with the accumulated context used as input).
To speed up learning, a subset of the Q-functions associated with formula options is updated after
each step. Updating all the Q-functions after each step is costly and we observed that similar per-
formance could be obtained with this strategy. To determine the subset, we keep an update counter
cϕ for each Q-function qϕ , and a global counter c (i.e., the total number of times Q-functions have
been updated). The probability of updating qϕ is:
                                       sϕ
                              pϕ = P         , where sϕ = c − cϕ − 1.
                                      ϕ′ sϕ
                                           ′


A subset of Q-functions is chosen using this probability distribution without replacement.
Exploration. During training, the formula and call option policies are ϵ-greedy. In the case of
                                                      j,ϕ
formula options, akin to Q-functions, each option ωi,u,Φ   performs exploration with an exploration
factor ϵϕ∧Φ , which linearly decreases with the number of steps performed using the policy induced
by qϕ∧Φ . Likewise, Kulkarni et al. (2016) keep an exploration factor for each subgoal, but vary
it depending on the option’s success rather than on the number of performed steps. In the case of
call options, each RM state-context pair is associated with its own exploration factor, which linearly
decreases as options started from that pair terminate.
The Formula Tree. As explained in Section 4, each formula option’s policy is induced by a Q-
function associated with a formula. In domains where certain proposition sets cannot occur, it is
unnecessary to consider formulas that cover some of these sets. For instance, in a domain where
two propositions a and b cannot be simultaneously observed (i.e., it is impossible to observe {a, b}),
formulas such as a ∧ ¬b or b ∧ ¬a could instead be represented by the more abstract formulas a
or b; therefore, a ∧ ¬b and a could be both associated with a Q-function qa , whereas b ∧ ¬a and b
could be both associated with a Q-function qb . By reducing the number of Q-functions, the learning
naturally becomes more efficient.
We represent relationships between formulas using a formula tree which, as the name suggests,
arranges a set of formulas in a tree structure. Formally, given a set of propositions P, a formula tree
is a tuple ⟨F, Fr , L⟩, where F is a set of nodes, each associated with a formula; Fr ∈ F is the root
of the tree and it is associated with the formula ⊤; and L ⊆ (2P )∗ is a set of labels. All the nodes
in the tree except for the root are associated with conjunctions. Let ν(X) ⊆ 22P denote the set of


                                                   22
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                             ⊤


                             a                                               ⊤


                  a ∧ ¬b          a ∧ ¬c                             a             a ∧ ¬c


               a ∧ ¬b ∧ ¬c                                        a ∧ ¬b         a ∧ ¬b ∧ ¬c


            a ∧ ¬b ∧ ¬c ∧ ¬d                                                a ∧ ¬b ∧ ¬c ∧ ¬d
       (a) Tree for L = {{a}, {b}, {c}, {d}}.             (b) Tree for L = {{a}, {b}, {c}, {d}, {a, c}}.

Figure 7: Examples of formula trees for different sets of literals. Note that the node a ∧ ¬b ∧ ¬c in
(a) could also be a child of a ∧ ¬c (the parent depends on the insertion order).


literals of a formula X, e.g. if X = a ∧ ¬b, then ν(X) = {a, ¬b}. A formula X subsumes a formula
Y if (1) X = ⊤, or (2.i) ν(X) ⊆ ν(Y ) and (2.ii) for all labels L ∈ L, either L |= X and L |= Y , or
L ̸|= X and L ̸|= Y . Case (2) indicates that Y is a special case of X (it adds literals but it is satisfied
by exactly the same labels). The tree is organized such that the formula at a given node subsumes
all its descendants. The set of Q-functions is determined by the children of the root.
During the agent-environment interaction, the formula tree is updated if (i) a new formula appears
in the learned HRMs, or (ii) a new label is observed. Algorithm 1 contains the pseudo-code for
updating the tree in these two cases. When a new formula is added (line 1), we create a node for the
formula (line 2) and add it to the tree. The insertion place is determined by exploring the tree top-
down from the root Fr (lines 3-19). First, we check whether a child of the current node subsumes the
new node (line 7). If such a node exists, then we go down this path (lines 8-9); otherwise, the new
node is going to be a child of the current node (lines 16-17). In the latter case, in addition, all those
children nodes from the current node that are subsumed by the new node need to become children
of the new node (lines 11-15). The other core case in which the tree may need an update occurs
when a new label is observed (lines 20-25) since we need to make sure that parenting relationships
comply with the set of labels L. First, we find nodes inconsistent with the new label: a parenting
relationship is broken (line 39) when the formula of the parent non-root node is satisfied by the
label but the formula of the child node is not (or vice versa). Once the inconsistent nodes are found,
we remove their current parenting relationship (lines 45-46) and reinsert them in the tree (line 47).
Figure 7 shows two simple examples of formula trees, where the Q-functions are qa in (a), and qa
and qa∧¬c in (b).

C.2    O PTION S ELECTION A LGORITHM

Algorithm 2 shows how options are selected, updated and interrupted during an episode. Lines
1-3 correspond to the algorithm’s initialization. The initial state is that of the environment, while
the initial hierarchy state is formed by the root RM Mr , its initial state u0r , an empty context (i.e.,
Φ = ⊤), and an empty call stack. The option stack ΩH contains the options we are currently
running, where options at the front are the shallowest ones (e.g., the first option in the list is taken
in the root RM). The steps taken during an episode are shown in lines 4-14, which are grouped as
follows:

      1. The agent fills the option stack ΩH by selecting options in the HRM from the current hi-
         erarchy state until a formula option is chosen (lines 15-25). The context is propagated and
         augmented through the HRM (i.e., the context of the calls is conjuncted with the propagat-
         ing context and converted into DNF form). Note that the context is initially ⊤ (true), and
         not that of the hierarchy state. It is possible that no new options are selected if the formula
         option chosen in a previous step has not terminated yet.
      2. The agent chooses an action according to the last option in the option stack (line 6), which
         will always be a formula option whose policy maps states into actions. The action is ap-


                                                    23
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Algorithm 1 Formula tree operations
Input: A formula tree ⟨F, Fr , L⟩, where F is a set of nodes, Fr ∈ F is the root node (associated
    with the formula ⊤), and L is a set of labels.
 1: procedure A DD F ORMULA(f )
 2:    A DD N ODE(C REATE N ODE(f ))
 3: procedure A DD N ODE(new node)
 4:    current node ← Fr
 5:    added node ← ⊥
 6:    while added node = ⊥ do
 7:        child node ← F IND S UBSUMING C HILD(current node, new node)
 8:        if child node ̸= nil then                              ▷ Keep exploring down this path
 9:             current node ← child node
10:        else                                                                  ▷ Insert the node
11:             subsumed children ← G ET S UBSUMED C HILDREN(current node, new node)
12:             new node.children ← new node.children ∪ subsumed children
13:             for child ∈ subsumed children do
14:                 current node.children ← current node.children \ {child}
15:                 child.parent ← new node
16:             current node.children ← current node.children ∪ {new node}
17:             new node.parent ← current node
18:             added node ← ⊤
19:    F ← F ∪ {new node}
20: procedure O N L ABEL(L)
21:    L ← L ∪ {L}
22:    inconsistent nodes ← {}
23:    for child ∈ Fr .children do
24:        F IND I NCONSISTENT N ODES(child, L, inconsistent nodes)
25:    R EINSERT I NCONSISTENT N ODES(inconsistent nodes)
26: procedure F IND S UBSUMING C HILD(current node, new node)
27:    for child ∈ current node.children do
28:        if child.formula subsumes new node.formula then
29:             return child
30:    return nil
31: procedure G ET S UBSUMED C HILDREN(current node, new node)
32:    subsumed children ← {}
33:    for child ∈ current node.children do
34:        if new node.formula subsumes child.formula then
35:             subsumed children ← subsumed children ∪ {new node}
36:    return subsumed children
37: procedure F IND I NCONSISTENT N ODES(current node, L, inconsistent nodes)
38:    for child ∈ current node.children do
39:        if L |= current node.formula ⊕ L |= child.formula then
40:             inconsistent nodes ← inconsistent nodes ∪ {child}
41:        else
42:             F IND I NCONSISTENT N ODES(child, L, inconsistent nodes)
43: procedure R EINSERT I NCONSISTENT N ODES(inconsistent nodes)
44:    for node ∈ inconsistent nodes do
45:        node.parent.children ← node.parent.children \ {node}
46:        node.parent ← nil
47:        A DD N ODE(node)


                                               24
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


         plied, and the agent gets the next state (line 7). The next hierarchy state is obtained by ap-
         plying the hierarchical transition function δH using label l(st+1 ) (line 8). The Q-functions
         associated with formula options’ policies are updated after this step (line 9).
      3. The option stack ΩH is updated by removing those options that have terminated (lines 10,
         26-45). The terminated options are saved in a different list Ωβ to update the Q-functions
         of the RMs where they were initiated later on (line 11). The termination of the options is
         performed as described in Section 4. All options terminate if a terminal state is reached
         (lines 27-28). Otherwise, we check options in ΩH from deeper to shallower levels. The
         first checked option is always a formula option, which terminates if the hierarchy state has
         changed (line 40). In contrast, a call option terminates if it does not appear in the stack
         (lines 33, 46-51).4 When an option is found to terminate, it is added to Ωβ and removed
         from ΩH (lines 35-36, 41-42). If a non-terminating option is found (lines 37, 43), we stop
         checking for termination (no higher level options can have terminated in this case).
      4. If at least one option has terminated (line 12), the option stack is updated such that it
         contains all options appearing in the call stack (lines 13, 52-70). Options are derived for
         the full stack if ΩH is empty (lines 53, 54), or for the part of the stack not appearing in ΩH
         (lines 56-59). The new derived options (lines 61-70) from the call stack are assumed to
         start in the same state as the last terminated option (i.e., the shallowest terminated option,
         line 63) and to have been run for the same number of steps too. Crucially, the contexts
         should be propagated accordingly, starting from the context of the last terminated option
         (line 69).
         As a result of the definition of the hierarchical transition function δH , the contexts in the
         stack may be DNF formulas with more than one disjunct. In contrast, the contexts asso-
         ciated with options are either ⊤ or DNFs with a single disjunct (remember that an option
         is formed for each disjunct). For instance, this occurs if the context is a ∨ b and {a, b}
         is observed: since both disjuncts are satisfied, the context shown in the call stack will be
         the full disjunction a ∨ b. In the simplest case, the derived option (which as said before
         is associated with a DNF with a single disjunct or ⊤) can include one of these disjuncts
         chosen uniformly at random (line 67). Alternatively, we could memorize all the derived
         options and perform identical updates for both later on once terminated.


C.3    E XAMPLES

We briefly describe some examples of how policy learning is performed in the HRM of Figure 1b.
                                                                          ⊤,       ⊤,       ⊤,
We first enumerate the options in the hierarchy. The formula options are ω1,0,¬ , ω2,0,⊤ , ω1,0,⊤ ,
  ⊤,      ⊤,           ⊤,
ω1,1,⊤ , ω2,1,⊤ , and ω0,3,⊤ . The first option should lead the agent to observe the label { } to satisfy
   ∧ ¬ . The Q-functions associated with this set of options are q ∧¬ , q , q , q and q . Note
      ⊤,            ⊤,                                                                      1,¬    2,⊤
that ω1,1,⊤  and ω2,1,⊤  are both associated with q . Conversely, the call options are ω0,0,⊤   , ω0,0,⊤ ,
 2,⊤          1,⊤                                                                     ⊤,         ⊤,
ω0,1,⊤ , and ω0,2,⊤ , where the first one achieves its local goal if formula options ω1,0,¬ and ω1,1,⊤
                                                                                        2,⊤
sequentially achieve theirs. The associated Q-functions are q0 , q1 and q2 . Note that ω0,0,⊤ and
 2,⊤
ω0,1,⊤ are both associated with q2 .
We now describe a few steps of the aforementioned option selection algorithm in two scenarios.
First, we consider the scenario where all chosen options are run to completion (i.e., until their local
goals are achieved):

      1. The initial hierarchy state is ⟨M0 , u00 , ⊤, []⟩ and the option stack ΩH is empty. We select
         options to fill ΩH . The first option is chosen from u00 in M0 using a policy induced by q0 .
                                                     1,¬          2,⊤
         At this state, the available options are ω0,0,⊤    and ω0,0,⊤ . Let us assume that the former is
         chosen. Then an option from the initial state of M1 under context ¬ is chosen, which can
                    ⊤,
         only be ω1,0,¬   . Since this option is a formula option (the call is made to M⊤ ), we do not
                                                                        1,¬    ⊤,
         select any more options and the option stack is ΩH = ⟨ω0,0,⊤       , ω1,0,¬ ⟩.
   4
     We denote by ϕ1 ⊆ ϕ2 , where ϕ1 , ϕ2 ∈ DNFP , the fact that all the disjuncts of ϕ1 appear in ϕ2 . This
containment relationship also holds if both formulas are ⊤. For instance, (a ∧ ¬c) ⊆ (a ∧ ¬c) ∨ d.


                                                    25
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Algorithm 2 Episode execution using an HRM (continues in p. 27)
Input: An HRM H = ⟨M, Mr , P⟩ and an environment E NV = ⟨S, A, p, r, γ, P, l, τ ⟩.
 1: s0 ← E NV.I NIT ()                                                                ▷ Initial MDP tuple
 2: ⟨Mi , u, Φ, Γ⟩ ← ⟨Mr , u0r , ⊤, []⟩                                           ▷ Initial hierarchy state
 3: ΩH ← []                                                                          ▷ Initial option stack
 4: for each step t = 0, . . . , do
 5:     ΩH ← F ILL O PTION S TACK(st , ⟨Mi , u, Φ, Γ⟩, ΩH )                    ▷ Expand the option stack
 6:     a ← S ELECTACTION(st , ΩH )                        ▷ Choose a according to the last option in ΩH
 7:     st+1 ← E NV.A PPLYACTION(a)
 8:     ⟨Mj , u′ , Φ′ , Γ′ ⟩ ← δH (⟨Mi , u, Φ, Γ⟩, l(st+1 ))                  ▷ Apply transition function
 9:     U PDATE F ORMULAQF UNCTIONS(st , a, st+1 )
10:     Ωβ , ΩH ← T ERMINATE O PTIONS(ΩH , s, ⟨Mi , u, Φ, Γ⟩, ⟨Mj , u′ , Φ′ , Γ′ ⟩)
11:     U PDATE C ALL QF UNCTIONS(Ωβ , st+1 , l(st+1 ))
12:     if |Ωβ | > 0 then
13:          ΩH ← A LIGN O PTION S TACK(ΩH , Γ′ , Ωβ )
14:     ⟨Mi , u, Φ, Γ⟩ ← ⟨Mj , u′ , Φ′ , Γ′ ⟩
15: procedure F ILL O PTION S TACK(s, ⟨Mi , u, ·, Γ⟩, ΩH )
16:     Ω′H ← ΩH
17:     Φ←⊤                                                                ▷ The context is initially true
18:     Mj ← M i ; v ← u                       ▷ The state-automaton pair in which an option is selected
19:     while the last option in Ω′H is not a formula option do
               x,ϕ
20:          ωj,v,Φ  ← S ELECT O PTION(s, Mj , v, Φ)             ▷ Select an option (e.g., with ϵ-greedy)
21:          if x ̸= ⊤ then                                                ▷ If the option is a call option
22:              Mj ← Mx ; v ← u0x               ▷ Next option is chosen on the called RM’s initial state
23:              Φ ← DNF(Φ ∧ ϕ)                                                      ▷ Update the context
               ′               x,ϕ
24:          ΩH ← ΩH ⊕ ωj,v,Φ                        ▷ Update the option stack (concatenate new option)
25:    return Ω′H
26: procedure T ERMINATE O PTIONS(ΩH , s, ⟨Mi , u, Φ, Γ⟩, ⟨Mj , u′ , Φ′ , Γ′ ⟩)
27:    if sT = ⊤ then
28:        return ΩH , []                                                     ▷ All options terminate
29:    Ωβ ← []; Ω′H ← ΩH                                                        ▷ Initialize structures
30:    while |Ω′H | > 0 do                                   ▷ While the option stack is not empty
             x,ϕ
31:        ωk,v,Ψ  ← last option in Ω′H
32:        if x ̸= ⊤ then                                            ▷ If the option is a call option
                                               x,ϕ
33:            in stack, ← O PTION I N S TACK(ωk,v,Ψ , Γ′ )
34:            if ¬in stack then
                                  x,ϕ
35:                Ωβ ← Ωβ ⊕ ωk,v,Ψ                         ▷ Update the list of terminated options
                                     x,ϕ
36:                 Ω′H ← Ω′H ⊖ ωk,v,Ψ                     ▷ Remove the last option from the option stack
37:             else
38:                 break                                                                 ▷ Stop unrolling
39:         else
40:                               ̸ ⟨Mj , u′ , Φ′ , Γ′ ⟩ then
                if ⟨Mi , u, Φ, Γ⟩ =                               ▷ If the hierarchy state has changed. . .
                                    x,ϕ
41:                 Ωβ ← Ωβ ⊕ ωk,v,Ψ                             ▷ Update the list of terminated options
                                        x,ϕ
42:                 Ω′H ← Ω′H ⊖ ωk,v,Ψ             ▷ Remove the last option from the option stack
43:            else
44:                 break                                                          ▷ Stop unrolling
                        ′
45:    return Ωβ , ΩH
                                         x,ϕ
46: procedure O PTION I N S TACK(ωk,v,Φ , Γ)
47:    for l = 0 . . . |Γ| − 1 do
48:        ⟨uf , ·, Mi , Mj , ϕ′ , Φ′ ⟩ ← Γl
49:        if uf = v ∧ i = k ∧ j = x ∧ ϕ ⊆ ϕ′ ∧ Φ ⊆ Φ′ then ▷ The call option is in the call stack
50:            return ⊤, l                   ▷ Return whether it appears in the stack and the index
51:    return ⊥, −1


                                                    26
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


52: procedure A LIGN O PTION S TACK(ΩH , Γ, Ωβ )
53:    if |ΩH | = 0 then
54:         return A LIGN O PTION S TACK H ELPER(ΩH , Γ, Ωβ , 0)
55:    else
              x,ϕ
56:         ωk,v,Φ ← last option in ΩH
                                                         x,ϕ
57:          in stack, stack index ← O PTION I N S TACK(ωk,v,Φ , Γ)
58:          if in stack then
59:               return A LIGN O PTION S TACK H ELPER(ΩH , Γ, Ωβ , stack index)
60:    return ΩH
61: procedure A LIGN O PTION S TACK H ELPER(ΩH , Γ, Ωβ , stack index)
62:    Ω′H ← ΩH
         ·,·
63:    ω·,·,Φ   ← last option in Ωβ                                  ▷ Shallowest terminated option
64:    Φ′ ← Φ                                                   ▷ Context initialized from last option
65:    for l = stack index . . . |Γ| − 1 do
66:          ⟨uf , ·, Mi , Mj , ϕ, ·⟩ ← Γl
67:          ϕsel ← Select disjunct from ϕ (e.g., randomly)
                                j,ϕsel
68:          Ω′H ← Ω′H ⊕ ωi,u      f ,Φ
                                       ′                    ▷ Append new option to the option stack
69:          Φ′ ← DNF(Φ′ ∧ ϕ)
70:    return Ω′H


                                                                                    ⊤,
      2. The agent selects options according to the formula option in ΩH , ω1,0,¬         , whose policy is
         induced by q ∧¬ . Let us assume that the policy tells the agent to turn right. Since the
         label at this location is empty, the hierarchy state remains the same; therefore, no options
         terminate, and the option stack does not change.
      3. Let us assume that the agent moves forward twice, thus observing { }. The hierarchy state
         then becomes ⟨M1 , u11 , ⊤, [⟨u00 , u10 , M0 , M1 , ¬ , ⊤⟩]⟩ (see Appendix A for a step-by-step
         application of the hierarchical transition function). We check which options in ΩH have
                                                                                      ⊤,
         terminated starting from the last chosen one. The formula option ω1,0,¬             terminates be-
                                                                                   1,¬
         cause the hierarchy state has changed. In contrast, the call option ω0,0,⊤      does not terminate
         since there is an item in the call stack, ⟨u00 , u10 , M0 , M1 , ¬ , ⊤⟩ that can be mapped into it
         (meaning that the option is running).
                               ⊤,
      4. An experience (s, ω1,0,¬     , s′ ) is formed for the terminated option, where s and s′ are the
         observed tuples on initiation and termination respectively. This tuple is added to the replay
         buffer associated with the RM where the option appears, D1 , since it achieved its goal (i.e.,
         a label that satisfied ∧ ¬ was observed).
      5. We align ΩH with the new stack. In this case, ΩH remains unchanged since its only option
         can be mapped into an item of the new stack.
      6. We start a new step. Since the option stack does not contain a formula option, we select
         new options from the current hierarchy state according to a policy induced by q1 . In this
                                                     ⊤,
         case, there is a single eligible option: ω1,1,⊤  .

In the second scenario, we observe what occurs when the HRM traversal differs from the options
chosen by the agent:
                                                                                   2,⊤
      1. The initial step is like the one in the previous scenario, but we assume ω0,0,⊤ is selected
         instead. Then, since this is a call option, an option from the initial state of M2 under
                                                       ⊤,
         context ⊤ is chosen, which can only be ω2,0,⊤     . The option stack thus becomes ΩH =
           2,⊤      ⊤,
         ⟨ω0,0,⊤ , ω2,0,⊤ ⟩.
                                                             ⊤,
      2. Let us assume that by taking actions according to ω2,0,⊤  we end up observing { }. Like in
         the previous scenario, the hierarchy state becomes ⟨M1 , u11 , ⊤, [⟨u00 , u10 , M0 , M1 , ¬ , ⊤⟩]⟩.
                                                                                           ⊤,
         We check which options in ΩH have terminated. The formula option ω2,0,⊤                  terminates
                                                                     2,⊤
         since the hierarchy state has changed, and the call option ω0,0,⊤ also terminates since it


                                                    27
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


         cannot be mapped into an item of the call stack. Note that these options should intuitively
         finish since the HRM is being traversed through a path different from that chosen by the
         agent.
      3. The replay buffers are not updated for these options since they have not achieved their local
         goals.
      4. We align ΩH with the new stack. The only item of the stack ⟨u00 , u10 , M0 , M1 , ¬ , ⊤⟩ can
                                1,¬
         be mapped into option ω0,0,⊤ . We assume that this option starts on the same tuple s and
                                                                                     2,⊤
         that it has run for the same number of steps as the last terminated option ω0,0,⊤ .

D     C URRICULUM L EARNING I MPLEMENTATION

We here describe the details of the curriculum learning method described in Section 5. When an
episode is completed for Mij , Rij is updated using the episode’s undiscounted return r as Rij ←
βRij + (1 − β)r, where β ∈ [0, 1] is a hyperparameter. A score cij = 1 − Rij is computed
from the return and used to determine the probability of selecting tasks and instances. Note that
this scoring function, also used in the curriculum method by Andreas et al. (2017), assumes that
the undiscountedP return ranges between 0 and 1 (see Section 2). The probability of choosing task
i is maxj cij / k maxl ckl ; that is, the task for which an instance is performing very poorly
                                                                                             P has
a higher probability. Having selected task i, the probability of choosing instance j is cij / k cik ,
i.e. instances where performance is worse have a higher probability of being chosen.

E     L EARNING AN HRM FROM T RACES WITH ILASP

We formalize the task of learning an HRM using ILASP (Law et al., 2015), an inductive logic pro-
gramming system that learns answer set programs (ASP) from examples. We address the reader to
Gelfond & Kahl (2014) for an introduction to ASP, and to Law (2018) for ILASP. Our formalization
is close to that by Furelos-Blanco et al. (2021) for flat finite-state machines. Without loss of gener-
ality, as stated in Section 5, we assume that each RM has exactly one accepting and one rejecting
state. We first describe how HRMs are represented in ASP, and then explain the encoding of the
HRM learning task in ILASP.

E.1   R EPRESENTATION OF AN HRM IN A NSWER S ET P ROGRAMMING

In this section, we explain how HRMs are represented using Answer Set Programming (ASP). First,
we describe how traces are represented. Then, we present how HRMs themselves are represented
and also introduce the general rules that describe the behavior of these hierarchies. Finally, we prove
the correctness of the representation. We use A(X) to denote the ASP representation of X (e.g., a
trace).
Definition 9 (ASP representation of a label trace). Given a label trace λ = ⟨L0 , . . . , Ln ⟩, M (λ)
denotes the set of ASP facts that describe it:
                                  {label(p, t). | 0 ≤ t ≤ n, p ∈ Lt } ∪
                           A(λ) = {step(t). | 0 ≤ t ≤ n} ∪
                                  {last(n).} .

The label(p, t) fact indicates that proposition p ∈ P is observed in step t, step(t) states that t is a
step of the trace, and last(n) indicates that the trace ends in step n.
Example 2. The set of ASP facts for the label trace λ = ⟨{ }, {}, { }⟩ is A(λ) = {label( , 0).,
label( , 2)., step(0), step(1)., step(2)., last(2).}.
Definition
S          10 (ASP representation of an HRM). Given an HRM H = ⟨M, Mr , P⟩, A(H) =
  Mi ∈M\{M⊤ } A(Mi ), where:

                                A(Mi ) = AU (Mi ) ∪ Aφ (Mi ),
                               AU (Mi ) = {state(u, Mi ). | u ∈ Ui } ,


                                                  28
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


               call(u, u′ , x + e, Mi , Mj ).
                                                                                                                            
                     u′ , x + e, Mi , T) : - not label(p1 , T), step(T).                                              ′
                                                                                                                            
               φ̄(u,                                                                              Mj ∈ M, u, u ∈ Ui , 
             
                                                                                                                            
             
                                                                                                                            
                                                                                                                             
             
                                               ..                                                                           
                                                                                                                             
                                                                                                   φi (u, u′ , Mj ) ̸= ⊥,
                                                                                                                            
             
             
                                                .                                                                           
                                                                                                                             
                                                                                                                             
             φ̄(u, u′ , x + e, M , T) : - not label(p , T), step(T).
                                                                                                   Pj−1              ′
                                                                                                                             
                                  i                      n                                     x = k=0 |φi (u, u , Mk )|,
   Aφ (Mi ) = φ̄(u, u′ , x + e, M , T) : - label(p                                                                 ′
                                                                                                 e ∈ [1, |φi (u, u , Mj )|],  .
                                 i                 n+1 , T), step(T).
                                               ..
             
                                                                                                                            
                                                                                                                             
                                                                                                                            
                                                .                                                  ϕe ∈ φi (u, u′ , Mj ),
             
                                                                                                                            
                                                                                                                             
             
                                                                                                                            
                                                                                                                             
                                                                                                ϕe = p1 ∧ · · · ∧ pn
             
                                                                                                                            
                                                                                                                             
                     ′                                                                                                      
             φ̄(u, u , x + e, Mi , T) : - label(pm , T), step(T).
                                                                                                                            
                                                                                                                             
                                                                                                   ∧ ¬pn+1 ∧ · · · ∧ ¬pm

Note that each non-leaf RM Mi in the hierarchy is associated with its own set of rules A(Mi ), which
are described as follows:

        • Facts state(u, Mi ) indicate that u is a state of RM Mi .
        • Facts call(u, u′ , e, Mi , Mj ) indicate that edge e between states u and u′ in RM Mi is
          labeled with a call to RM Mj .
        • Normal rules whose head is of the form φ̄(u, u′ , e, Mi , T) indicate that the transition from
          state u to u′ with edge e in RM Mi does not hold at step T. The body of these rules consists
          of a single label(p, T) literal and a step(T) atom indicating that T is a step. Commonly,
          variables are represented using upper case letters in ASP, which is the case of steps T here.

There are some important things to take into account regarding the encoding:

    • There is no leaf RM M⊤ . We later introduce the ASP rules to emulate it.
    • The edge identifiers e between a given pair of states (u, u′ ) range from 1 to the total number
       of conjunctions/disjuncts between them. Note that in Aφ we assume that the leaf RM has
       an index, just like the other RMs in the HRM. The index could be n since the rest are
       numbered from 0 to n − 1.
Example 3. The following rules represent the HRM in Figure 1b:
                 0                    1                2
                                                                      state(u30 , M0 ). state(uA
                                                                                                                                   
    state(u
                0 , M0 ). state(u0 , M0 ). state(u0 , M0 ).                                           0 , M0 ).                    
      call(u00 , u10 , 1, M0 , M1 ). call(u00 , u20 , 1, M0 , M2 ). call(u10 , u30 , 1, M0 , M2 ). call(u20 , u30 , 1, M0 , M1 ).
                                                                                                                                   
                                                                                                                                    
               3     A                                                     0     1                                                    ∪
    call(u0 , u0 , 1, M0 , M⊤ ).
                                                                     φ̄(u0 , u0 , 1, M0 , T) : - label( , T), step(T).             
                                                                                                                                    
         3     A                                                                                                                   
      φ̄(u0 , u00 , 1, M0 , T) : - not   label( , T), step(T).
     state(u1 , M1 ). state(u11 , M1 ). state(uA                   call(u01 , u11 , 1, M1 , M⊤ ). call(u11 , uA

                                                       1 , M1 ).                                                  1 , 1, M1 , M⊤ ). ∪
          0     1                                                      1     A
     φ̄(u 1 , u 1 , 1, M 1 , T) : - not label( , T), step(T).      φ̄(u1 , u 1 , 1, M  1 , T) : - not label(   , T), step(T).
     state(u02 , M2 ). state(u12 , M2 ). state(uA                  call(u02 , u12 , 1, M2 , M⊤ ). call(u12 , uA

                                                       2 , M2 ).                                                  2 , 1, M2 , M⊤ ). .
          0     1                                                      1     A
     φ̄(u2 , u2 , 1, M2 , T) : - not label( , T), step(T).         φ̄(u2 , u2 , 1, M2 , T) : - not label( , T), step(T).


General Rules. The following sets of rules, whose union is denoted by R = ∪5i=0 Ri , represent
how an HRM functions (e.g., how transitions are taken or the acceptance/rejection criteria). For
simplicity, all initial, accepting and rejecting states are denoted by u0 , uA and uR respectively.
The rule below is the inversion of the negation of the state transition function φ̄. Note that the
predicate for φ includes the called RM M2 as an argument.
           R0 = {φ(X, Y, E, M, M2, T) : - not φ̄(X, Y, E, M, T), call(X, Y, E, M, M2), step(T).} .

The rule set R1 introduces the pre sat(X, M, T) predicate, which encodes the exit condition pre-
sented in Section 3 and indicates whether a call from state X of RM M can be started at time T. The
first rule corresponds to the base case and indicates that if the leaf M⊤ is called then the condition
is satisfied if the associated formula is satisfied. The second rule applies to calls to non-leaf RMs,
where we need to satisfy the context of the call (like in the base case), and also check whether a call
from the initial state of the potentially called RM can be started.

                     pre sat(X, M, T) : - φ(X, , , M, M⊤ , T).
           R1 =                                                                              .
                     pre sat(X, M, T) : - φ(X, , , M, M2, T), pre sat(u0 , M2, T), M2!=M⊤ .

The rule set R2 introduces the reachable(X, M, TO, T2) predicate, which indicates that state X of
RM M is reached between steps T0 and T2. The latter step can also be seen as the step we are


                                                                   29
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


currently at. The first fact indicates that the initial state of the root RM is reached from step 0 to step
0. The second rule indicates that the initial state of a non-root RM is reached from step T to step T
(i.e., it is reached anytime). The third rule represents the loop transition in the initial state of the root
Mr : we stay there if no call can be started at T (i.e., we are not moving in the HRM). The fourth rule
is analogous to the third but for the accepting state of the root instead of the initial state. Remember
this is the only accepting state in the HRM that does not return control to the calling RM. The fifth
rule is also similar to the previous ones: it applies to states reached after TO that are non-accepting,
which excludes looping in initial states of non-root RMs at the time of starting them (i.e., loops are
permitted in the initial state of a non-root RM if we can reach it afterwards by going back to it). The
last rule indicates that Y is reached at step T2 in RM M started at T0 if there is an outgoing transition
from the current state X to Y at time T that holds between T and T2, and state X has been reached
between T0 and T. We will later see how δ is defined.
                               0
                                                                                                        
               reachable(u0 , Mr , 0, 0).
               
                                                          0
                                                                                                        
                                                                                                        
               
               
                reachable(u      , M, T, T) : - state(u    , M), M!=M   r , step(T).                   
                                                                                                        
                                                                                                        
                                                  : -
                                                                                                       
               
               
                reachable(X,    M,  T0,  T+1)        reachable(X,    M, T0,  T),  not pre sat(X, M, T),
                                                                                                        
                                                                                                        
                                                                     0
                                                      step(T), X=u , M=Mr .
               
                                                                                                       
                                                                                                        
                                                                                                       
       R2 = reachable(X, M, T0, T+1) : - reachable(X, M, T0, T), not pre sat(X, M, T), .
               
               
                                                     step(T), X=uA , M=Mr .                            
                                                                                                        
                                                                                                        
                 reachable(X, M, T0, T+1) : - reachable(X, M, T0, T), not pre sat(X, M, T),
               
                                                                                                       
               
                                                                                                       
                                                                                                        
                                                                              A                        
               
               
                                                     step(T),  TO<T,  X!=u      .                      
                                                                                                        
                                                                                                        
                 reachable(Y, M, T0, T2) : - reachable(X, M, T0, T), δ(X, Y, M, T, T2).
                                                                                                       


The rule set R3 introduces two predicates. The predicate satisfied(M, T0, TE) indicates that RM
M is satisfied if its accepting state uA is reached between steps T0 and TE. Likewise, the predicate
failed(M, T0, TE) indicates that RM M fails if its rejecting state uR is reached between steps T0 and
TE. These two descriptions correspond to the first and third rules. The second rule applies to the
leaf RM M⊤ , which always returns control immediately; thus, it is always satisfied between any two
consecutive steps.
                                                                                 
                           satisfied(M, T0, TE) : - reachable(uA , M, T0, TE).
                     R3 = satisfied(M⊤ , T, T+1) : - step(T).
                           failed(M, T0, TE) : - reachable(uR , M, T0, TE).      


The following set, R4 , encodes multi-step transitions within an RM. The predicate δ(X, Y, M, T, T2)
expresses that the transition from state X to state Y in RM M is satisfied between steps T and T2. The
first rule indicates that this occurs if the context labeling a call to an RM M2 is satisfied and that RM
is also satisfied (i.e., its accepting state is reached) between these two steps. In contrast, the second
rule is used for the case in which the rejecting state of the called RM is reached between those steps.
In the latter case, we transition to the local rejecting state uR of M (i.e., the state we would have
transitioned to does not matter). This follows from the assumption that rejecting states are global
rejectors (see Section 3). The idea of this rule is that rejection is propagated bottom-up in the HRM.

                           δ(X, Y, M, T, T2) : - φ(X, Y, , M, M2, T), satisfied(M2, T, T2).
                R4 =                                                                         .
                           δ(X,uR , M, T, T2) : - φ(X, , , M, M2, T), failed(M2, T, T2).

The last set, R5 , encodes the accepting/rejecting criteria. Remember that the last(T) predicate
indicates that T is the last step of a trace. Therefore, the trace is accepted if the root RM is satisfied
from the initial step 0 to step T + 1 (the step after the last step of the trace, once the final label
has been processed). In contrast, the trace is rejected if a rejecting state in the hierarchy is reached
between these two same steps.

                                 accept : - last(T), satisfied(Mr , 0, T+1).
                       R5 =
                                 reject : - last(T), failed(Mr , 0, T+1).

Unlike the formalism introduced in Section 3, this encoding does not use stacks, which would be
costly to do. Here we know the trace to be processed and, therefore, the RMs can be evaluated
bottom-up; that is, we start evaluating the lowest level RMs first on different subtraces, and the
result of this evaluation is used in higher level RMs.


                                                     30
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


We now prove the correctness of the ASP encoding. To do so, we first introduce what means for
an HRM to be valid with respect to a trace, as well as a definition and a theorem due to Gelfond &
Lifschitz (1988) that will help us derive the proof.
Definition 11. Given a label trace λ∗ , where ∗ ∈ {G, D, I}, an HRM H is valid with respect to
λ∗ if H accepts λ∗ and ∗ = G (i.e., λ∗ is a goal trace), or H rejects λ∗ and ∗ = D (i.e., λ∗ is a
dead-end trace), or H does not accept nor reject λ∗ and ∗ = I (i.e., λ∗ is an incomplete trace).
Definition 12. An ASP program P is stratified when there is a partition
                      P = P 0 ∪ P 1 ∪ · · · ∪ Pn                        (Pi and Pj disjoint for all i ̸= j)
such that, (1) for every predicate p, the definition of p (all clauses with p in the head) is contained in
one of the partitions Pi and, (2) for eachS1 ≤ i ≤ n, if a predicate occurs positively in a clause of
Pi then its definition is contained within j≤i Pj , and if a predicate occurs negatively in a clause of
                                           S
Pi then its definition is contained within j<i Pj .
Theorem 3. If an ASP program P is stratified, then it has a unique answer set.
Proposition 1 (Correctness of the ASP encoding). Given a finite label trace λ∗ , where ∗ ∈
{G, D, I}, and an HRM H = ⟨M, Mr , P⟩ that is valid with respect to λ∗ , the program P =
A(H) ∪ R ∪ A(λ∗ ) has a unique answer set AS and (1) accept ∈ AS if and only if ∗ = G, and
(2) reject ∈ AS if and only if ∗ = D.
                                                                                      S5
Proof. First, we prove that the program P = A(H) ∪ R ∪ A(λ∗ ), where R = i=0 Ri , has a
unique answer set. By Theorem 3, if P is stratified then it has a unique answer set. We show
there is a way of partitioning P following the constraints in Definition 12. A possible partition is
P = P0 ∪P1 ∪P2 ∪P3 , where P0 = A(λ∗ ), P1 = A(H), P2 = R0 ∪R1 , P3 = R2 ∪R3 ∪R4 ∪R5 .
The unique answer set AS = AS0 ∪ AS1 ∪ AS2 ∪ AS3 , where ASi corresponds to partition Pi ,
is shown in Figure 8. For simplicity, λ∗ [t] denotes the t-th label in trace λ∗ , λ∗ [t :] denotes the
subtrace starting from the t-th label onwards, and Mi (λ∗ ) denotes the hierarchy traversal using RM
Mi as the root.
We now prove that accept ∈ AS if and only if ∗ = G (i.e., the trace achieves the goal). If ∗ = G
then, since the hierarchy is valid with respect to λ∗ (see Definition 11), the hierarchy traversal H(λ∗ )
finishes in the accepting state uA of the root; that is, H(λ∗ )[n + 1] = ⟨Mr , uA   r , ·, ·⟩. This holds if
and only if accept ∈ AS.
The proof showing that reject ∈ AS if and only if ∗ = D (i.e., the trace reaches a dead-end)
is similar to the previous one. If ∗ = D then, since the hierarchy is valid with respect to λ∗ , the
hierarchy traversal H(λ∗ ) finishes in a rejecting state uR ; that is, H(λ∗ )[n + 1] = ⟨Mk , uR , ·, ·⟩,
where Mk ∈ M. This holds if and only if reject ∈ AS.

E.2   R EPRESENTATION OF THE HRM L EARNING TASK IN ILASP

We here formalize the learning of an HRM and its mapping to a general ILASP learning task. We
start by defining the HRM learning task introduced in Section 5.
Definition 13. An HRM learning task is a tuple TH = ⟨r, U, P, M, MC , u0 , uA , uR , Λ, κ⟩, where
r is the index of the root RM in the HRM; U ⊇ {u0 , uA , uR } is a set of states of the root RM
always containing an initial state u0 , an accepting state uA , and a rejecting state uR ; P is a set of
propositions; M ⊇ {M⊤ } is a set of RMs; MC ⊆ M is a set of callable RMs; Λ = ΛG ∪ ΛD ∪ ΛI
is a set of label traces; and κ is the maximum number of conjunctions/disjuncts in each formula. An
HRM H = ⟨M ∪ {Mr }, Mr , P⟩ is a solution of TH if and only if it is valid with respect to all the
traces in Λ.

We make some assumptions about the sets of RMs M: (i) all RMs reachable from RMs in MC must
be in M, (ii) all RMs in M are deterministic, and (iii) all RMs in M are defined over the same set
of propositions P (or a subset of it).
For completeness, we provide the definition of an ILASP task introduced by Law et al. (2016).
The first definition corresponds to the form of the examples taken by ILASP, while the second
corresponds to the ILASP tasks themselves.


                                                    31
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


AS0 = {label(p, t). | 0 ≤ t ≤ n, p ∈ Lt } ∪ {step(t). | 0 ≤ t ≤ n} ∪ {last(n).} ,

      {state(u,  Mi ). | Mi ∈ M \ {M⊤ }, u ∈ Ui } ∪
       call(u, u′ , x + e, Mi , Mj ). Mi ∈ M \ {M⊤ }, Mj ∈ M, u, u′ ∈ Ui , φi (u, u′ , Mj ) ̸= ⊥,

                                             Pj−1              ′                             ′         ∪
                                       x = k=0 |φi (u, u , Mk )|, e ∈ [1, |φi (u, u , M       j )|]
AS1 =        ′                                                                         ′               ,
      φ̄(u, u , x + e, Mi , t). 0 ≤ t ≤ n, Mi ∈ M \ {M            }, M ∈ M, u, u ∈ Ui ,
                                                              P⊤j−1 j
                                         ′                                       ′
                                 φi (u, u , Mj ) ̸= ⊥, x = k=0 |φi (u, u , Mk )|,
                                 e ∈ [1, |φi (u, u′ , Mj )|], λ∗ [t] ̸|= φi (u, u′ , Mj )[e]
                                                                                              


         φ(u, u′ , x + e, Mi , t).       0 ≤ t ≤ n, Mi ∈ M \ {M⊤ }, Mj ∈ M, u, u′ ∈ Ui ,
                                                                                                    
                                                  ′                    Pj−1              ′
                                          φi (u, u , Mj ) ̸= ⊥, x = k=0 |φi (u, u , Mk )|,             ∪
AS2 =                                                                                                ,
                                          e ∈ [1, |φi (u, u′ , Mj )|], λ∗ [t] |= φi (u, u′ , Mj )[e]
                                       0 ≤ t ≤ n, Mi ∈ M \ {M⊤ }, u ∈ Ui , λ∗ [t] |= ξi,u,⊤

       pre sat(u, Mi , t).

                        0

       reachable(u0 , Mr , 0, 0). ∪                                                              0
       reachable(u , Mi , t, t). | 0 ≤ t ≤ n, Mi ∈ M \ {M⊤ , Mr }, u  ∈ Ui ∪
        reachable(u, Mr , t1 , t2 ). 0 ≤ t1 < t2 ≤ n + 1, u ∈ Ur ,
                                                                                                     ∪
                                               H(λ∗ [t1 :])[t2 − t1 ] = ⟨Mr , u, ·, ·⟩
                           M    , t , t  ).     0 ≤    t    <   t    ≤  n +   1, M   ∈  M     \  {M  r , M⊤ }, u ∈ Ui ,
                                                                                                                      
        reachable(u,           i 1 2                     1        2                i
                                                  ∗
      
                                                λ [t1 ] |= ξi,u0 ,⊤ ,
                                                                                                                      
                                                M    (λ  ∗
                                                           [t   :])[t   −  t   ] = ⟨M    , u, ·, ·⟩,                     ∪
                                                  i          1       2      1         i                               
                                                        ∗                                         A                   
                                                Mi (λ [t1 :])[t2 − t1 − 1] ̸= ⟨Mi , u , ·, ·⟩
       satisfied(Mr , t1 , t2 ) | 0 ≤ t1 < t2 ≤ n + 1, H(λ∗ [t1 :])[t2 − t1 ] = ⟨Mr , uA , ·, ·⟩

        satisfied(Mi , t1 , t2 ). 0 ≤ t1 < t2 ≤ n + 1, Mi ∈ M \ {Mr , M⊤ },
                                                                                                            
                                              ∗
      
                                            λ [t1 ] |= ξi,u0 ,⊤ ,                                           
                                                     ∗                                   A                       ∪
                                            Mi (λ [t1 :])[t2 − t1 ] = ⟨Mi , u , ·, ·⟩,                      
                                                     ∗                                         A
                                                                                                            
                                             Mi (λ [t1 :])[t2 − t1 − 1] ̸= ⟨Mi , u , ·, ·⟩
      {satisfied(M        ⊤ , t, t +  1)   | 0 ≤ t ≤ n} ∪
                                                                           ∗
                                                                                                          uR , ·, ·⟩ ∪

AS3 = failed(Mr , t1 , t2 ) | 0 ≤ t1 < t2 ≤ n + 1, H(λ [t1 :])[t2 − t1 ] = ⟨·,                                           .
      failed(Mi , t1 , t2 ). 0 ≤ t1 < t2 ≤ n + 1, Mi ∈ M \ {Mr , M⊤ },
                                      λ∗ [t1 ] |= ξi,u0 ,⊤ ,                                               ∪
                                              ∗                                  R
                                      M   i (λ [t1 :])[t2 − t1 ] = ⟨·, u , ·, ·⟩
                                                                                                       
        δ(u, u′ , Mi , t, t + 1). 0 ≤ t ≤ n, Mi ∈ M \ {M⊤ }, u, u′ ∈ Ui ,

                                          ∗                        ′                                   ∪
                                        λ [t1 ] |= φi (u, u , M⊤ )
               ′                                                                                      ′
                                                                                                                      
      δ(u, u , Mi , t1 , t2 ). 0 ≤ t1 < t2 ≤ n + 1, Mi ∈ M \ {M⊤ }, u, u ∈ Ui ,                                       
                                                                                          ′           ∗
                                                                                                                      
                                    ∃Mj ∈ M \ {M⊤ } s.t. ϕ = φi (u, u , Mj ), λ [t1 ] |= ξj,u0 ,ϕ ,
                                                                                                                         ∪
                                    Mj (λ∗ [t1 :])[t2 − t1 ] = ⟨Mj , uA , ·, ·⟩,                                      
                                              ∗                                          A
                                                                                                                      
                                     Mj (λ [t1 :])[t2 − t1 − 1] ̸= ⟨Mj , u , ·, ·⟩
                                                                                                                      
                                                                                                                      
      δ(u, uR , Mi , t1 , t2 ). Mi ∈ M \ {M⊤ }, u ∈ Ui , 0 ≤ t1 < t2 ≤ n + 1,                                         
                                                                                            ′           ∗
                                      ∃Mj ∈ M \ {M⊤ } s.t. ϕ = φi (u, u , Mj ), λ [t1 ] |= ξj,u0 ,ϕ , ∪
                                      Mj (λ∗ [t1 :])[t2 − t1 ] = ⟨Mk , uR , ·, ·⟩, Mk ∈ M
                                                                                                                      
                         ∗                             A

       accept | H(λ∗ )[n + 1] = ⟨Mr , u R, ·, ·⟩ ∪
       reject | H(λ )[n + 1] = ⟨Mk , u , ·, ·⟩, Mk ∈ M \ {M⊤ }


Figure 8: Answer sets for each of the partitions in the program P = A(H) ∪ R ∪ A(λ∗ ), where H
is an HRM, R is the set of general rules and λ∗ is a label trace.


                                                                 32
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Definition 14. A context-dependent partial interpretation (CDPI) is a pair ⟨⟨einc , eexc ⟩, ectx ⟩,
where ⟨einc , eexc ⟩ is a pair of sets of atoms, called a partial interpretation, and ectx is an ASP
program called a context. A program P accepts a CDPI ⟨⟨einc , eexc ⟩, ectx ⟩ if and only if there is an
answer set AS of P ∪ ectx such that einc ⊆ AS and eexc ∩ AS = ∅.
Definition 15. An ILASP task is a tuple T = ⟨B, SM , ⟨E + , E − ⟩⟩ where B is the ASP background
knowledge, which describes a set of known concepts before learning; SM is the set of ASP rules
allowed in the hypotheses; and E + and E − are sets of CDPIs called, respectively, the positive and
negative examples. A hypothesis H ⊆ SM is an inductive solution of T if and only if (i) ∀e ∈ E + ,
B ∪ H accepts e, and (ii) ∀e ∈ E − , B ∪ H does not accept e.

Given an HRM learning task TH , we map it into an ILASP learning task A(TH ) = ⟨B, SM , ⟨E + , ∅⟩⟩
and use the ILASP system (Law et al., 2015) to find an inductive solution Aφ (H) ⊆ SM that covers
the examples. Note that we do not use negative examples (E − = ∅). We define the components of
A(TH ) below.

Background Knowledge. The background knowledge B = BU ∪ BM ∪ R is a set of rules that
describe the behavior of the HRM. The set BU consists of state(u,
                                                               S Mr ) facts for each state u ∈ U
of the root RM with index r we aim to induce, whereas BM = Mi ∈M\{M⊤ } A(Mi ) contains the
ASP representations of all RMs. Finally, R is the set of general rules introduced in Appendix E.1
that defines how HRMs process label traces. Importantly, the index of the root r in these rules must
correspond to the one used in TH .

Hypothesis Space. The hypothesis space SM contains all ed and φ̄ rules that characterize a tran-
sition from a non-terminal state u ∈ U \ {uA , uR } to a different state u′ ∈ U \ {u} using edge
i ∈ [1, κ]. Formally, it is defined as
                                                                                            
               call(u, u′ , i, M ).

                                                                     u ∈ U \ uA , uR , 
       SM = φ̄(u, u′ , i, M, T) : - label(p, T), step(T).         u′ ∈ U \ {u} , i ∈ [1, κ] , .
               φ̄(u, u′ , i, M, T) : - not label(p, T), step(T).     M ∈ MC , p ∈ P         

Example Sets. Given a set of traces Λ = ΛG ∪ ΛD ∪ ΛI , the set of positive examples is defined as
                            E + = {⟨e∗ , A(λ)⟩ | ∗ ∈ {G, D, I}, λ ∈ Λ∗ },
where

        • eG = ⟨{accept}, {reject}⟩,
        • eD = ⟨{reject}, {accept}⟩, and
        • eI = ⟨{}, {accept, reject}⟩

are the partial interpretations for goal, dead-end and incomplete traces. The accept and reject
atoms express whether a trace is accepted or rejected by the HRM; hence, goal traces must only
be accepted, dead-end traces must only be rejected, and incomplete traces cannot be accepted or
rejected. Note that the context of each example is the set of ASP facts A(λ) that represents the
corresponding trace (see Definition 9).

Correctness of the Learning Task. The following theorem captures the correctness of the HRM
learning task.
Theorem 4. Given an HRM learning task TH = ⟨r, U, P, M, MC , u0 , uA , uR , Λ, κ⟩, an HRM
H = ⟨M ∪ {Mr }, Mr , P⟩ is a solution of TH if and only if Aφ (Mr ) is an inductive solution of
A(TH ) = ⟨B, SM , ⟨E + , ∅⟩⟩.

Proof. Assume H is a solution of TH .
⇐⇒ H is valid with respect to all traces in Λ (i.e., H accepts all traces in ΛG , rejects all traces in
ΛD and does not accept nor reject any trace in ΛI ).
 ⇐⇒ By Proposition 1, for each trace λ∗ ∈ Λ∗ where ∗ ∈ {G, D, I}, A(H) ∪ R ∪ A(λ∗ ) has a
unique answer set AS and (1) accept ∈ AS if and only if ∗ = G, and (2) reject ∈ AS if and
only if ∗ = D.


                                                  33
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


⇐⇒ For each example e ∈ E + , R ∪ A(H) accepts e.
⇐⇒ For each example e ∈ E + , B ∪ Aφ (Mr ) accepts e (the two programs are identical).
⇐⇒ Aφ (Mr ) is an inductive solution of A(TH ).

Constraints. We introduce several constraints encoding structural properties of the HRMs we
want to learn. Some of these constraints are expressed in terms of facts pos(u, u′ , e, m, p) and
neg(u, u′ , e, m, p), which indicate that proposition p ∈ P appears positively (resp. negatively) in
edge e from state u to state u′ in RM Mm . These facts are derived from φ̄ rules in A(H) and injected
in the ILASP tasks using meta-program injection (Law et al., 2018).
The following set of constraints ensures that the learned root RM is deterministic using the satura-
tion technique (Eiter & Gottlob, 1995). The idea is to check determinism top-down by selecting two
edges from a given state in the root, each associated with a set of literals. Initially, the set of literals
is formed by those in the formula labeling the edges. If a selected edge calls a non-leaf RM, we
select an edge from the initial state of the called RM, augment the set of literals with the associated
formula, and repeat the process until a call to the leaf RM is reached. We then check if the literal
sets are mutually exclusive. If there is a pair of edges from the root that are not mutually exclusive,
the solution is discarded. The set of rules is shown below. The first rule states that we keep two
saturation IDs, one for each of the edges we select next and for which mutual exclusivity is checked.
The second rule chooses a state X in the root, whereas the third rule selects two edges from this state
and assigns a saturation ID to each of them. The fourth rule indicates that if one of the edges we have
selected so far calls a non-leaf RM, we select one of the edges from the initial state of the called RM
and create a new edge with the same saturation ID. The fifth and sixth rules take the propositions for
each set of edges (one per saturation ID). The next three rules indicate that if the edges are mutually
exclusive (i.e., a proposition appears positively in one set and negatively in the other) or they are the
same, then the answer set is saturated. The saturation itself is encoded in the following three rules:
an answer set is saturated by adding every possible ed mtx and root point atoms to the answer
set. Due to the minimality of answer sets in disjunctive answer set programming, this “maximal”
interpretation can only be an answer set if there is no smaller answer set. This will be the case if and
only if every choice of edges satisfies the condition (i.e. every choice of ed mtx and root point
atoms results in saturation). The constraint encoded in the final rule then discards answer sets in
which saturation did not occur, meaning that the remaining solutions must satisfy the condition.
                                                                                                                 
     sat id(1; 2).                                                                                               
    
    
     root point(X, M) : call(X, , , M, ), M=Mr .                                                                 
                                                                                                                  
                                                                                                                  
      ed mtx((X,  Y, E, M,  M2), SatID)  : call(X,    Y, E, M, M2) : - root   point(X,  M), sat  id(SatID).
    
                                                                                                                 
                                                                                                                  
    
                                                                                                                 
                                                                                                                  
    
    
     ed mtx((u0,   Y2, E2,   M2, M3), SatID)   : call(u0,   Y2, E2,   M2,  M3) : - ed mtx(( , ,  , , M2), SatID),
                                                                                                                  
                                                                                                                  
    
    
                                                                                   M2!=M⊤ .                      
                                                                                                                  
                                                                                                                  
      pos  prop(P,  ID)  : - ed mtx((X,  Y, E, M,  ), ID),  pos(X,  Y,  E, M, P).
    
                                                                                                                 
                                                                                                                  
    
                                                                                                                 
                                                                                                                  
      neg prop(P, ID) : - ed mtx((X, Y, E, M, ), ID), neg(X, Y, E, M, P).
   saturate : - pos prop(P, 1), neg prop(P, 2).                                                            
   saturate : - pos prop(P, 2), neg prop(P, 1).
   
                                                                                                           
                                                                                                            
                                                                                                           
                                                                                                            
   
   
    saturate : - ed mtx((X, Y, , M, M2), 1), ed mtx((X, Y, , M, M2), 2), root point(X, M).                 
                                                                                                            
                                                                                                            
   root point(X, M) : - call(X, , , M, ), saturate, M=Mr .
                                                                                                           
                                                                                                            
                                                                                                           
     ed mtx((X, Y, E, M, M2), SatID) : - call(X, Y, E, M, M2), M=Mr , sat id(SatID), saturate.
   
                                                                                                           
                                                                                                            
   
                                                                                                           
                                                                                                            
   ed mtx((u0, Y, E, M, M2), SatID) : - call(u0, Y, E, M, M2), sat id(SatID), saturate.
   
                                                                                                           
                                                                                                            
                                                                                                            
      : - not saturate.

Other required constraints to learn sensible HRMs are shown below. The first rule prevents an edge
from being labeled with calls to two different RMs. The second rule prevents edges from being
labeled with the same literal both positively and negatively.

                        : - call(X, Y, E, M, M2), call(X, Y, E, M, M3), M2!=M3.
                        : - pos(X, Y, E, M, P), neg(X, Y, E, M, P).

The following constraints are used to speed up the learning of an HRM. First, we extend the symme-
try breaking method by Furelos-Blanco et al. (2021), originally proposed for flat RMs, to our hier-
archical setting. The main advantage of this method is that it accelerates learning without restricting
the family of learnable HRMs. Other constraints analogous to those in previous work (Furelos-
Blanco et al., 2021) that speed up the learning process further are enumerated below. For simplicity,


                                                        34
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


some of these constraints use the auxiliary rule below to define the ed(X, Y, E, M) predicate, which is
equivalent to the call(X, Y, E, M, M2) predicate but omitting the called RM:
                                 ed(X, Y, E, M) : - call(X, Y, E, M, ).
The constraints are the following:

       • Rule out inductive solutions where an edge calling the leaf M⊤ is labeled by a formula
         formed only by negated propositions. The rule below enforces a proposition to occur posi-
         tively whenever a proposition appears negatively in an edge calling M⊤ .
                       : - neg(X, Y, E, M, ), not pos(X, Y, E, M, ), call(X, Y, E, M,M⊤ ).

       • Rule out any inductive solution where an edge from X to Y with index E is not labeled by a
         positive or a negative literal. This rule only applies to calls to the leaf M⊤ , thus avoiding
         unconditional transitions.
                    : - not pos(X, Y, E, M, ), not neg(X, Y, E, M, ), call(X, Y, E, M, M⊤ ).

       • Rule out inductive solutions containing states different from the accepting and rejecting
         states without outgoing edges. In general, these states are not interesting.

                      has outgoing edges(X, M) : - ed(X, , , M).
                      : - state(X, M), not has outgoing edges(X, M), X!=uA , X!=uR .

       • Rule out inductive solutions containing cycles; that is, solutions where two states can be
         reached from each other. The path(X, Y, M) predicate indicates there is a directed path (i.e.,
         a sequence of directed edges) from X to Y in RM M. The first rule states that there is a path
         from X to Y if there is an edge from X to Y. The second rule indicates that there is a path
         from X to Y if there is an edge from X to an intermediate state Z from which there is a path
         to Y. Finally, the third rule discards the solutions where X and Y can be reached from each
         other through directed edges.
                                  path(X, Y, M) : - ed(X, Y, , M).
                                (                                                )
                                  path(X, Y, M) : - ed(X, Z, , M), path(Z, Y, M).
                                  : - path(X, Y, M), path(Y, X, M).

F     E XPERIMENTAL D ETAILS

In this section, we describe the details of the experiments introduced in Section 6. We discuss
how the domains are implemented, the hyperparameters used to run the algorithms, and provide all
specific results through tables and plots. All experiments ran on 3.40GHz Intel® Core™ i7-6700
processors.

F.1   D OMAINS

The C RAFT W ORLD domain is based on MiniGrid (Chevalier-Boisvert et al., 2018), thus inheriting
many of its features. At each step, the agent observes a W × H × 3 tensor, where W and H are the
width and height of the grid. The three channels contain the object IDs, the color IDs, and object
state IDs (including the orientation of the agent) respectively. Each of the objects we define (except
for the lava , which already existed in MiniGrid) has its own object and color IDs. Before providing
the agent with the state, the content of all matrices is scaled between -1 and 1. Note that even though
the agent gets a full view of the grid, it is still unaware of the completion degree of a task. Other
works have previously used the full view of the grid (Igl et al., 2019; Jiang et al., 2021).
The grids are randomly generated. In all settings (OP, OPL, FR, FRL), the agent and the objects are
randomly assigned an unoccupied position. In the case of FR and FRL, no object occupies a position
between rooms nor its adjoining positions. There is a single object per object type (i.e., proposition)
in OP and OPL, whereas there can be one or two per type in FR and FRL. Finally, there is a single
lava location in OPL, which is randomly assigned (like the rest of the propositions), whereas in FRL
there are four fixed lava locations placed in the intersections between doors as shown in Figure 9.


                                                  35
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                 Figure 9: An instance of the C RAFT W ORLD grid in the FRL setting.


      Figure 10: An instance of the WATERW ORLD in the WOD setting (Toro Icarte et al., 2018).


The WATERW ORLD domain (cf. Figure 10) has a continuous state space. The states are vectors
containing the absolute position and velocity of the agent, and the relative positions and velocities
of the other balls. The agent does not know the color of each ball. In all settings (WOD and WD), a
WATERW ORLD instance is created by assigning a random position and direction to each ball. Like
in C RAFT W ORLD, the agent does not know the degree of completion of a task.


F.2     H YPERPARAMETERS

Table 2 lists some of the hyperparameters used in the experiments. The rest of the hyperparameters
and other details (e.g., architectures, evaluation of other methods) are discussed in the following
paragraphs.
Architectures. The DQNs for C RAFT W ORLD consist of a 3-layer convolutional neural network
(CNN) with 16, 32 and 32 filters respectively. All kernels are 2 × 2 and use a stride of 1. In the FR
and FRL settings, there is a max pooling layer with kernel size 2 × 2 after the first convolutional
layer. This part of the architecture is based on that by Igl et al. (2019) and Jiang et al. (2021), who
also work on MiniGrid using the full view of the grid. In DQNs associated with formulas, the CNN’s
output is fed to a 3-layer multilayer perceptron (MLP) where the hidden layer has 256 rectifier units
and the output layer has a single output for each action. In the case of DQNs for RMs, the output of
the CNN is extended with the encoding of the RM state and the context (as discussed in Appendix C)
before being fed to a 3-layer MLP where the hidden layer has 256 rectifier units and the output layer
has a single output for each call in the RM.
The architecture for WATERW ORLD is a simple modification of the one introduced by Toro Icarte
et al. (2018). The formula DQNs consist of a 5-layer MLP, where each of the 3 hidden layers has
512 rectifier units. The DQN for the RMs share the same architecture and, like in C RAFT W ORLD,
the state from the environment is extended with the state and context encodings.


                                                  36
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                            Table 2: List of hyperparameters and their values.

  Parameter                                                 C RAFT W ORLD                    WATERW ORLD
  General
   Episodes                                                         300,000                         300,000
   Maximum episode length                                             1,000                           1,000
   Num. of instances I                                                   10                              10
  DQNs
   Learning rate α                                               5 × 10−4                         1 × 10−5
   Learning rate (SMDP) α                                        5 × 10−4                         1 × 10−3
   Optimizer                                  RMSprop (Hinton et al., 2012)    RMSprop (Hinton et al., 2012)
   Discount γ                                                           0.9                              0.9
   Discount (SMDP) γ                                                   0.99                             0.99
   Updated formula Q-functions per step                                   4                                4
   Replay memory size                                             500,000                          500,000
   Replay start size                                              100,000                          100,000
   Target network update frequency                                    1,500                            1,500
   Replay memory size (SMDP)                                        10,000                           10,000
   Replay start size (SMDP)                                           1,000                            1,000
   Target network update frequency (SMDP)                               500                              500
   Minibatch size                                                        32                               32
  Exploration
   Initial exploration                                                   1.0                             1.0
   Final exploration                                                     0.1                             0.1
   Annealing steps                                                2,000,000                       5,000,000
   Annealing steps (SMDP)                                            10,000                          10,000
  HRM learning
   Curriculum weight β                                                 0.99                             0.99
   Curriculum threshold                                                0.85                             0.75
   ILASP time budget                                                2 hours                          2 hours
   Num. collected goal traces ρ (height 1)                               25                               25
   Num. collected goal traces ρ (height ≥2)                            150                              150
   Num. goal traces ρs to learn first HRM                                10                               10


Compression. Akin to some methods for learning RMs (Furelos-Blanco et al., 2021; Toro Icarte
et al., 2019), we compress label traces by merging consecutive equal labels into a single one. For
instance, ⟨{}, { }, { }, {}, {}, { }, { }⟩ becomes ⟨{}, { }, {}, { }, { }⟩.
Curriculum. The average undiscounted returns (see Section 5 and Appendix D) are updated for
each task-instance pair every 100 training episodes using the undiscounted return obtained by the
greedy policies in a single evaluation episode.
Flat HRM Learning Methods. We briefly describe the methods used to learn flat HRMs. Each run
consists of 150,000 episodes, and the set of instances is exactly the same across methods. The core
difference with respect to learning non-flat HRMs is that there is a single task for which the HRM
is learned. Our method, LHRM, is therefore not able to reuse previously learned HRMs for other
tasks; however, it still uses the same hyperparameters. In the case of DeepSynth (Hasanbeig et al.,
2021), LRM (Toro Icarte et al., 2019) and JIRP (Xu et al., 2020), we exclusively evaluate their RM
learning components using traces collected through random walks. For a fair comparison against
LHRM (both in the non-flat and flat learning cases), we (i) compress the traces using the aforemen-
tioned methodology, and (ii) use the OP and WOD settings of C RAFT W ORLD and WATERW ORLD
respectively, where observing goal traces is very easy for simple tasks such as M ILK B UCKET. In
these approaches, a different instance is selected at each episode following a cyclic order (i.e., 1,
2,. . . , I − 1, I, 1, 2, . . . ). The set of propositions in these approaches includes a proposition covering
the case where no other propositions are observed (if needed). In the case of LRM, one of the pa-
rameters is the maximum number of RM states, which we set to that of the minimal RM. Finally, we
modify DeepSynth to avoid periodically calling the learner (i.e., only call it when a counterexample


                                                     37
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


trace is observed): this is not done in other approaches and usually causes timeouts unnecessarily
(the same RM is repeatedly learned).5
ILASP. We use ILASP2 (Law et al., 2015) to learn the HRMs.6 For efficiency, the default calls to the
underlying ASP solver are modified to be made with the flag ---opt-mode=ignore, meaning
that non-minimal solutions might be obtained (i.e., solutions involving more rules than needed),
so the learned root might contain some unnecessary edges. In practice, the solutions produced by
ILASP rarely contain such edges and, if they do, these edges eventually disappear by observing
an appropriate counterexample. We hypothesize that using this flag helps since no optimization is
made every time ILASP is called. The design of the ILASP tasks is discussed in Appendix E.2. We
highlight that this notion of minimality is not related to that of a minimal RM (i.e., an RM with the
fewest number of states) described in Section 5.

F.3     E XTENDED R ESULTS

We organize the tables and figures following the structure in Section 6.
Policy Learning. Figure 11 shows the plots omitted in the main paper (the remaining C RAFT-
W ORLD setting, FRL, is shown in Figure 2). The number of plotted episodes varies across domains
and tasks for clarity. Figure 12 shows the learning curves for a task called T EN PAPERS, which con-
sists of performing PAPER a total of 10 times.7 The plot shows that exploiting the non-flat HRM
leads to much faster convergence than the equivalent flat one. The difference arises from the fact
that the non-flat HRM can reuse the policies for the called PAPER RM, whereas the flat one cannot.
Learning Non-Flat HRMs. We present tables containing the results for the HRM learning compo-
nent of LHRM. The content of the columns is the following left-to-right: (1) task name; (2) number
of runs in which at least one goal trace was observed; (3) number of runs in which at least one HRM
was learned; (4) time spent to learn the HRMs; (5) number of calls to ILASP made to learn the
HRMs; (6) number of states of the final HRM; (7) number of edges of the final HRM; (8) number
of episodes between the learning of the first HRM and the activation of the task’s level; (9) number
of example traces of a given type (G = goal, D = dead-end, I = incomplete); and (10) length of the
example traces of a given type. In addition, the bottom of the tables contains the number of com-
pleted runs (i.e., the number of runs that have not timed out), the total time spent on learning the
HRMs, and the total number of calls made to ILASP. In the case of C RAFT W ORLD, Table 3 shows
the results for the default case (all lower level RMs are callable and options are used for exploration),
Table 4 shows the results when the set of callable RMs contains only those actually needed, and Ta-
ble 5 shows the results using primitive actions for exploration instead of options. Analogous results
are shown for WATERW ORLD in Tables 6, 7 and 8. The discussion of these results can be found in
Section 6.
Learning Flat HRMs. Table 9 shows the results of learning a non-flat HRM using LHRM, and the
results of learning a flat HRM using several approaches (LHRM, DeepSynth, LRM and JIRP). An
extended discussion of these results can be found in Section 6.


G       E XAMPLES OF H IERARCHIES OF R EWARD M ACHINES

Figures 14 and 15 show the minimal root RMs for the C RAFT W ORLD and WATERW ORLD tasks,
respectively. In the case of C RAFT W ORLD, since two or more propositions can never occur si-
multaneously, the mutual exclusivity between formulas could be enforced differently. These RMs
correspond to the settings without dead-ends; thus, they do not include rejecting states.

    5
     The code of these methods is publicly available: DeepSynth (https://github.com/grockious/
deepsynth, MIT license), LRM (https://bitbucket.org/RToroIcarte/lrm, no license), and
JIRP (https://github.com/corazza/stochastic-reward-machines, no license). The first
two links can be found in the papers, whereas the last one was provided by one of the authors through personal
communication.
   6
     ILASP is free to use for research and education (see https://www.ilasp.com/terms).
   7
     Disclaimer: At the time of writing this revised version (November 10), this experiment consisting of 5 runs
has not finished. However, we are confident the observations we have made still will hold when it is completed.


                                                      38
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                    (a) C RAFT W ORLD – OP


                                    (b) C RAFT W ORLD – OPL


                                    (c) C RAFT W ORLD – FR


                                   (d) WATERW ORLD – WOD


                                    (e) WATERW ORLD – WD

  Figure 11: Learning curves comparing the performance of handcrafted non-flat and flat HRMs.


                                              39
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                            Table 3: Results of LHRM in C RAFT W ORLD for the default case.

                                                                                            (a) OP
       Task         #G          #L         Time (s.)           Calls           States        Edges        Ep. First HRM                   # Examples                      Example Length
                                                                                                               (×102 )               G                   I                G              I
 BATTER                 5         5        11.1 (1.7)      17.8 (1.9)         5.0 (0.0)     5.2 (0.2)             1.8 (0.1)     12.2 (0.7)          11.6 (1.4)       26.5 (2.1)     24.2 (3.2)
 B UCKET                5         5          0.9 (0.0)      3.6 (0.2)         3.0 (0.0)     2.0 (0.0)             1.7 (0.1)     10.0 (0.0)           1.6 (0.2)       19.4 (1.1)     19.3 (5.7)
 C OMPASS               5         5      135.4 (73.3)      18.6 (1.6)         5.0 (0.0)     5.2 (0.2)             1.8 (0.2)     11.8 (0.6)          12.8 (1.4)       28.7 (1.9)     20.3 (2.8)
 L EATHER               5         5          0.9 (0.0)      3.8 (0.2)         3.0 (0.0)     2.0 (0.0)             1.8 (0.1)     10.0 (0.0)           1.8 (0.2)       16.7 (1.7)     17.9 (4.4)
 PAPER                  5         5          0.8 (0.1)      3.4 (0.2)         3.0 (0.0)     2.0 (0.0)             1.6 (0.1)     10.0 (0.0)           1.4 (0.2)       19.8 (2.0)    40.6 (27.0)
 Q UILL                 5         5        18.0 (3.5)      19.8 (1.2)         5.0 (0.0)     5.2 (0.2)             2.1 (0.1)     13.2 (0.4)          12.6 (1.1)       29.6 (2.5)     24.4 (3.2)
 S UGAR                 5         5          0.8 (0.1)      3.2 (0.2)         3.0 (0.0)     2.0 (0.0)             1.7 (0.2)     10.0 (0.0)           1.2 (0.2)       17.7 (1.6)     17.5 (3.2)
 B OOK                  5         5      191.2 (36.4)      22.8 (2.6)         5.0 (0.0)     5.8 (0.2)             6.0 (0.2)     11.4 (0.7)          17.4 (2.2)       20.5 (1.8)     24.8 (1.5)
 M AP                   5         5     549.4 (149.5)      33.4 (3.2)         5.0 (0.0)     5.6 (0.2)             6.0 (0.2)     12.2 (0.6)          27.2 (2.9)       29.5 (3.2)     28.7 (1.7)
 M ILK B UCKET          5         5          1.5 (0.2)      4.6 (0.4)         3.0 (0.0)     2.0 (0.0)             6.8 (0.5)     10.0 (0.0)           2.6 (0.4)       11.6 (0.7)     15.3 (4.3)
 B OOK Q UILL           5         5        17.9 (1.4)      19.6 (1.1)         4.0 (0.0)     4.0 (0.0)             3.8 (0.1)     10.0 (0.0)          16.6 (1.1)       27.2 (1.3)     20.8 (1.4)
 M ILK B.S UGAR         5         5          7.3 (1.2)     12.4 (1.2)         4.0 (0.0)     4.0 (0.0)             3.8 (0.1)     10.2 (0.2)           9.2 (1.2)       16.9 (0.8)     14.3 (1.7)
 C AKE                  5         5       74.5 (25.7)      26.4 (3.7)         4.0 (0.0)     3.2 (0.2)             2.1 (0.1)     10.2 (0.2)          23.2 (3.6)       38.4 (0.9)     22.7 (1.6)
 Completed Runs                 5
 Total Time (s.)                1009.8 (122.3)
 Total Calls                    189.4 (4.1)

                                                                                            (b) OPL
      Task         #G   #L            Time (s.)        Calls       States        Edges       Ep. First HRM                   # Examples                               Example Length
                                                                                                (×102 )             G            D              I                G            D              I
 BATTER             5       5       13.7 (2.9)    23.0 (3.0)      6.0 (0.0)     9.2 (0.2)         12.0 (1.0)    11.4 (0.4)    7.0 (1.2)     10.6 (1.6)       20.4 (1.1)   18.7 (1.6)   12.1 (1.7)
 B UCKET            5       5         1.8 (0.2)    7.2 (0.6)      4.0 (0.0)     4.0 (0.0)          8.0 (0.5)    10.2 (0.2)    2.2 (0.2)      2.8 (0.4)       10.2 (0.5)   13.4 (1.9)    6.8 (1.7)
 C OMPASS           5       5       13.1 (1.7)    22.0 (1.7)      6.0 (0.0)     9.2 (0.2)         10.4 (1.4)    11.0 (0.6)    6.8 (1.0)     10.2 (1.0)       17.2 (1.6)   20.9 (1.9)   14.3 (0.8)
 L EATHER           5       5         1.9 (0.2)    7.0 (0.5)      4.0 (0.0)     4.0 (0.0)          6.9 (0.5)    10.0 (0.0)    2.4 (0.2)      2.6 (0.4)       11.1 (0.9)   16.9 (5.6)    8.9 (3.3)
 PAPER              5       5         2.0 (0.2)    7.6 (0.6)      4.0 (0.0)     4.0 (0.0)          7.7 (1.1)    10.0 (0.0)    3.0 (0.3)      2.6 (0.4)       10.1 (0.9)   18.9 (3.3)    5.6 (0.8)
 Q UILL             5       5       11.3 (1.2)    22.0 (1.2)      6.0 (0.0)     9.2 (0.2)         12.8 (1.5)    10.6 (0.2)    6.4 (0.7)     11.0 (0.9)       15.3 (1.3)   13.5 (1.0)   12.1 (1.4)
 S UGAR             5       5         1.7 (0.1)    6.4 (0.4)      4.0 (0.0)     4.0 (0.0)          6.5 (0.7)    10.0 (0.0)    2.4 (0.2)      2.0 (0.3)        9.6 (0.6)   15.3 (3.6)   16.6 (9.2)
 B OOK              5       5    427.8 (201.6)    32.6 (4.2)      6.0 (0.0)     6.6 (0.2)          5.6 (0.2)    12.0 (0.3)    3.6 (0.7)     23.0 (3.4)       21.6 (1.5)   25.9 (3.4)   23.7 (1.3)
 M AP               5       5    647.9 (110.7)    38.6 (3.6)      6.0 (0.0)     6.4 (0.2)          5.6 (0.2)    11.2 (0.4)    3.8 (0.9)     29.6 (3.5)       23.1 (1.0)   27.8 (4.6)   26.1 (0.4)
 M ILK B UCKET      5       5         2.1 (0.2)    5.4 (0.4)      4.0 (0.0)     3.0 (0.0)          7.6 (0.5)    10.0 (0.0)    1.4 (0.4)      2.0 (0.0)       11.1 (0.5)   26.3 (6.5)   15.2 (5.8)
 B OOK Q UILL       5       5       18.7 (2.3)    16.6 (1.3)      4.0 (0.0)     4.0 (0.0)          3.7 (0.2)    10.0 (0.0)    0.4 (0.2)     13.2 (1.4)       29.0 (1.1)    6.2 (5.5)   27.8 (1.4)
 M ILK B.S UGAR     5       5         7.7 (0.7)   12.2 (0.9)      4.0 (0.0)     4.0 (0.0)          3.8 (0.2)    10.0 (0.0)    0.2 (0.2)      9.0 (0.9)       16.0 (0.9)    1.6 (1.6)   16.3 (1.3)
 C AKE              5       5    472.9 (216.6)    36.0 (6.0)      5.0 (0.0)     4.6 (0.2)          2.1 (0.0)    10.0 (0.0)    1.6 (0.4)     31.4 (5.7)       39.5 (1.2)   41.5 (8.6)   26.9 (0.8)
 Completed Runs         5
 Total Time (s.)        1622.6 (328.7)
 Total Calls            236.6 (9.3)

                                                                                            (c) FR
       Task         #G          #L        Time (s.)            Calls          States         Edges        Ep. First HRM               # Examples                          Example Length
                                                                                                               (×102 )               G                   I                G              I
 BATTER                 5         5        12.3 (1.7)     17.6 (1.3)        5.0 (0.0)       5.4 (0.2)            9.2 (1.2)      11.6 (0.4)       12.0 (1.2)          30.3 (2.3)     27.8 (2.0)
 B UCKET                5         5         1.2 (0.1)      3.8 (0.2)        3.0 (0.0)       2.0 (0.0)            6.7 (0.9)      10.0 (0.0)        1.8 (0.2)          16.6 (2.5)     28.5 (4.1)
 C OMPASS               5         5        14.1 (1.6)     20.2 (1.7)        5.0 (0.0)       5.2 (0.2)            9.8 (0.7)      11.6 (0.6)       14.6 (1.2)          26.5 (0.8)     26.5 (2.1)
 L EATHER               5         5         1.1 (0.1)      3.6 (0.2)        3.0 (0.0)       2.0 (0.0)            4.5 (0.7)      10.0 (0.0)        1.6 (0.2)          13.4 (1.3)     16.7 (3.6)
 PAPER                  5         5         1.2 (0.0)      4.0 (0.0)        3.0 (0.0)       2.0 (0.0)            4.9 (0.9)      10.0 (0.0)        2.0 (0.0)          12.4 (1.1)     10.9 (2.5)
 Q UILL                 5         5         8.9 (0.9)     16.0 (0.8)        5.0 (0.0)       5.2 (0.2)            9.4 (1.7)      10.6 (0.2)       11.4 (0.6)          25.4 (0.3)     25.5 (2.7)
 S UGAR                 5         5         1.1 (0.1)      3.8 (0.2)        3.0 (0.0)       2.0 (0.0)            5.2 (0.3)      10.0 (0.0)        1.8 (0.2)          15.3 (1.7)    21.0 (10.1)
 B OOK                  5         5      220.2 (83.3)     25.2 (3.4)        5.0 (0.0)       5.6 (0.2)            6.1 (0.2)      10.2 (0.2)       21.0 (3.4)          21.9 (1.0)     18.4 (0.7)
 M AP                   5         5      628.3 (85.4)     37.8 (3.7)        5.0 (0.0)       5.6 (0.2)            5.8 (0.1)      10.0 (0.0)       33.8 (3.7)          26.4 (1.0)     21.4 (0.7)
 M ILK B UCKET          5         5         1.9 (0.2)      5.0 (0.3)        3.0 (0.0)       2.0 (0.0)            9.8 (0.7)      10.0 (0.0)        3.0 (0.3)          13.2 (0.7)     12.8 (3.2)
 B OOK Q UILL           5         5        12.9 (2.2)     15.6 (1.7)        4.0 (0.0)       4.0 (0.0)            3.9 (0.1)      10.0 (0.0)       12.6 (1.7)          29.0 (1.5)     13.3 (0.8)
 M ILK B.S UGAR         5         5         7.2 (0.6)     12.0 (0.7)        4.0 (0.0)       4.0 (0.0)            3.9 (0.2)      10.0 (0.0)        9.0 (0.7)          18.9 (0.9)     10.1 (1.0)
 C AKE                  5         5      121.1 (41.1)     34.0 (4.8)        4.0 (0.0)       3.0 (0.0)            2.2 (0.0)      10.0 (0.0)       31.0 (4.8)          42.2 (1.7)     16.2 (1.1)
 Completed Runs                 5
 Total Time (s.)                1031.6 (150.3)
 Total Calls                    198.6 (11.3)

                                                                                            (d) FRL
      Task         #G   #L            Time (s.)        Calls       States        Edges       Ep. First HRM                   # Examples                               Example Length
                                                                                                (×102 )             G            D              I                G            D              I
 BATTER             5       5       11.3 (1.4)    23.4 (2.5)      6.0 (0.0)     9.2 (0.2)     468.4 (121.9)     10.4 (0.2)    7.6 (0.9)     11.4 (1.9)       11.9 (0.6)   10.1 (1.3)    9.9 (0.4)
 B UCKET            5       5         2.3 (0.2)    7.0 (0.3)      4.0 (0.0)     4.0 (0.0)      129.5 (69.4)     10.2 (0.2)    2.8 (0.2)      2.0 (0.3)        7.8 (0.5)    9.9 (1.7)    6.4 (2.1)
 C OMPASS           5       5       13.0 (1.9)    24.6 (2.2)      6.0 (0.0)     9.4 (0.2)     550.8 (156.4)     10.4 (0.2)    7.8 (1.0)     12.4 (1.2)       12.5 (1.6)    9.4 (1.0)    8.4 (0.5)
 L EATHER           5       5         2.5 (0.3)    7.8 (0.7)      4.0 (0.0)     4.0 (0.0)       89.0 (18.0)     10.0 (0.0)    3.2 (0.4)      2.6 (0.4)        7.3 (0.4)    9.3 (1.7)    3.7 (0.4)
 PAPER              5       5         2.2 (0.1)    7.0 (0.3)      4.0 (0.0)     4.0 (0.0)       82.7 (18.8)     10.0 (0.0)    3.0 (0.0)      2.0 (0.3)        6.9 (0.7)   10.2 (1.8)    4.7 (2.7)
 Q UILL             5       5       11.6 (1.1)    23.8 (1.5)      6.0 (0.0)     9.6 (0.2)      458.9 (61.0)     10.6 (0.2)    8.0 (0.9)     11.2 (1.2)       11.9 (0.6)   13.1 (2.7)    9.2 (0.8)
 S UGAR             5       5         2.7 (0.2)    8.4 (0.7)      4.0 (0.0)     4.0 (0.0)      103.5 (39.5)     10.0 (0.0)    3.6 (0.4)      2.8 (0.5)        8.2 (0.7)   10.1 (1.9)    5.0 (1.1)
 B OOK              5       5     301.7 (98.1)    36.4 (1.9)      6.0 (0.0)     6.8 (0.2)         5.3 (0.1)     10.2 (0.2)    5.0 (0.7)     27.2 (1.9)       21.7 (1.1)   18.8 (2.2)   16.1 (0.6)
 M AP               5       5    754.1 (158.2)    44.6 (2.6)      6.0 (0.0)     7.0 (0.0)         5.5 (0.2)     10.2 (0.2)    5.2 (0.4)     35.2 (2.3)       25.6 (0.5)   20.4 (2.9)   18.7 (0.6)
 M ILK B UCKET      5       5         2.8 (0.1)    6.6 (0.2)      4.0 (0.0)     3.0 (0.0)         6.9 (0.4)     10.0 (0.0)    2.0 (0.0)      2.6 (0.2)       12.5 (0.8)   13.1 (3.7)    7.4 (2.2)
 B OOK Q UILL       5       5       19.8 (2.9)    19.6 (1.6)      4.0 (0.0)     4.0 (0.0)         4.3 (0.1)     10.0 (0.0)    0.8 (0.4)     15.8 (1.2)       28.4 (1.1)    2.7 (1.3)   13.5 (0.9)
 M ILK B.S UGAR     5       5         8.8 (0.9)   12.6 (1.0)      4.0 (0.0)     4.0 (0.0)         4.0 (0.1)     10.0 (0.0)    1.2 (0.5)      8.4 (0.7)       19.3 (1.3)    3.7 (2.0)   10.7 (2.0)
 C AKE              5       5     344.0 (87.7)    46.2 (4.9)      5.0 (0.0)     4.8 (0.2)         2.8 (0.1)     10.0 (0.0)    2.8 (0.7)     40.4 (4.5)       44.5 (2.3)   21.8 (2.2)   17.3 (1.0)
 Completed Runs         5
 Total Time (s.)        1476.8 (175.3)
 Total Calls            268.0 (6.5)


                                                                                               40
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


              Table 4: Results of LHRM in C RAFT W ORLD with a restricted set of callable RMs.

                                                                                           (a) OP
       Task         #G          #L     Time (s.)             Calls          States         Edges        Ep. First HRM               # Examples                        Example Length
                                                                                                             (×102 )               G                 I                G              I
 BATTER                 5         5    11.2 (1.6)      17.8 (1.9)          5.0 (0.0)      5.2 (0.2)            1.8 (0.1)      12.2 (0.7)        11.6 (1.4)       26.5 (2.1)     24.2 (3.2)
 B UCKET                5         5     0.9 (0.0)       3.6 (0.2)          3.0 (0.0)      2.0 (0.0)            1.7 (0.1)      10.0 (0.0)         1.6 (0.2)       19.4 (1.1)     19.3 (5.7)
 C OMPASS               5         5    15.5 (4.2)      18.6 (1.6)          5.0 (0.0)      5.2 (0.2)            1.8 (0.2)      11.8 (0.6)        12.8 (1.4)       28.7 (1.9)     20.3 (2.8)
 L EATHER               5         5     0.9 (0.0)       3.8 (0.2)          3.0 (0.0)      2.0 (0.0)            1.8 (0.1)      10.0 (0.0)         1.8 (0.2)       16.7 (1.7)     17.9 (4.4)
 PAPER                  5         5     0.9 (0.0)       3.4 (0.2)          3.0 (0.0)      2.0 (0.0)            1.6 (0.1)      10.0 (0.0)         1.4 (0.2)       19.8 (2.0)    40.6 (27.0)
 Q UILL                 5         5    18.2 (3.5)      19.8 (1.2)          5.0 (0.0)      5.2 (0.2)            2.1 (0.1)      13.2 (0.4)        12.6 (1.1)       29.6 (2.5)     24.4 (3.2)
 S UGAR                 5         5     0.8 (0.0)       3.2 (0.2)          3.0 (0.0)      2.0 (0.0)            1.7 (0.2)      10.0 (0.0)         1.2 (0.2)       17.7 (1.6)     17.5 (3.2)
 B OOK                  5         5    45.8 (4.5)      19.6 (0.9)          5.0 (0.0)      5.6 (0.2)            6.0 (0.2)      11.2 (1.0)        14.4 (0.9)       21.6 (1.8)     21.0 (1.7)
 M AP                   5         5   64.1 (10.6)      22.0 (2.6)          5.0 (0.0)      5.2 (0.2)            6.1 (0.2)      10.8 (0.4)        17.2 (2.7)       22.5 (1.6)     23.0 (1.2)
 M ILK B UCKET          5         5     1.2 (0.1)       4.4 (0.4)          3.0 (0.0)      2.0 (0.0)            6.8 (0.3)      10.0 (0.0)         2.4 (0.4)       12.1 (0.7)     15.3 (1.6)
 B OOK Q UILL           5         5     4.5 (0.8)      10.2 (1.4)          4.0 (0.0)      4.0 (0.0)            3.9 (0.1)      10.0 (0.0)         7.2 (1.4)       26.1 (0.8)     22.4 (0.9)
 M ILK B.S UGAR         5         5     3.5 (0.5)       9.6 (1.3)          4.0 (0.0)      4.0 (0.0)            3.9 (0.1)      10.2 (0.2)         6.4 (1.2)       17.4 (0.5)     12.5 (0.8)
 C AKE                  5         5     9.1 (0.9)      17.0 (0.9)          4.0 (0.0)      3.2 (0.2)            2.1 (0.1)      10.0 (0.0)        14.0 (0.9)       37.5 (1.9)     18.0 (1.9)
 Completed Runs                 5
 Total Time (s.)                176.6 (13.1)
 Total Calls                    153.0 (3.6)

                                                                                          (b) OPL
      Task         #G   #L        Time (s.)       Calls         States        Edges       Ep. First HRM                    # Examples                             Example Length
                                                                                              (×102 )             G            D            I                G            D              I
 BATTER             5       5     13.9 (3.0)    23.0 (3.0)     6.0 (0.0)     9.2 (0.2)         12.0 (1.0)     11.4 (0.4)    7.0 (1.2)   10.6 (1.6)       20.4 (1.1)   18.7 (1.6)   12.1 (1.7)
 B UCKET            5       5      1.8 (0.1)     7.2 (0.6)     4.0 (0.0)     4.0 (0.0)          8.0 (0.5)     10.2 (0.2)    2.2 (0.2)    2.8 (0.4)       10.2 (0.5)   13.4 (1.9)    6.8 (1.7)
 C OMPASS           5       5     13.2 (1.7)    22.0 (1.7)     6.0 (0.0)     9.2 (0.2)         10.4 (1.4)     11.0 (0.6)    6.8 (1.0)   10.2 (1.0)       17.2 (1.6)   20.9 (1.9)   14.3 (0.8)
 L EATHER           5       5      1.9 (0.1)     7.0 (0.5)     4.0 (0.0)     4.0 (0.0)          6.9 (0.5)     10.0 (0.0)    2.4 (0.2)    2.6 (0.4)       11.1 (0.9)   16.9 (5.6)    8.9 (3.3)
 PAPER              5       5      2.0 (0.2)     7.6 (0.6)     4.0 (0.0)     4.0 (0.0)          7.7 (1.1)     10.0 (0.0)    3.0 (0.3)    2.6 (0.4)       10.1 (0.9)   18.9 (3.3)    5.6 (0.8)
 Q UILL             5       5     11.5 (1.3)    22.0 (1.2)     6.0 (0.0)     9.2 (0.2)         12.8 (1.5)     10.6 (0.2)    6.4 (0.7)   11.0 (0.9)       15.3 (1.3)   13.5 (1.0)   12.1 (1.4)
 S UGAR             5       5      1.6 (0.1)     6.4 (0.4)     4.0 (0.0)     4.0 (0.0)          6.5 (0.7)     10.0 (0.0)    2.4 (0.2)    2.0 (0.3)        9.6 (0.6)   15.3 (3.6)   16.6 (9.2)
 B OOK              5       5    69.0 (20.5)    21.8 (2.2)     6.0 (0.0)     6.2 (0.2)          5.5 (0.1)     10.4 (0.2)    5.2 (0.9)   12.2 (1.9)       20.4 (1.3)   21.2 (2.0)   20.8 (1.7)
 M AP               5       5     76.5 (6.0)    24.2 (1.3)     6.0 (0.0)     6.4 (0.2)          5.7 (0.3)     11.6 (0.8)    4.0 (0.3)   14.6 (1.0)       24.8 (3.0)   21.4 (2.1)   25.7 (0.8)
 M ILK B UCKET      5       5      1.7 (0.2)     6.0 (0.6)     4.0 (0.0)     3.0 (0.0)          7.5 (0.7)     10.2 (0.2)    1.4 (0.2)    2.4 (0.2)       11.7 (0.7)   25.4 (6.4)   14.2 (3.4)
 B OOK Q UILL       5       5      5.3 (0.9)    10.8 (1.4)     4.0 (0.0)     4.0 (0.0)          3.7 (0.1)     10.0 (0.0)    1.0 (0.5)    6.8 (0.9)       27.7 (1.0)   11.2 (5.4)   21.1 (1.7)
 M ILK B.S UGAR     5       5      4.0 (0.9)     9.8 (1.7)     4.0 (0.0)     4.0 (0.0)          3.8 (0.1)     10.0 (0.0)    1.6 (0.7)    5.2 (1.2)       18.4 (0.7)    8.3 (2.9)   15.6 (1.7)
 C AKE              5       5     16.2 (0.4)    20.8 (0.2)     5.0 (0.0)     4.0 (0.0)          2.1 (0.1)     10.0 (0.0)    3.2 (0.2)   14.6 (0.2)       38.1 (0.9)   22.5 (3.3)   25.8 (1.7)
 Completed Runs         5
 Total Time (s.)        218.6 (21.1)
 Total Calls            188.6 (5.4)

                                                                                           (c) FR
       Task         #G          #L     Time (s.)             Calls          States         Edges        Ep. First HRM               # Examples                        Example Length
                                                                                                             (×102 )               G                 I                G              I
 BATTER                 5         5    12.6 (1.8)      17.6 (1.3)          5.0 (0.0)      5.4 (0.2)            9.2 (1.2)      11.6 (0.4)        12.0 (1.2)       30.3 (2.3)     27.8 (2.0)
 B UCKET                5         5     1.2 (0.1)       3.8 (0.2)          3.0 (0.0)      2.0 (0.0)            6.7 (0.9)      10.0 (0.0)         1.8 (0.2)       16.6 (2.5)     28.5 (4.1)
 C OMPASS               5         5    14.1 (1.5)      20.2 (1.7)          5.0 (0.0)      5.2 (0.2)            9.8 (0.7)      11.6 (0.6)        14.6 (1.2)       26.5 (0.8)     26.5 (2.1)
 L EATHER               5         5     1.1 (0.1)       3.6 (0.2)          3.0 (0.0)      2.0 (0.0)            4.5 (0.7)      10.0 (0.0)         1.6 (0.2)       13.4 (1.3)     16.7 (3.6)
 PAPER                  5         5     1.2 (0.1)       4.0 (0.0)          3.0 (0.0)      2.0 (0.0)            4.9 (0.9)      10.0 (0.0)         2.0 (0.0)       12.4 (1.1)     10.9 (2.5)
 Q UILL                 5         5     9.3 (0.8)      16.0 (0.8)          5.0 (0.0)      5.2 (0.2)            9.4 (1.7)      10.6 (0.2)        11.4 (0.6)       25.4 (0.3)     25.5 (2.7)
 S UGAR                 5         5     1.4 (0.2)       3.8 (0.2)          3.0 (0.0)      2.0 (0.0)            5.2 (0.3)      10.0 (0.0)         1.8 (0.2)       15.3 (1.7)    21.0 (10.1)
 B OOK                  5         5   43.8 (13.0)      20.0 (1.9)          5.0 (0.0)      5.4 (0.2)            6.0 (0.1)      10.0 (0.0)        16.0 (1.9)       21.9 (1.0)     14.7 (1.4)
 M AP                   5         5   85.2 (13.4)      22.2 (2.5)          5.0 (0.0)      5.2 (0.2)            5.9 (0.1)      10.2 (0.2)        18.0 (2.6)       26.5 (0.9)     18.2 (1.2)
 M ILK B UCKET          5         5     1.4 (0.1)       4.4 (0.2)          3.0 (0.0)      2.0 (0.0)           10.2 (0.9)      10.0 (0.0)         2.4 (0.2)       13.0 (0.8)     12.2 (2.8)
 B OOK Q UILL           5         5     6.3 (0.9)      13.2 (1.7)          4.0 (0.0)      4.0 (0.0)            3.8 (0.1)      10.0 (0.0)        10.2 (1.7)       30.6 (2.0)     11.9 (1.2)
 M ILK B.S UGAR         5         5     4.8 (0.6)      11.8 (1.3)          4.0 (0.0)      4.0 (0.0)            3.8 (0.1)      10.0 (0.0)         8.8 (1.3)       19.8 (0.7)      8.6 (1.0)
 C AKE                  5         5    12.5 (1.8)      20.8 (2.5)          4.0 (0.0)      3.0 (0.0)            2.3 (0.1)      10.0 (0.0)        17.8 (2.5)       44.2 (2.6)     13.1 (1.2)
 Completed Runs                 5
 Total Time (s.)                194.9 (17.6)
 Total Calls                    161.4 (7.0)

                                                                                          (d) FRL
      Task         #G   #L         Time (s.)       Calls         States        Edges       Ep. First HRM                   # Examples                             Example Length
                                                                                              (×102 )             G            D            I                G            D              I
 BATTER             5       5      11.2 (1.4)   23.4 (2.5)      6.0 (0.0)     9.2 (0.2)     468.4 (121.9)     10.4 (0.2)    7.6 (0.9)   11.4 (1.9)       11.9 (0.6)   10.1 (1.3)    9.9 (0.4)
 B UCKET            5       5       2.4 (0.1)    7.0 (0.3)      4.0 (0.0)     4.0 (0.0)      129.5 (69.4)     10.2 (0.2)    2.8 (0.2)    2.0 (0.3)        7.8 (0.5)    9.9 (1.7)    6.4 (2.1)
 C OMPASS           5       5      13.1 (1.9)   24.6 (2.2)      6.0 (0.0)     9.4 (0.2)     550.8 (156.4)     10.4 (0.2)    7.8 (1.0)   12.4 (1.2)       12.5 (1.6)    9.4 (1.0)    8.4 (0.5)
 L EATHER           5       5       2.5 (0.4)    7.8 (0.7)      4.0 (0.0)     4.0 (0.0)       89.0 (18.0)     10.0 (0.0)    3.2 (0.4)    2.6 (0.4)        7.3 (0.4)    9.3 (1.7)    3.7 (0.4)
 PAPER              5       5       2.1 (0.1)    7.0 (0.3)      4.0 (0.0)     4.0 (0.0)       82.7 (18.8)     10.0 (0.0)    3.0 (0.0)    2.0 (0.3)        6.9 (0.7)   10.2 (1.8)    4.7 (2.7)
 Q UILL             5       5      11.6 (1.2)   23.8 (1.5)      6.0 (0.0)     9.6 (0.2)      458.9 (61.0)     10.6 (0.2)    8.0 (0.9)   11.2 (1.2)       11.9 (0.6)   13.1 (2.7)    9.2 (0.8)
 S UGAR             5       5       2.6 (0.2)    8.4 (0.7)      4.0 (0.0)     4.0 (0.0)      103.5 (39.5)     10.0 (0.0)    3.6 (0.4)    2.8 (0.5)        8.2 (0.7)   10.1 (1.9)    5.0 (1.1)
 B OOK              5       5     62.2 (13.2)   27.4 (2.2)      6.0 (0.0)     6.6 (0.2)          5.3 (0.1)    10.2 (0.2)    5.6 (0.6)   17.6 (1.7)       23.0 (1.0)   16.5 (2.0)   13.4 (1.0)
 M AP               5       5    131.3 (28.0)   34.0 (3.0)      6.0 (0.0)     6.6 (0.2)          5.5 (0.2)    10.2 (0.2)    6.8 (0.7)   23.0 (2.4)       26.2 (0.7)   16.9 (1.6)   14.5 (0.5)
 M ILK B UCKET      5       5       2.7 (0.7)    6.6 (0.6)      4.0 (0.0)     3.0 (0.0)          6.8 (0.3)    10.0 (0.0)    2.2 (0.2)    2.4 (0.4)       12.0 (0.8)    9.4 (1.0)    9.9 (2.3)
 B OOK Q UILL       5       5       6.8 (0.6)   12.6 (0.7)      4.0 (0.0)     4.0 (0.0)          4.4 (0.2)    10.0 (0.0)    1.6 (0.5)    8.0 (0.3)       32.3 (2.3)    4.9 (1.5)   11.6 (1.1)
 M ILK B.S UGAR     5       5       5.4 (0.6)   12.2 (1.0)      4.0 (0.0)     4.0 (0.0)          4.0 (0.1)    10.2 (0.2)    1.0 (0.4)    8.0 (0.4)       20.4 (1.7)    2.9 (1.4)   10.3 (1.2)
 C AKE              5       5      16.3 (1.2)   21.2 (1.0)      5.0 (0.0)     4.0 (0.0)          2.8 (0.0)    10.0 (0.0)    2.6 (0.2)   15.6 (1.2)       47.7 (1.9)   15.0 (0.7)   16.0 (0.9)
 Completed Runs         5
 Total Time (s.)        270.1 (34.6)
 Total Calls            216.0 (5.1)


                                                                                             41
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Figure 12: Learning curves comparing the performance of handcrafted non-flat and flat HRMs in
the T EN PAPERS task (FRL setting).

              Table 5: Results of LHRM in C RAFT W ORLD without exploration using options.

                                                                                            (a) OP
       Task         #G           #L          Time (s.)            Calls         States        Edges       Ep. First HRM                  # Examples                     Example Length
                                                                                                              (×102 )                G                 I                G                 I
 BATTER                 5          5          11.2 (1.7)        17.8 (1.9)     5.0 (0.0)     5.2 (0.2)           1.8 (0.1)      12.2 (0.7)        11.6 (1.4)       26.5 (2.1)         24.2 (3.2)
 B UCKET                5          5            0.9 (0.0)        3.6 (0.2)     3.0 (0.0)     2.0 (0.0)           1.7 (0.1)      10.0 (0.0)         1.6 (0.2)       19.4 (1.1)         19.3 (5.7)
 C OMPASS               5          5          15.6 (4.1)        18.6 (1.6)     5.0 (0.0)     5.2 (0.2)           1.8 (0.2)      11.8 (0.6)        12.8 (1.4)       28.7 (1.9)         20.3 (2.8)
 L EATHER               5          5            0.9 (0.1)        3.8 (0.2)     3.0 (0.0)     2.0 (0.0)           1.8 (0.1)      10.0 (0.0)         1.8 (0.2)       16.7 (1.7)         17.9 (4.4)
 PAPER                  5          5            0.9 (0.1)        3.4 (0.2)     3.0 (0.0)     2.0 (0.0)           1.6 (0.1)      10.0 (0.0)         1.4 (0.2)       19.8 (2.0)        40.6 (27.0)
 Q UILL                 5          5          18.3 (3.6)        19.8 (1.2)     5.0 (0.0)     5.2 (0.2)           2.1 (0.1)      13.2 (0.4)        12.6 (1.1)       29.6 (2.5)         24.4 (3.2)
 S UGAR                 5          5            0.9 (0.0)        3.2 (0.2)     3.0 (0.0)     2.0 (0.0)           1.7 (0.2)      10.0 (0.0)         1.2 (0.2)       17.7 (1.6)         17.5 (3.2)
 B OOK                  5          5       529.0 (164.2)        21.2 (1.4)     5.0 (0.0)     5.8 (0.2)           6.8 (0.2)      10.2 (0.2)        17.0 (1.5)       33.0 (2.6)         23.7 (1.3)
 M AP                   5          5      1924.2 (443.5)        28.0 (3.8)     5.0 (0.0)     5.4 (0.2)           7.8 (0.4)      10.4 (0.2)        23.6 (3.7)       40.1 (1.0)         29.4 (1.3)
 M ILK B UCKET          5          5            1.6 (0.2)        4.4 (0.4)     3.0 (0.0)     2.0 (0.0)           6.1 (0.3)      10.0 (0.0)         2.4 (0.4)       16.0 (1.0)         14.2 (1.3)
 B OOK Q UILL           5          5         42.7 (10.1)        24.6 (3.9)     4.0 (0.0)     4.0 (0.0)           6.8 (0.2)      10.0 (0.0)        21.6 (3.9)       55.8 (2.7)         21.2 (1.1)
 M ILK B.S UGAR         5          5            8.1 (0.8)       11.8 (1.0)     4.0 (0.0)     4.0 (0.0)           4.9 (0.1)      10.2 (0.2)         8.6 (1.2)       31.1 (0.7)         13.1 (0.8)
 C AKE                  5          5        198.3 (47.5)        43.0 (5.3)     4.0 (0.0)     3.8 (0.2)           5.5 (0.2)      10.0 (0.0)        40.0 (5.3)       65.0 (0.9)         22.0 (0.9)
 Completed Runs                  5
 Total Time (s.)                 2752.8 (503.2)
 Total Calls                     203.2 (11.8)

                                                                                            (b) OPL
      Task         #G   #L             Time (s.)      Calls         States       Edges      Ep. First HRM                  # Examples                               Example Length
                                                                                               (×102 )            G             D             I                G            D                 I
 BATTER             5        5       14.1 (3.2)     23.0 (3.0)     6.0 (0.0)    9.2 (0.2)       12.0 (1.0)    11.4 (0.4)     7.0 (1.2)    10.6 (1.6)       20.4 (1.1)   18.7 (1.6)     12.1 (1.7)
 B UCKET            5        5        1.8 (0.1)      7.2 (0.6)     4.0 (0.0)    4.0 (0.0)        8.0 (0.5)    10.2 (0.2)     2.2 (0.2)     2.8 (0.4)       10.2 (0.5)   13.4 (1.9)      6.8 (1.7)
 C OMPASS           5        5       13.5 (1.8)     22.0 (1.7)     6.0 (0.0)    9.2 (0.2)       10.4 (1.4)    11.0 (0.6)     6.8 (1.0)    10.2 (1.0)       17.2 (1.6)   20.9 (1.9)     14.3 (0.8)
 L EATHER           5        5        1.8 (0.1)      7.0 (0.5)     4.0 (0.0)    4.0 (0.0)        6.9 (0.5)    10.0 (0.0)     2.4 (0.2)     2.6 (0.4)       11.1 (0.9)   16.9 (5.6)      8.9 (3.3)
 PAPER              5        5        2.0 (0.2)      7.6 (0.6)     4.0 (0.0)    4.0 (0.0)        7.7 (1.1)    10.0 (0.0)     3.0 (0.3)     2.6 (0.4)       10.1 (0.9)   18.9 (3.3)      5.6 (0.8)
 Q UILL             5        5       11.8 (1.3)     22.0 (1.2)     6.0 (0.0)    9.2 (0.2)       12.8 (1.5)    10.6 (0.2)     6.4 (0.7)    11.0 (0.9)       15.3 (1.3)   13.5 (1.0)     12.1 (1.4)
 S UGAR             5        5        1.6 (0.1)      6.4 (0.4)     4.0 (0.0)    4.0 (0.0)        6.5 (0.7)    10.0 (0.0)     2.4 (0.2)     2.0 (0.3)        9.6 (0.6)   15.3 (3.6)     16.6 (9.2)
 B OOK              5        5     224.8 (71.6)     27.0 (1.9)     6.0 (0.0)    6.4 (0.2)     139.7 (21.8)    11.6 (0.4)     3.2 (0.4)    18.2 (1.4)       22.0 (1.6)   24.7 (6.5)     23.5 (1.2)
 M AP               5        5     339.9 (33.6)     33.0 (2.8)     6.0 (0.0)    6.4 (0.2)     204.8 (27.1)    10.6 (0.2)     2.8 (0.5)    25.6 (2.5)       25.4 (0.8)   21.8 (3.1)     25.2 (1.1)
 M ILK B UCKET      5        5        3.5 (0.3)      8.2 (0.6)     4.0 (0.0)    3.0 (0.0)       47.6 (3.7)    10.2 (0.2)     2.6 (0.4)     3.4 (0.4)       10.3 (0.7)   16.2 (1.7)     14.2 (1.8)
 B OOK Q UILL       5        5       19.0 (2.2)     15.4 (1.5)     4.0 (0.0)    4.0 (0.0)     383.4 (83.7)    10.0 (0.0)     1.0 (0.3)    11.4 (1.3)       38.2 (1.6)   14.1 (4.9)     23.8 (1.0)
 M ILK B.S UGAR     5        5       11.4 (2.1)     14.4 (1.7)     4.0 (0.0)    4.0 (0.0)       87.4 (8.9)    10.4 (0.2)     1.0 (0.4)    10.0 (1.3)       19.7 (1.2)    8.7 (4.9)     17.6 (1.2)
 C AKE              4        1      277.4 (0.0)     33.0 (0.0)     5.0 (0.0)    4.0 (0.0)      264.1 (0.0)    10.0 (0.0)     2.0 (0.0)    28.0 (0.0)       46.7 (0.0)   36.0 (0.0)     22.9 (0.0)
 Completed Runs         5
 Total Time (s.)        701.0 (111.2)
 Total Calls            199.8 (6.9)

                                                                                            (c) FRL
      Task         #G       #L         Time (s.)     Calls         States       Edges       Ep. First HRM                  # Examples                               Example Length
                                                                                               (×102 )            G             D             I                G            D                 I
 BATTER             5         5    11.1 (1.4)      23.4 (2.5)     6.0 (0.0)    9.2 (0.2)     468.4 (121.9)    10.4 (0.2)    7.6 (0.9)     11.4 (1.9)       11.9 (0.6)   10.1 (1.3)      9.9 (0.4)
 B UCKET            5         5     2.2 (0.1)       7.0 (0.3)     4.0 (0.0)    4.0 (0.0)      129.5 (69.4)    10.2 (0.2)    2.8 (0.2)      2.0 (0.3)        7.8 (0.5)    9.9 (1.7)      6.4 (2.1)
 C OMPASS           5         5    12.9 (1.9)      24.6 (2.2)     6.0 (0.0)    9.4 (0.2)     550.8 (156.4)    10.4 (0.2)    7.8 (1.0)     12.4 (1.2)       12.5 (1.6)    9.4 (1.0)      8.4 (0.5)
 L EATHER           5         5     2.8 (0.4)       7.8 (0.7)     4.0 (0.0)    4.0 (0.0)       89.0 (18.0)    10.0 (0.0)    3.2 (0.4)      2.6 (0.4)        7.3 (0.4)    9.3 (1.7)      3.7 (0.4)
 PAPER              5         5     2.1 (0.1)       7.0 (0.3)     4.0 (0.0)    4.0 (0.0)       82.7 (18.8)    10.0 (0.0)    3.0 (0.0)      2.0 (0.3)        6.9 (0.7)   10.2 (1.8)      4.7 (2.7)
 Q UILL             5         5    11.6 (1.1)      23.8 (1.5)     6.0 (0.0)    9.6 (0.2)      458.9 (61.0)    10.6 (0.2)    8.0 (0.9)     11.2 (1.2)       11.9 (0.6)   13.1 (2.7)      9.2 (0.8)
 S UGAR             5         5     2.6 (0.3)       8.4 (0.7)     4.0 (0.0)    4.0 (0.0)      103.5 (39.5)    10.0 (0.0)    3.6 (0.4)      2.8 (0.5)        8.2 (0.7)   10.1 (1.9)      5.0 (1.1)
 B OOK              5         0     0.0 (0.0)       0.0 (0.0)     0.0 (0.0)    0.0 (0.0)          0.0 (0.0)    0.0 (0.0)    0.0 (0.0)      0.0 (0.0)        0.0 (0.0)    0.0 (0.0)      0.0 (0.0)
 M AP               3         0     0.0 (0.0)       0.0 (0.0)     0.0 (0.0)    0.0 (0.0)          0.0 (0.0)    0.0 (0.0)    0.0 (0.0)      0.0 (0.0)        0.0 (0.0)    0.0 (0.0)      0.0 (0.0)
 M ILK B UCKET      5         2     4.7 (0.5)      11.0 (1.0)     4.0 (0.0)    3.0 (0.0)     885.6 (142.3)    10.0 (0.0)    2.0 (0.0)      7.0 (1.0)        8.2 (0.4)   10.2 (1.7)      8.8 (0.2)
 B OOK Q UILL       0         0     0.0 (0.0)       0.0 (0.0)     0.0 (0.0)    0.0 (0.0)          0.0 (0.0)    0.0 (0.0)    0.0 (0.0)      0.0 (0.0)        0.0 (0.0)    0.0 (0.0)      0.0 (0.0)
 M ILK B.S UGAR     0         0     0.0 (0.0)       0.0 (0.0)     0.0 (0.0)    0.0 (0.0)          0.0 (0.0)    0.0 (0.0)    0.0 (0.0)      0.0 (0.0)        0.0 (0.0)    0.0 (0.0)      0.0 (0.0)
 C AKE              0         0     0.0 (0.0)       0.0 (0.0)     0.0 (0.0)    0.0 (0.0)          0.0 (0.0)    0.0 (0.0)    0.0 (0.0)      0.0 (0.0)        0.0 (0.0)    0.0 (0.0)      0.0 (0.0)
 Completed Runs             5
 Total Time (s.)            47.1 (0.9)
 Total Calls                106.4 (2.9)


                                                                                              42
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                Table 6: Results of LHRM in WATERW ORLD for the default case.

                                                                                         (a) WOD
    Task           #G          #L     Time (s.)            Calls          States        Edges        Ep. First HRM                  # Examples                     Example Length
                                                                                                         (×102 )                G                 I                G                I
 RG                    5         5    0.9 (0.0)       4.0 (0.0)          3.0 (0.0)     2.0 (0.0)            0.9 (0.1)      10.0 (0.0)         2.0 (0.0)        11.2 (1.0)        5.8 (1.1)
 BC                    5         5    0.9 (0.1)       3.8 (0.2)          3.0 (0.0)     2.0 (0.0)            0.8 (0.1)      10.0 (0.0)         1.8 (0.2)        10.8 (0.8)       11.9 (3.4)
 MY                    5         5    0.9 (0.0)       3.6 (0.2)          3.0 (0.0)     2.0 (0.0)            0.7 (0.0)      10.0 (0.0)         1.6 (0.2)         8.7 (0.8)        6.6 (1.9)
 RG & BC               5         5    4.5 (0.3)      13.4 (0.4)          4.0 (0.0)     4.0 (0.0)            8.8 (0.3)      11.8 (0.6)         8.6 (0.7)        12.2 (0.9)       14.8 (1.2)
 BC & MY               5         5    5.8 (1.0)      15.6 (2.1)          4.0 (0.0)     4.0 (0.0)            8.1 (0.2)      12.8 (1.3)         9.8 (1.5)        13.2 (1.7)       17.1 (1.6)
 RG & MY               5         5    4.7 (0.5)      13.2 (1.0)          4.0 (0.0)     4.0 (0.0)            8.5 (0.2)      10.8 (0.2)         9.4 (0.9)        12.2 (0.7)       18.6 (1.2)
 RGB                   5         5    1.2 (0.1)       4.8 (0.5)          3.0 (0.0)     2.0 (0.0)            8.6 (0.2)      10.0 (0.0)         2.8 (0.5)         7.8 (0.2)        7.0 (1.4)
 CMY                   5         5    1.4 (0.2)       5.4 (0.7)          3.0 (0.0)     2.0 (0.0)            8.8 (0.5)      10.0 (0.0)         3.4 (0.7)         8.0 (0.3)       10.2 (1.3)
 RGB & CMY             5         5   15.1 (1.7)      21.6 (1.7)          4.0 (0.0)     4.0 (0.0)            2.3 (0.0)      11.0 (0.4)        17.6 (1.7)        17.3 (0.4)       22.6 (1.6)
 Completed Runs                5
 Total Time (s.)               35.4 (2.0)
 Total Calls                   85.4 (3.1)

                                                                                          (b) WD
    Task      #G       #L        Time (s.)      Calls         States        Edges       Ep. First HRM                  # Examples                              Example Length
                                                                                           (×102 )            G            D             I                G            D                I
 RG                5       5      1.9 (0.2)    7.8 (1.1)     4.0 (0.0)     4.0 (0.0)         3.0 (0.3)    10.0 (0.0)    3.0 (0.3)     2.8 (0.9)        7.0 (0.7)   10.3 (1.6)     4.2 (0.8)
 BC                5       5      1.8 (0.3)    7.2 (1.0)     4.0 (0.0)     4.0 (0.0)         2.7 (0.3)    10.2 (0.2)    2.4 (0.2)     2.6 (0.7)        8.4 (0.5)    6.9 (1.5)     6.3 (1.7)
 MY                5       5      1.4 (0.1)    5.8 (0.4)     4.0 (0.0)     4.0 (0.0)         2.9 (0.3)    10.0 (0.0)    2.4 (0.2)     1.4 (0.2)        6.9 (0.4)    5.8 (1.5)     4.6 (1.6)
 RG & BC           5       5     11.7 (2.5)   24.0 (3.8)     4.8 (0.2)     4.8 (0.2)        12.0 (0.4)    13.0 (0.7)    6.2 (1.6)    11.8 (1.9)       11.7 (0.8)    6.9 (1.5)    11.8 (0.8)
 BC & MY           5       5      9.5 (1.5)   20.8 (2.4)     4.8 (0.2)     4.8 (0.2)        11.5 (0.4)    11.2 (0.6)    5.2 (0.7)    11.4 (1.6)       10.6 (0.9)    8.8 (1.4)    13.2 (0.9)
 RG & MY           5       5      5.4 (0.5)   14.0 (1.3)     4.2 (0.2)     4.2 (0.2)        11.8 (0.6)    10.6 (0.2)    3.2 (0.7)     7.2 (1.1)        9.8 (0.3)    6.2 (1.9)    11.6 (0.7)
 RGB               5       5      2.5 (0.3)    8.2 (0.7)     4.0 (0.0)     3.0 (0.0)        11.9 (0.6)    10.2 (0.2)    3.0 (0.3)     3.0 (0.5)        7.9 (0.4)   14.0 (1.8)    10.6 (2.0)
 CMY               5       5      3.6 (0.4)   11.4 (1.2)     4.0 (0.0)     3.0 (0.0)        10.8 (0.3)    10.0 (0.0)    4.2 (0.7)     5.2 (0.6)        7.9 (0.2)    8.8 (1.6)    10.5 (1.1)
 RGB & CMY         5       5     29.0 (4.1)   31.4 (2.8)     4.4 (0.2)     4.4 (0.2)         4.9 (0.3)    11.2 (0.4)    5.4 (1.6)    21.8 (1.3)       16.6 (0.8)    7.4 (0.9)    17.2 (0.6)
 Completed Runs        5
 Total Time (s.)       67.0 (6.2)
 Total Calls           130.6 (6.0)


             Table 7: Results of LHRM in WATERW ORLD with a restricted set of callable RMs.

                                                                                         (a) WOD
    Task           #G          #L     Time (s.)         Calls             States        Edges        Ep. First HRM                  # Examples                     Example Length
                                                                                                         (×102 )               G                  I                G                I
 RG                    5         5    0.9 (0.0)      4.0 (0.0)           3.0 (0.0)     2.0 (0.0)           0.9 (0.1)      10.0 (0.0)          2.0 (0.0)       11.2 (1.0)         5.8 (1.1)
 BC                    5         5    0.9 (0.1)      3.8 (0.2)           3.0 (0.0)     2.0 (0.0)           0.8 (0.1)      10.0 (0.0)          1.8 (0.2)       10.8 (0.8)        11.9 (3.4)
 MY                    5         5    0.9 (0.0)      3.6 (0.2)           3.0 (0.0)     2.0 (0.0)           0.7 (0.0)      10.0 (0.0)          1.6 (0.2)        8.7 (0.8)         6.6 (1.9)
 RG & BC               5         5    5.3 (0.4)     15.2 (0.9)           4.0 (0.0)     4.0 (0.0)           8.6 (0.3)      12.4 (0.2)          9.8 (0.8)       14.7 (1.3)        16.0 (0.8)
 BC & MY               5         5    3.9 (0.1)     12.4 (0.2)           4.0 (0.0)     4.0 (0.0)           8.3 (0.4)      11.8 (0.7)          7.6 (0.7)       11.2 (0.8)        13.2 (1.0)
 RG & MY               5         5    4.6 (0.3)     13.8 (0.9)           4.0 (0.0)     4.0 (0.0)           8.5 (0.2)      10.2 (0.2)         10.6 (0.9)       10.7 (0.5)        15.8 (1.6)
 RGB                   5         5    1.2 (0.1)      4.8 (0.7)           3.0 (0.0)     2.0 (0.0)           8.7 (0.2)      10.2 (0.2)          2.6 (0.7)        8.3 (0.5)        16.2 (3.8)
 CMY                   5         5    1.6 (0.2)      6.2 (0.7)           3.0 (0.0)     2.0 (0.0)           8.6 (0.5)      10.0 (0.0)          4.2 (0.7)        8.0 (0.3)        10.8 (1.2)
 RGB & CMY             5         5    5.7 (0.8)     15.0 (1.6)           4.0 (0.0)     4.0 (0.0)           2.6 (0.1)      10.4 (0.4)         11.6 (1.6)       17.0 (1.1)        15.9 (1.3)
 Completed Runs                5
 Total Time (s.)               24.9 (0.9)
 Total Calls                   78.8 (2.7)

                                                                                          (b) WD
    Task      #G       #L        Time (s.)      Calls         States        Edges      Ep. First HRM                   # Examples                              Example Length
                                                                                           (×102 )           G             D             I                G            D                I
 RG                5       5     1.9 (0.3)     7.8 (1.1)     4.0 (0.0)     4.0 (0.0)         3.0 (0.3)   10.0 (0.0)     3.0 (0.3)     2.8 (0.9)        7.0 (0.7)   10.3 (1.6)     4.2 (0.8)
 BC                5       5     1.8 (0.3)     7.2 (1.0)     4.0 (0.0)     4.0 (0.0)         2.7 (0.3)   10.2 (0.2)     2.4 (0.2)     2.6 (0.7)        8.4 (0.5)    6.9 (1.5)     6.3 (1.7)
 MY                5       5     1.4 (0.1)     5.8 (0.4)     4.0 (0.0)     4.0 (0.0)         2.9 (0.3)   10.0 (0.0)     2.4 (0.2)     1.4 (0.2)        6.9 (0.4)    5.8 (1.5)     4.6 (1.6)
 RG & BC           5       5     6.9 (0.7)    17.6 (1.5)     4.6 (0.2)     4.6 (0.2)        12.0 (0.4)   10.8 (0.2)     4.6 (0.5)     9.2 (1.0)       10.4 (0.5)    9.4 (1.8)    12.6 (0.7)
 BC & MY           5       5     9.3 (1.8)    21.4 (2.9)     4.8 (0.2)     4.8 (0.2)        11.7 (0.5)   12.2 (1.0)     5.8 (1.1)    10.4 (1.8)       11.4 (0.7)    6.9 (1.3)    12.1 (0.7)
 RG & MY           5       5     7.8 (1.1)    18.8 (1.9)     4.8 (0.2)     4.8 (0.2)        11.8 (0.5)   11.0 (0.3)     4.8 (0.4)    10.0 (2.0)        9.8 (0.2)    8.6 (0.8)    13.0 (0.8)
 RGB               5       5     2.1 (0.1)     7.6 (0.2)     4.0 (0.0)     3.0 (0.0)        11.9 (0.5)   10.0 (0.0)     2.6 (0.2)     3.0 (0.0)        7.6 (0.5)   11.8 (1.7)    10.7 (1.7)
 CMY               5       5     2.3 (0.2)     8.2 (0.8)     4.0 (0.0)     3.0 (0.0)        10.7 (0.2)   10.0 (0.0)     2.2 (0.4)     4.0 (0.5)        7.8 (0.2)    9.9 (1.6)     8.9 (0.5)
 RGB & CMY         5       5     9.6 (1.5)    20.6 (2.6)     5.0 (0.0)     5.0 (0.0)         5.0 (0.6)   10.2 (0.2)     6.4 (0.9)    11.0 (1.8)       15.0 (0.5)   12.3 (0.8)    14.2 (1.2)
 Completed Runs        5
 Total Time (s.)       42.9 (3.7)
 Total Calls           115.0 (7.5)


                                                                                             43
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


             Table 8: Results of LHRM in WATERW ORLD without exploration using options.

                                                                                       (a) WOD
    Task           #G          #L     Time (s.)         Calls            States        Edges        Ep. First HRM                  # Examples                      Example Length
                                                                                                        (×102 )               G                  I                 G                I
 RG                    5         5    0.9 (0.0)       4.0 (0.0)         3.0 (0.0)     2.0 (0.0)            0.9 (0.1)      10.0 (0.0)         2.0 (0.0)        11.2 (1.0)         5.8 (1.1)
 BC                    5         5    0.9 (0.1)       3.8 (0.2)         3.0 (0.0)     2.0 (0.0)            0.8 (0.1)      10.0 (0.0)         1.8 (0.2)        10.8 (0.8)        11.9 (3.4)
 MY                    5         5    0.9 (0.0)       3.6 (0.2)         3.0 (0.0)     2.0 (0.0)            0.7 (0.0)      10.0 (0.0)         1.6 (0.2)         8.7 (0.8)         6.6 (1.9)
 RG & BC               5         5    4.2 (0.4)      12.2 (0.9)         4.0 (0.0)     4.0 (0.0)            9.5 (0.3)      10.6 (0.2)         8.6 (1.1)        13.8 (0.2)        15.3 (1.6)
 BC & MY               5         5    4.3 (0.3)      11.8 (0.7)         4.0 (0.0)     4.0 (0.0)            9.8 (0.1)      11.6 (0.2)         7.2 (0.6)        15.3 (0.9)        16.7 (1.7)
 RG & MY               5         5    4.6 (0.3)      12.6 (0.7)         4.0 (0.0)     4.0 (0.0)            9.5 (0.1)      11.2 (0.4)         8.4 (0.7)        14.2 (0.9)        14.8 (0.8)
 RGB                   5         5    1.2 (0.2)       4.6 (0.7)         3.0 (0.0)     2.0 (0.0)            9.0 (0.1)      10.0 (0.0)         2.6 (0.7)         9.4 (0.4)         8.7 (1.7)
 CMY                   5         5    1.4 (0.1)       5.0 (0.5)         3.0 (0.0)     2.0 (0.0)            8.8 (0.2)      10.0 (0.0)         3.0 (0.5)         8.8 (0.2)        10.6 (1.5)
 RGB & CMY             5         5   16.1 (1.1)      19.8 (1.1)         4.0 (0.0)     4.0 (0.0)            4.1 (0.1)      11.2 (0.6)        15.6 (1.3)        26.0 (1.2)        21.6 (0.9)
 Completed Runs                5
 Total Time (s.)               34.4 (1.4)
 Total Calls                   77.4 (2.0)

                                                                                        (b) WD
    Task      #G       #L        Time (s.)      Calls        States        Edges      Ep. First HRM                   # Examples                              Example Length
                                                                                          (×102 )            G            D             I                G             D                I
 RG                5       5      1.9 (0.3)    7.8 (1.1)    4.0 (0.0)     4.0 (0.0)         3.0 (0.3)    10.0 (0.0)    3.0 (0.3)     2.8 (0.9)        7.0 (0.7)    10.3 (1.6)     4.2 (0.8)
 BC                5       5      1.8 (0.2)    7.2 (1.0)    4.0 (0.0)     4.0 (0.0)         2.7 (0.3)    10.2 (0.2)    2.4 (0.2)     2.6 (0.7)        8.4 (0.5)     6.9 (1.5)     6.3 (1.7)
 MY                5       5      1.4 (0.1)    5.8 (0.4)    4.0 (0.0)     4.0 (0.0)         2.9 (0.3)    10.0 (0.0)    2.4 (0.2)     1.4 (0.2)        6.9 (0.4)     5.8 (1.5)     4.6 (1.6)
 RG & BC           5       5      8.1 (1.4)   18.2 (2.2)    4.6 (0.2)     4.6 (0.2)        97.4 (4.2)    10.8 (0.4)    5.2 (0.6)     9.2 (1.4)       10.5 (0.5)    10.3 (1.7)    13.7 (1.5)
 BC & MY           5       5      6.2 (0.5)   15.6 (0.7)    4.6 (0.2)     4.6 (0.2)        91.5 (5.8)    10.6 (0.2)    4.6 (0.6)     7.4 (0.7)        9.7 (0.2)     7.0 (1.2)    11.3 (1.0)
 RG & MY           5       5      8.6 (1.8)   19.2 (2.7)    4.4 (0.2)     4.4 (0.2)        90.3 (5.3)    11.2 (0.8)    5.6 (0.9)     9.4 (1.3)       10.4 (0.7)     7.7 (0.7)    13.3 (0.9)
 RGB               5       5      2.3 (0.1)    7.6 (0.2)    4.0 (0.0)     3.0 (0.0)        65.3 (1.6)    10.2 (0.2)    2.6 (0.4)     2.8 (0.4)        7.6 (0.3)    11.1 (3.0)     8.8 (1.7)
 CMY               5       5      4.4 (0.6)   13.2 (1.5)    3.8 (0.2)     3.0 (0.0)        59.2 (2.9)    10.2 (0.2)    3.8 (0.6)     7.2 (1.0)        6.9 (0.5)     8.2 (1.0)     7.6 (0.8)
 RGB & CMY         5       5     32.1 (5.0)   31.4 (3.3)    4.4 (0.2)     4.4 (0.2)       125.7 (9.9)    11.4 (0.5)    5.8 (1.2)    21.2 (2.2)       17.1 (0.6)     8.4 (1.6)    17.8 (1.0)
 Completed Runs        5
 Total Time (s.)       66.7 (6.6)
 Total Calls           126.0 (6.3)



                                                                                                           Updated task's HRM
                           Tasks
                                                                                                                 Callable RMs
                   1           Batter
                                                     task               HRMs                            Task HRM                                         ILASP
                   4           Cake

                       Instances                        Task - Instance                                   Agent                                          Traces


                                                                                                                                                             Yes

                                                                                                           Trace
                                                                                                                                     Counterexample?


                                                                Figure 13: Overview of LHRM.


H        I LLUSTRATION OF LHRM
Figure 13 illustrates the main components of our algorithm for learning HRMs, LHRM, described
in Section 5. Given a set of tasks with known levels and a set of instances, we select a (task,
instance) pair at the beginning of an episode. The HRM corresponding to the selected task is taken
from the bank of HRMs. At each step, the agent performs an action at+1 in the (task, instance)
environment, and observes a tuple st and a label Lt . The label is used to (i) know the next hierarchy
state ut+1 in the HRM and the reward rt+1 , and (ii) update the label trace ⟨L0 , . . . , Lt ⟩. If the
trace is a counterexample (i.e., the tuple st and the new hierarchy state ut+1 are inconsistent with
each other),8 we add it to our set of counterexample traces for the current task and learn a new HRM
using the ILASP system. The learned HRM is then updated in the bank of HRMs so that future tasks
can reuse it. Note that the description omits some aspects for simplicity, such as how are the (task,
instance) pairs selected, the exploration using options from lower level HRMs, or the accumulation
of traces before learning the first HRM for a given task.
    8
        For example if (sTt , sG
                               t ) = (⊤, ⊤) and the state in ut+1 is not the accepting state of the root RM.



                                                                                            44
     Table 9: Results of learning non-flat and flat HRMs using different methods. The columns are the following: the number of completed runs without timing out, the
     amount of time needed to learn the HRMs or RMs, and the number of states and edges of the RM.

      Task                     LHRM (Non-Flat)                             LHRM (Flat)                                        DeepSynth                                        LRM                                             JIRP
                      C    Time (s.)      States      Edges      C   Time (s.)    States      Edges      C    Time (s.)          States          Edges       C     Time (s.)        States        Edges       C   Time (s.)     States      Edges
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


      M ILK B UCKET   5      1.5 (0.2)   3.0 (0.0)   2.0 (0.0)   5   3.2 (0.6)   4.0 (0.0)   3.6 (0.2)   5   325.6 (29.7)       13.4 (0.4)      93.2 (1.7)   5     347.5 (64.5)    4.0 (0.0)     14.0 (1.0)   5   17.1 (5.5)   4.0 (0.0)    3.0 (0.0)


45
      B OOK           5   191.2 (36.4)   5.0 (0.0)   5.8 (0.2)   0           -           -           -   5   288.9 (31.7)       16.6 (3.1)    119.0 (19.4)   5   2261.0 (552.2)    8.0 (0.0)     31.2 (2.0)   0            -           -            -
      B OOK Q UILL    5     17.9 (1.4)   4.0 (0.0)   4.0 (0.0)   0           -           -           -   5   308.6 (52.6)       12.8 (0.5)      92.8 (2.3)   0                -            -              -   0            -           -            -
      C AKE           5    74.5 (25.7)   4.0 (0.0)   3.2 (0.2)   0           -           -           -   4   290.6 (36.4)       17.2 (2.5)    110.2 (11.6)   0                -            -              -   0            -           -            -
      RG              5      0.9 (0.0)   3.0 (0.0)   2.0 (0.0)   5   0.9 (0.0)   3.0 (0.0)   2.0 (0.0)   0                -               -              -   0                 -             -            -   5   32.3 (7.9)   3.8 (0.2)   82.4 (9.1)
      RG & BC         5      4.5 (0.3)   4.0 (0.0)   4.0 (0.0)   0           -           -           -   0                -               -              -   0                 -             -            -   0            -           -            -
      RGB & CMY       5     15.1 (1.7)   4.0 (0.0)   4.0 (0.0)   0           -           -           -   0                -               -              -   0                 -             -            -   0            -           -            -
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                                                                                  u02
                u00                                     u01                                                                                   u03
                                                                                         M⊤ |     M⊤ |         ∧¬

              M⊤ |                                   M⊤ |                          u12                          u22                    M⊤ |

                                                                                         M⊤ |           M⊤ |
                u10                                     u11                                                                                   u13
                                                                                                  u32
              M⊤ |                                   M⊤ |                                                                              M⊤ |
                                                                                                M⊤ |

                uA
                 0                                      uA
                                                         1                                        uA
                                                                                                   2
                                                                                                                                              uA
                                                                                                                                               3


       (a) M0 – B UCKET                          (b) M1 – S UGAR                         (c) M2 – BATTER                            (d) M3 – PAPER

                 u04                                                                              u06
                                                        u05                                                                                   u07
       M⊤ |      M⊤ |          ∧¬                                                        M⊤ |     M⊤ |     ∧¬

 u14                            u24                  M⊤ |                          u16                          u26                    M0 | ⊤

       M⊤ |            M⊤ |                                                              M⊤ |           M⊤ |
                                                        u15                                                                                   u17
                 u34                                                                              u36
                                                     M⊤ |                                                                              M⊤ |
               M⊤ |                                                                             M⊤ |

                uA
                 4
                                                        uA
                                                         5                                        uA
                                                                                                   6
                                                                                                                                              uA
                                                                                                                                               7


   (e) M4 – C OMPASS                             (f) M5 – L EATHER                       (g) M6 – Q UILL                 (h) M7 – M ILK B UCKET

                 u08                                                    u09                                                            u010

       M3 | ⊤          M4 | ¬                                  M3 | ⊤         M5 | ¬                                         M1 | ⊤           M7 | ¬

 u18                                u28                  u19                              u29                         u110                             u210

       M4 | ⊤          M3 | ⊤                                  M5 | ⊤         M3 | ⊤                                         M7 | ⊤           M1 | ⊤

                 u38     M⊤ |             uA
                                           8                            u39        M⊤ |          uA
                                                                                                  9                                    uA
                                                                                                                                        10


              (i) M8 – M AP                                       (j) M9 – B OOK                                    (k) M10 – M ILK B.S UGAR


                        u011

              M6 | ⊤ M9 | ¬ ∧ ¬

       u111                               u211

              M9 | ⊤           M6 | ⊤

                        uA
                         11                                      u012     M2 | ⊤                u112     M10 | ⊤             u212     M⊤ |               uA
                                                                                                                                                          12


        (l) M11 – B OOK Q UILL                                                                     (m) M12 – C AKE

                       Figure 14: Root reward machines for each of the C RAFT W ORLD tasks.


                                                                              46
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                 u00                                   u01                                         u02                   u03

            M⊤ | r                                M⊤ | b                                       M⊤ | m          M0 | ¬b         M1 | ¬r

                 u10                                   u11                                         u12   u13                             u23

            M⊤ | g                                M⊤ | c                                       M⊤ | y          M1 | ⊤          M0 | ⊤

                 uA
                  0                                    uA
                                                        1                                          uA
                                                                                                    2                    uA
                                                                                                                          3


         (a) M0 – RG                           (b) M1 – BC                              (c) M2 – MY            (d) M3 – RG & BC

                                                                                                   u06                   u07
                 u04                                   u05
                                                                                               M0 | ⊤               M⊤ | c
       M1 | ¬m         M2 | ¬b               M0 | ¬m         M2 | ¬r

 u14                             u24   u15                             u25                         u16                   u17

       M2 | ⊤          M1 | ⊤                M2 | ⊤          M0 | ⊤                            M⊤ | g               M2 | ⊤

                uA
                 4                                    uA
                                                       5                                           uA
                                                                                                    6                    uA
                                                                                                                          7


       (e) M4 – BC & MY                      (f) M5 – RG & MY                           (g) M6 – RGB            (h) M7 – CMY

                                                                             u08

                                                                   M6 | ¬c         M7 | ¬r

                                                             u18                             u28

                                                                   M7 | ⊤          M6 | ⊤

                                                                             uA
                                                                              8


                                                              (i) M8 – RGB & CMY

                       Figure 15: Root reward machines for each of the WATERW ORLD tasks.


                                                                             47
