Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


FASTER R EINFORCEMENT L EARNING WITH VALUE
TARGET L OWER B OUNDING
 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                             A BSTRACT

         We show that an arbitrary lower bound of the maximum achievable value can be
         used to improve the Bellman value target during value learning. In the tabular
         case, value learning using the lower bounded Bellman operator converges to the
         same optimal value as using the original Bellman operator, at a potentially faster
         speed. In practice, discounted episodic return in episodic tasks and n-step boot-
         strapped return in continuing tasks can serve as lower bounds to improve the value
         target. We experiment on Atari games, FetchEnv tasks and a challenging physi-
         cally simulated car push and reach task. We see large gains in sample efficiency
         as well as converged performance over common baselines such as TD3, SAC and
         Hindsight Experience Replay (HER) in most tasks, and observe a reliable and
         competitive performance against the stronger n-step methods such as td-lambda,
         Retrace and optimality tightening. Prior works have already successfully applied
         a special case of lower bounding using episodic return, to a limited number of
         episodic tasks. To the best of our knowledge, we are the first to propose the gen-
         eral method of value target lower bounding with possibly bootstrapped return, to
         demonstrate its optimality in theory, and effectiveness in a wide range of tasks
         over many strong baselines.



1   I NTRODUCTION

The value function is a key concept in dynamic programming approaches to Reinforcement Learn-
ing (RL) (Bellman, 1957). Given a starting state, the value function estimates the sum of all fu-
ture rewards (usually time-discounted). In temporal difference (TD) learning, the value function is
adjusted toward its Bellman target which simply adds the reward of the current step with the (dis-
counted) value of the next state (Sutton & Barto, 2018). This forms the basis of many state of the
art RL algorithms such as DQN (Mnih et al., 2013), DDPG (Lillicrap et al., 2016), TD3 (Fujimoto
et al., 2018), and SAC (Haarnoja et al., 2018).
The value of the next state is typically estimated or derived from the value function itself, which is
being actively learned during training, a process called “bootstrapping”. The bootstrapped values
can be random and far from the optimal value, especially at the initial stage of training, or with sparse
reward tasks where rewards can only be achieved through a long sequence of actions. Consequently,
the Bellman value targets as well as the learned values are usually far away from the optimal value
(the value of the optimal policy).
Naturally, this leads to the following idea: If we can make the value target closer to the optimal
value, we may speedup TD learning. For example, we know that the optimal value is just the
expected discounted return of the optimal policy, which always upper bounds the expected return of
any policy. For episodic RL tasks, we could use the observed discounted return up to episode end
from the training trajectories to lower bound the value target. When the empirical return is higher
than the Bellman target, lower bounding brings the new value target closer to the optimal value.
For continuing or non-episodic tasks, it is less clear how a lower bound may be estimated. When a
continuing task can return negative rewards, a lower bound may not even exist. One could use the
n-step bootstrapped return as a lower bound, but bootstrapped return can overestimate and be greater
than the optimal value. It is unclear whether the resulting algorithm will still converge.


                                                   1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Algorithm 1 Value iteration with value target lower bounding
    Input: Finite MDP p(s′ , r|s, a), convergence threshold θ, a lower bound f (s) of the maximum
    achievable value Ḡv (s)
    Output: State value v(s)
    v(s) ← 0
    repeat
      ∆←0
      vp (s) ← v(s)
      for each state s do
         v̂(s) ← maxa s′ ,r p(s′ , r|s, a)[r + γvp (s′ )]
                         P

         v̂f (s) ← max(f (s), v̂(s))
         v(s) ← v̂ f (s)
         ∆ ← max(∆, |v(s) − vp (s)|)
      end for
    until ∆ < θ


This work presents a general framework proving that value target lower bounding converges to
the optimal value for both the episodic and non-episodic cases, under certain conditions for the
lower bound function. We demonstrate faster training with an illustrative example and extensive
experiments on a variety of environments over strong baselines.

2     T HEORETICAL R ESULTS FOR THE TABULAR C ASE

Here we show for the tabular case, arbitrary functions below a certain bootstrap bound can be used
to lower bound the value target to still converge to the same optimal value.

2.1    BACKGROUND

In finite MDPs with a limited number of states and actions, a table can keep track of the value of
each state. Using dynamic programming algorithms such as value iteration, values are guaranteed
to converge to the optimum through Bellman updates (Chapter 4.4 (Sutton & Barto, 2018)).
The core of the value iteration algorithm (Algorithm 1) is the Bellman update of the value function,
B(v), where v(s′ ) is the bootstrapped value:
                                             X
                            B(v)(s) := max       p(s′ , r|s, a)[r + γv(s′ )]                     (1)
                                          a
                                              s′ ,r


Here a is an available action in state s. s′ is the resulting state, and r the resulting reward, of
executing a in s, with p(s′ , r|s, a) being the transition probability.
It is well known that the Bellman operator, B, is a contraction mapping over value functions
(Denardo, 1967). That is, for any two value functions v1 and v2 , ||B(v1 )−B(v2 )||∞ ≤ γ||v1 −v2 ||∞
for the discount factor γ ∈ [0, 1) and ||x||∞ := maxi |xi | (the L∞ norm). This guarantees that any
value function under the algorithm converges to the optimal value B ∞ (v) = v ∗ .1

2.2    C ONVERGENCE OF VALUE TARGET LOWER BOUNDING

Definition 2.1. The expected n-step bootstrapped return for a given policy π and value function v(s)
is defined as the expected bootstrapped return of taking n steps according to policy π:

                          Gπ,v         π
                           n (s0 ) := E {r1 + ... + γ
                                                      n−1
                                                          rn + γ n v(sn )}                         (2)
Here, the step rewards ri and the resulting n-th step state sn are random variables, with the expecta-
tion Eπ taken over all possible n-step trajectories under the policy π and the given MDP.
  1
    For the gist of the proof, see for example page 8 of https://people.eecs.berkeley.edu/
˜pabbeel/cs287-fa09/lecture-notes/lecture5-2pp.pdf


                                                      2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Definition 2.2. Given the current learned value function v(s), policy class Π, the maximum achiev-
able value of a state s is defined as:


                                   Ḡv (s) :=      max         Gπ,v
                                                                n (s)                                (3)
                                                π∈Π,n∈[1,+∞)



This is a tight definition of maximum because for each state s, a different policy π(s) and a different
number of steps n(s) can be used to achieve the maximum Ḡv (s). It is the maximum achievable
bootstrapped return of any single policy or any mixture of policies for any number of steps.
The theorem below says any function not exceeding the maximum achievable value can be used to
lower bound the value target, and still achieve the optimal value in convergence.
Theorem 2.3. Under the same assumptions for Bellman value contraction, for any function f that
lower bounds the maximum achievable value, i.e. ∀s, f (s) ≤ Ḡv (s), if we define the lower bounded
Bellman operator as Bf (v) := max(B(v), f ), then Bf∞ (v) = B ∞ (v).

Note, the value v(s) and the bootstrapped value can be inaccurate, and even above the optimal value.
As a consequence, when n is finite, the maximum achievable value Ḡv (s) (and f ) can be above the
maximum expected return (i.e. the optimal value). On the other hand, when n is sufficiently large,
the effect of the bootstrap value v(sn ) diminishes (see Equation 2), and the maximum achievable
value becomes the maximum expected return (i.e. the optimal value). Therefore, ∀s, Ḡv (s) is no
smaller than the optimal value B ∞ (v)(s).
As a special case of the theorem, as long as f is below the optimal value, value target lower bounding
converges correctly:
Corollary 2.4. If function f lower bounds the optimal value, i.e. ∀s, f (s) ≤ B ∞ (v)(s), then
Bf∞ (v) = B ∞ (v).

A few things to note about the proof of Theorem 2.3 (included in Appendix A.1).
First, this only proves convergence, not contraction under the original ||v1 − v2 ||∞ metric. In the
case of the Bellman operator, contraction shows that ∀v1 , v2 value functions, ||B(v1 ) − B(v2 )||∞ ≤
γ||v1 − v2 ||∞ . Here, for value target lower bounding, what’s proved is convergence to v ∗ at a rate
of γ, not contraction. There can be counter examples where the distance between v1 and v2 under
one application of Bf can increase in the original L∞ metric space, even though v1 and v2 are both
getting closer to v ∗ at a rate of γ. One difficulty caused by convergence instead of contraction is that
the stopping criterion in Algorithm 1 (∆ < θ) no longer works, due to the inaccessible v ∗ during
learning. In practice, this may not be a serious concern, as people often train algorithms for a fixed
number of iterations or time steps.
Second, based on the proof, the new algorithm is at least as fast as the original. When the lower
bound actually improves the value target, i.e. f (s) > B(v1 )(s), there is a chance for the convergence
to be faster. Convergence is strictly faster when the lower bound f has an impact on the L∞ distance
between the current value and the optimal value, i.e. it increases the value target for the states where
the differences between the current value and the optimal value are the largest.
Third, the lower bound function doesn’t have to be static during training. As long as there is a single
f during each training update, convergence is preserved.
The following sections detail how to compute lower bounds of the maximum achievable value (Sec-
tion 3), how to integrate the lower bounds into state of the art RL algorithms (Section 4), and provide
an illustration of how this method may benefit value learning in practice (Section 4.3).


3   E XAMPLE L OWER B OUND F UNCTIONS

We show a few cases where lower bound functions can be readily obtained from the training expe-
rience. Future work may investigate alternatives.


                                                    3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


3.1      E PISODIC TASKS

In episodic tasks, discounted return is accumulated up to the last step of an episode. During training,
we can wait until an episode ends, and compute discounted returns for all time steps. To make it
more efficient, we compute and store the discounted return for each time step into the replay buffer,
and read it out when the experience is used in training, which adds very little computation to the
baseline one-step TD learning.
                                                      X
                                        f (s0 ) =              γ i r(si , ai )                          (4)
                                                    i=0,..,∞

We call this variant “lb-DR”, short for lower bounding with discounted return.

3.1.1      E PISODIC WITH HINDSIGHT RELABELED GOALS
In goal conditioned tasks, one helpful technique is hindsight goal relabeling (Andrychowicz et al.,
2017). It takes a future state that is d time steps away from the current state as the hindsight /
relabeled goal for the current state. When the goal is reached, a reward of 0 is given, otherwise a -1
reward is given for each time step.
In this case, we know it took d steps to reach the hindsight goal, so the discounted future return is:
                                                X
                                   f (s0 ) =            −1γ i
                                             i=0,..,d−1                                             (5)
                                                        d
                                           = − 1(1 − γ )/(1 − γ)

This calculation can be done on the fly as hindsight relabeling happens, requiring no extra space and
very little computation.
We call this variant “lb-GD”, short for lower bounding with goal distance based return.
Additionally, we can also apply lb-DR and lb-GD together, with discounted episodic return (lb-
DR) on the original experience and goal distance based return (lb-GD) on the hindsight experience,
giving the “lb-DR+GD” variant, which was used in Fujita et al. (2020).

3.2      I N GENERAL ( INCLUDING NON - EPISODIC TASKS )

If the task is continuing, without an episode end2 , discounted return needs to be accumulated all the
way to infinity. When rewards are always non-negative, one can still use the accumulated discounted
reward of the future n-steps to lower bound the value. But accumulated n-step discounted reward
is no longer a lower bound when rewards can be negative, in which case, the more general lower
bounding with bootstrapped return can be used: given a trajectory of training experience τ :=<
s0 , ..., sn >:

                               Gvn (τ ) := r1 + γr2 + ... + γ n−1 rn + γ n v(sn )                       (6)

In this case, two variations are possible: Given a trajectory of length n,

         1. compute v(si ) for all i ∈ [1, n] and take the maximum of all Gvi (τ ) to obtain a tighter lower
            bound. We call this variant “lb-b-nstep”:
                                                    f (s0 ) = max Gvi (τ )                              (7)
                                                                i∈[1,n]

         2. only evaluate v on the last (i.e. the nth) step and use the nth-step bootstrapped return as the
            lower bound, which involves less compute but results in a looser bound. (When n is large
            enough, this becomes the lb-DR variant.) We call this variant “lb-b-nstep-only”.
                                                       f (s0 ) = Gvn (τ )                               (8)
   2
       Chapter 3.3 of Sutton & Barto (2018) has more details on episodic vs continuing tasks.


                                                          4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


The general bootstrapped returns allow lower bounding to be applied to non-episodic tasks, with a
bit extra computation in the case of lb-b-nstep-only, to evaluate value on the nth step. The cost can
be high for a large n for the lb-b-nstep variant, but is still comparable to typical n-step return based
methods like td-lambda.

4     I NTEGRATION INTO RL ALGORITHMS

4.1   BACKGROUND

The value target lower bounds can be readily plugged into TD learning based algorithms that regress
value to a target, e.g. DQN, DDPG or SAC.
In these algorithms, the action value q(s, a) is learned through a squared loss with the target value
y. In one step TD return, for a batch B of experience {s, a → r, s′ }, the loss is:
                                                  X
                                     Lq :=                   |q(s, a) − y|2                         (9)
                                             (s,a,r,s′ )∈B


In one step TD return, y is the one step TD return q̂(s, a, r, s′ ):

                                q̂(s, a, r, s′ ) := r(s, a) + γq ′ (s′ , µ′ (s′ ))                 (10)

Here, q ′ and µ′ are the bootstrap value and policy functions, typically following the value and policy
functions in a delayed schedule during training. (They are also called “target value” and “target
policy”, and are very different from the “value target” y in this paper.)

4.2   VALUE TARGET LOWER BOUNDING

With lower bounding, we replace the value target y with the lower bounded target:

                      y ← max(f, q̂(s, a, r, s′ )) = max(f, r + γq ′ (s′ , µ′ (s′ )))              (11)

This way of lower bounding the value target is the same as was done by Fujita et al. (2020), but is
subtly and importantly different from lower bounding the q value directly (Oh et al., 2018; Tang,
2020): q(s, a) ← max(f, q(s, a)), which stays overestimated if q(s, a) initially overestimates.
Fujita et al. (2020) only used episodic return to lower bound the value target, while we introduce the
general framework of lower bounding with possibly bootstrapped return.

4.3   A N ILLUSTRATIVE EXAMPLE

Figure 1 includes a fairly general example showing how value target lower bounding would improve
value learning. Suppose we enhance an off policy algorithm such as DDPG with value target lower
bounding (lb-DR), when there is no training experience hitting the target state, no meaningful train-
ing happens for the baseline or lb-DR. However, when there is one trajectory hitting the target state,
all states along the trajectory will soon be propagated with meaningful return, and nearby states
will also enjoy faster learning. As the state space becomes larger and the time horizon longer, a
successful trajectory will speed up learning quite a bit.
At the core of the above illustration is this simpler example: Consider a simple chain of n states s1
to sn , with si going to si+1 . It emits reward 1 and terminates when the agent is at the end of the
chain, state sn , and emits reward 0 elsewhere. Suppose we have already collected an experience
of traversing the chain once, and start training with zero initial value. The basic value iteration
algorithm would back up the reward just one step along the chain for each iteration of training,
converging in n iterations. However, value target lower bounding trains much faster. Given the
collected experience, we precompute the empirical return of each state G(si ) = γ n−i , which is also
the optimal value. Thus, one training iteration already populates all states with the optimal value.


                                                        5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


        S                  T   S                  T       S                  T   S                  T


             Baseline: 0            Baseline: 1                Baseline: 2            Baseline: 3

        S                  T   S                  T       S                  T   S                  T


            Lowerbound 0           Lowerbound 1               Lowerbound 2           Lowerbound 3

Figure 1: Illustration of value target lower bounding speeding up value learning as training pro-
gresses from stages 0 to 3. The task is to navigate in the state space from start state S to end state T,
with sparse reward 1 at T and 0 elsewhere. The curve from S to T denotes a training experience that
reaches the target. The shaded areas denote states with high value.


5     E XPERIMENTS

The goal is to demonstrate the sample efficiency of lower bounding the value target over baseline
such as DDPG, TD3, SAC and HER. Because the lower bounded value target can now look many
steps into the future, we expect it to be better suited for long horizon, sparse reward tasks. Hence,
we choose to experiment on a sampled subset of Atari games, the goal conditioned FetchEnv tasks
and the harder goal conditioned Pioneer Push and Reach tasks. See details of the experiment setup
in Appendix A.2.

5.1   BASELINES

Baselines include DDPG (Lillicrap et al., 2016), TD3 (Fujimoto et al., 2018), SAC (Haarnoja et al.,
2018) and HER (Andrychowicz et al., 2017; Plappert et al., 2018). Implementations are based
on open sourced repositories, and baseline performance is verified against published results under
similar settings. The Appendix A.6 and A.5 include results on more baselines such as DDQN (van
Hasselt et al., 2015), td-labmda (Sutton & Barto, 2018) and Retrace (Munos et al., 2016).

5.2   H YPERPARAMETERS

Value target lower bounding is applied on top of these baselines without any additional hyperpa-
rameter (Section 4). The only hyperparameters come from the baselines. These hyperparameters
follow published work as much as possible. When baseline hyperparameters need to be tuned for an
environment, e.g. Atari games or Pioneer tasks, we search for the best performance in total episode
reward averaged across all tasks for that environment on one set of random seeds, then the optimal
hyperparameters are fixed and evaluated on a separate set of random seeds never seen during devel-
opment. Value target lower bounding simply uses the the parameter values optimal for the baselines.
Details are in Appendix A.3.

5.3   R ESULTS

We report results on both episodic and continuing/non-episodic tasks. We report evaluation perfor-
mance averaged across several runs of the algorithms (five for the less stable Atari games and three
for the others). Each run uses a random seed never seen during development. Due to space con-
straints, the main paper only reports performance aggregated across all tasks for each environment.
During each run, we take one task and one random seed, run baseline and treatment algorithms, and
record whether treatment agent evaluates strictly above the baseline agent as training progresses. We
average across all the runs of the same environment, and plot the fraction of times where treatment
is above baseline and when it is statistically significant in Figure 2. Appendix A.4 contains per task
evaluation curves.


                                                      6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                                               1.0                                                                                                                  1.0                                                                                                                1.0                                                                                                                    1.0


                                                               0.8                                                                                                                  0.8                                                                                                                0.8                                                                                                                    0.8


     Fraction of random task trials


                                                                                                                          Fraction of random task trials


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Fraction of random task trials


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Fraction of random task trials
                                                               0.6                                                                                                                  0.6                                                                                                                0.6                                                                                                                    0.6


                                                               0.4                                                                                                                  0.4                                                                                                                0.4                                                                                                                    0.4


                                                               0.2                                                                                                                  0.2                                                                                                                0.2                                                                                                                    0.2
                                                                           Fraction lb­DR (ours) above sac                                                                                      Fraction lb­b­3step (ours) above sac                                                                                      Fraction lb­DR (ours) above ddpg                                                                                 Fraction lb­DR+GD (ours) above her
                                                                           Statistically significant when above                                                                                 Statistically significant when above                                                                                      Statistically significant when above                                                                             Statistically significant when above
                                                               0.0                                                                                                                  0.0                                                                                                                0.0                                                                                                                    0.0
                                                                     0.0   0.2       0.4 0.6 0.8             1.0    1.2                                                                   0.0   0.2    0.4 0.6 0.8            1.0      1.2                                                                0.0       0.5            1.0       1.5              2.0                                                                    0       1        2       3          4          5
                                                                                     Environment Steps              1e7                                                                                Environment Steps               1e7                                                                                  Environment Steps                 1e6                                                                                 Environment Steps                1e6


                                                                     (a) Atari (lb-DR)                                     (b) Atari (bootstrapped) (c) FetchEnv (episodic)                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                (d) Pioneer

Figure 2: Aggregated evaluation performance: The fraction of times where treatment performs
strictly above baseline, plotted along the number of time steps used for training. The fraction being
above 0.5 means treatment is more often better. We use, for Atari (lb-DR), 85 runs – 17 games each
with 5 seeds, for Atari (bootstrapped), 20 runs – 4 games 5 seeds, for episodic FetchEnv, 9 runs –
3 tasks 3 seeds, and for Pioneer, 6 runs – 2 tasks 3 seeds. Statistical significance is calculated with
one sided sign test at significance level p < 0.05.
                                                                                                                          Average fraction of experience with higher value target


                                                                                                                                                                                    1.0


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Average fraction of experience with higher value target


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Average fraction of experience with higher value target
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       0.05                                                                                                                   0.10
     Average fraction of experience with higher value target


                                                               0.200                                                                                                                             lb­b­3step (ours) above Bellman target
                                                                                     lb­DR (ours) above Bellman target                                                                                                                                                                                                     lb­DR (ours) above Bellman target                                                                                lb­DR+GD (ours) above Bellman target
                                                               0.175
                                                                                                                                                                                    0.8                                                                                                                0.04                                                                                                                   0.08
                                                               0.150
                                                               0.125                                                                                                                0.6                                                                                                                0.03                                                                                                                   0.06
                                                               0.100
                                                                                                                                                                                    0.4                                                                                                                0.02                                                                                                                   0.04
                                                               0.075
                                                               0.050
                                                                                                                                                                                    0.2                                                                                                                0.01                                                                                                                   0.02
                                                               0.025
                                                               0.000                                                                                                                0.0                                                                                                                0.00                                                                                                                   0.00
                                                                       0         1        2          3       4       5                                                                    0       1       2          3       4          5                                                                     0.0   0.2       0.4       0.6      0.8    1.0                                                                          0.0         0.5           1.0           1.5
                                                                                       Training Iterations          1e4                                                                                Training Iterations             1e4                                                                                   Training Iterations              1e3                                                                                  Training Iterations             1e3


                                                                     (a) Atari (lb-DR)                                     (b) Atari (bootstrapped) (c) FetchEnv (episodic)                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                (d) Pioneer

Figure 3: Average fraction of training experience where lower bounding improves Bellman value
target, plotted along the number of iterations of training. The solid curve is the average of the
fraction across all runs – number of tasks times number of seeds, and the shaded area is +/- one
standard deviation. Other setups are the same as Figure 2.



5.3.1                                                                L OWER BOUNDING VS BASELINES SAC/DDPG/HER

Figure 2 compares the lower bounding treatment with SAC, DDPG or HER baseline on 17 sam-
pled Atari games, the FetchEnv tasks and the Pioneer tasks. For all the environments, value target
lower bounding is not only more sample efficient, but also enjoys a higher converged performance.
After training starts, it quickly gains ground and outperforms the baseline for 70% to 100% of the
runs. It keeps that advantage even at the end of the training, outperforming baseline in converged
performance. These plots show most of the times treatment is above baseline, and during most of
the training process, the improvement is statistically significant.
Appendix A.4 shows the magnitude of change with total episode return plotted for each task.
There is often large gains in sample efficiency and sometimes much higher converged performance.
Among all the 22 tasks, only one task (Atari Breakout) shows lb-DR underperforming the baseline.
Investigations show that the loss on Atari Breakout is likely due to the mismatch between train-
ing objective and evaluation metric. During training, raw rewards are clipped to [-1, 1] and step
discounted at γ = 0.99 to compute value, while in evaluation, total reward is the unclipped and
undiscounted sum of all episode rewards. The discount and clipping together severely penalizes
large rewards earned later in the episode, which is what’s happening for Breakout, because hitting a
top layer block produces a reward of 7 while hitting a bottom layer block produces only 1. When we
use non-clipped rewards or a higher γ in training, the lower bounding method performs much better
in total reward. This train-test discrepancy and another bias of not discounting the state distribution
(Thomas, 2014) are likely present in prior works using policy gradient methods on Atari games.


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


5.3.2   VALUE TARGET IMPROVEMENT
The lb-DR method is mostly effective, but is it really due to improvements to the value targets?
Figure 3 looks at the fraction of training experience where lower bounding actually improves the
Bellman value target over the course of training. Overall, improved value target roughly coincides
with performance gains. Appendix A.4 shows the plots per each task.
The Appendix also has more results, comparing with baselines such as n-step methods, DDQN
and optimality tightening, and more analyses such as ablations and robustness to hyperparameter
choices.

6   R ELATED W ORKS

Prior works (Fujita et al., 2020; Hoppe & Toussaint, 2020; He et al., 2017; Oh et al., 2018; Tang,
2020) employ several different ways of computing future returns and using that as a lower bound
to improve value learning. It is quite easy to introduce biases and inefficiencies into the process
and end up with a suboptimal or inefficient algorithm, e.g. see discussion below about Self Imitation
Learning and episodic control (Oh et al., 2018; Tang, 2020; Blundell et al., 2016), or n-step methods.
Our work is the first to propose the general form of value target lower bounding (possibly with
bootstrapping) for both the episodic and non-episodic tasks, to show its convergence to the optimal
value in the tabular case, and to demonstrate its effectiveness in extensive experiments on a wide
range of tasks.
Fujita et al. (2020)’s method is similar to a special case (the lb-DR+GD variant) of the general
method. It was used as a part of a large system and was shown to improve sample efficiency for
a robotic grasping task. Hoppe & Toussaint (2020) also bound the value target. But instead of
using empirical return, they use a simplified MDP with a subset of actions. Though without the-
oretical proof and only experimented on a limited set of tasks, both works show that value target
lower bounding increases sample efficiency empirically. Our work, in addition to the theory and the
more general method, shows that lower bounding improves both sample efficiency and converged
performance in a wide range of tasks.
Optimality tightening (He et al., 2017) also uses empirical return with bootstrap to improve value
learning, but in a different way. It formulates value learning as a constrained optimization problem
using the empirical bootstrapped value to provide the lower and upper constraints of the value func-
tion. In the experiments, the Lagrangian multiplier is fixed rather than being learnt, which would
likely lead to suboptimal solutions. Our lb-b-nstep method also uses bootstrapped value. We lower
bound the value target directly, which is simpler, more efficient, and likely more optimal. Our frame-
work includes even more efficient and effective methods like lb-DR for episodic tasks. Appendix
A.5 offers more discussions and results related to the optimality tightening method.
Our work is subtly but importantly different from the prior works on lower bound Q learning or Self
Imitation Learning (SIL) (Oh et al., 2018; Tang, 2020). SIL uses empirical return R to lower bound
the value function itself (instead of the value target). This is achieved by adding an off policy value
                                                           1
loss during on-policy (AC or PPO) training (Lsil                                   2
                                                  value = 2 |v(s) − max(v(s), R)| ). When the value
function overestimates, the SIL value loss becomes zero, and keeps overestimating. Mixing the SIL
loss with the loss from the baseline algorithms probably helped to correct the overestimation, but no
theoretical guarantee was given. In evaluation, SIL was often compared to on-policy Actor Critic or
PPO baselines, so it was not clear how much of the gain was due to lower bounding and how much
due to off-policy value learning. In this work, we bound the Bellman value target (Equation 11),
so overestimates are automatically corrected via Bellman updates, and convergence is guaranteed in
the tabular case. We also use off-policy algorithms as baselines for a cleaner comparison.
Episodic control (Blundell et al., 2016) and follow-up works (Lin et al., 2018; Sarrico et al., 2019;
Hu et al., 2021; Ma et al., 2022) use episodic memory from past experiences to develop value lower
bounds. When multiple experiences start from the same state, the maximum episodic return is stored
in the episodic memory slot for that state. This provides a potentially tighter lower bound than the
episodic return used in this paper (which only uses the episodic return from the one episode where
the transition is sampled). During control, the action that maximizes the stored episodic return is
picked. For the general non-tabular case, function approximation is used to represent states, which
bootstraps values of states never encountered in training before. The original episodic control and


                                                  8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


a few of the variations (Blundell et al., 2016; Lin et al., 2018; Sarrico et al., 2019) lower bound
the value function itself, not the value target, similar to how Self Imitation Learning (Oh et al.,
2018) does. Hence, an initially overestimated episodic value, due to either improper initialization
or function approximation, stays overestimated throughout training, because it never goes through
the Bellman operator. These methods may not converge to the optimal value even for tabular de-
terministic environments. Follow-up works (Hu et al., 2021; Ma et al., 2022) use implicit memory
based planning, which essentially lower bound the value target with a function based on episodic
return, and avoid the earlier overestimation problem (see Appendix A.8). Maximum entropy Mel-
lowmax episodic control (Sarrico et al., 2019) uses a temperature controlled softmax based operator
to generate the action probabilities and is similar to the discrete version of SAC. Overall, episodic
memory is an interesting tool to come up with tight value target lower bounds, while the value target
lower bounding we propose is more general along two directions: the theory works for stochastic
environments, and for non-episodic tasks (with experiments in Appendix A.4.3).
Hindsight Experience Replay (HER) (Andrychowicz et al., 2017) is a related prior work to compare
to. HER is simple, effective, efficient, and also relies on the unbiased replay of past experiences, as
explained in Appendix A.7. HER works best in sparse reward goal conditioned tasks. Unlike our
work, HER additionally requires the task to be goal conditioned, and relies on full knowledge of
the reward function to work. HER also has one additional hyperparameter to tune – the proportion
of hindsight experience. Our method is more general, applicable to non-goal conditioned tasks and
to dense reward scenarios, e.g. Atari games. We employ the orthogonal idea of value target lower
bounding to improve RL training, and provide additional significant gains even on top of HER, as
shown in the experiments on hard continuous control tasks.
N-step return methods such as td-lambda (Sutton & Barto, 2018) and Retrace (Munos et al., 2016)
also look a few steps ahead to obtain a better value. Traditionally, this requires careful off-policy
correction, and the value can still be far from the optimal value due to the often suboptimal behavior
policy. This work shows that value target lower bounding efficiently and effectively looks ahead
much further without the need for off-policy correction. Lower bounding with episodic return is
also more efficient, without having to compute value of all n-steps. Appendix A.5 has more detailed
observations and discussions.


7     C ONCLUSIONS

Overall, value target lower bounding is a simple method without any additional hyperparameters
to tune. It is efficient, highly effective, and theoretically justified. It can be readily applied to any
TD learning based RL algorithms, such as DQN, DDPG and SAC. In theory, value target lower
bounding converges to the same optimal solution as the original Bellman operator, at a speed at least
as fast. In practice, extensive experiments across a wide range of tasks show that it greatly improves
sample efficiency, and in several cases even converge to a higher performance.
For episodic tasks, discounted episodic return lower bound is efficient and effective, achieving much
higher sample efficiency and converged performance than one-step baselines such as SAC, DDPG
or TD3 in most tasks, and is competitive among n-step baselines. For goal conditioned tasks, simple
goal distance based return achieves higher value than Hindsight experience relabeling (HER) in
difficult long horizon tasks.
For non-episodic tasks or in general, lower bounding with n-step bootstrapped return outperforms
one-step baselines and is a strong competitor to the n-step methods such as (truncated) td-lambda
and Retrace.

7.1   F UTURE WORK

There could be better value lower bounds that improve training even more. One such direction is
to use planning (e.g. Monte Carlo Tree Search, the Cross Entropy Method or using subgoals) to
achieve tighter lower bounds with the help of a model of the task.
Other ways of bounding the value target may be worth investigating as well. An example is value
upper bounding, to reduce value overestimation. However, given the disparate motivation from
lower bounding, which is to speed up value improvement, we leave upper bounding to future work.


                                                   9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


E THICS STATEMENT

This research belongs to basic reinforcement learning, accelerating the training of reinforcement
learning algorithms. Helpful agents trained on benevolent tasks will learn faster, so will malicious
agents trained to do damage. All the usual societal impact of reinforcement learning algorithms
apply. The reader and user has to use caution and their own judgments when applying these au-
tomation algorithms to the real world: careful testing and scaling is needed, starting from virtual
simulations, to testing in a lab environment, to small scale real world tests, and eventually to full
scale deployment with careful monitoring in place.

R EPRODUCIBILITY STATEMENT

Our code change is based on a publicly available RL library, with strong baselines already imple-
mented. Our relatively small code change is committed to a private github repository, which we plan
to open source upon publication. Experiment parameters are configured and controlled by an au-
tomation script, with each experiment label corresponding to the set of configurations used for that
experiment, so there is little room for manual error when running many experiments across different
tasks, methods and hyperparameters. When running experiments, the snapshot of the code used to
run each experiment is stored together with the results for verification.
Experiments are done in simulation with pseudo randomness. We’ve run our code on different ma-
chines with different GPU hardware using the same docker image, and the results are reproducible
up to every float number using the same random seed. In a few cases, we’ve also run our code on
different versions of hardware and software (CUDA and pytorch), and the results are similar, though
not the same at the float number level.

R EFERENCES

Marcin Andrychowicz, Dwight Crow, Alex Ray, Jonas Schneider, Rachel Fong, Peter Welinder, Bob
 McGrew, Josh Tobin, Pieter Abbeel, and Wojciech Zaremba. Hindsight experience replay. In Is-
 abelle Guyon, Ulrike von Luxburg, Samy Bengio, Hanna M. Wallach, Rob Fergus, S. V. N. Vish-
 wanathan, and Roman Garnett (eds.), Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 30:
 Annual Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems 2017, December 4-9, 2017, Long
 Beach, CA, USA, pp. 5048–5058, 2017. URL https://proceedings.neurips.cc/
 paper/2017/hash/453fadbd8a1a3af50a9df4df899537b5-Abstract.html.
Ioannis Antonoglou, Julian Schrittwieser, Sherjil Ozair, Thomas K Hubert, and David Silver. Plan-
  ning in stochastic environments with a learned model. In International Conference on Learning
  Representations, 2022. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=X6D9bAHhBQ1.
Richard Bellman. Dynamic Programming. Princeton Univ. Press, Princeton, NJ, USA, 1957. ISBN
  0-691-07951-X.
Léonard Blier and Yann Ollivier. Unbiased methods for multi-goal reinforcement learning. CoRR,
   abs/2106.08863, 2021. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2106.08863.
Charles Blundell, Benigno Uria, Alexander Pritzel, Yazhe Li, Avraham Ruderman, Joel Z Leibo,
  Jack Rae, Daan Wierstra, and Demis Hassabis. Model-free episodic control, 2016. URL https:
  //arxiv.org/abs/1606.04460.
Elliot Chane-Sane, Cordelia Schmid, and Ivan Laptev. Goal-conditioned reinforcement learning
  with imagined subgoals. In Marina Meila and Tong Zhang (eds.), Proceedings of the 38th In-
  ternational Conference on Machine Learning, volume 139 of Proceedings of Machine Learning
  Research, pp. 1430–1440. PMLR, 18–24 Jul 2021. URL https://proceedings.mlr.
  press/v139/chane-sane21a.html.
Kurtland Chua, Roberto Calandra, Rowan McAllister, and Sergey Levine. Deep reinforcement
  learning in a handful of trials using probabilistic dynamics models. In Proceedings of the 32nd
  International Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems, NIPS’18, pp. 4759–4770,
  Red Hook, NY, USA, 2018. Curran Associates Inc.


                                                 10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Eric V. Denardo. Contraction mappings in the theory underlying dynamic programming. SIAM
  Review, 9(2):165–177, 1967. ISSN 00361445. URL http://www.jstor.org/stable/
  2027440.

Scott Fujimoto, Herke van Hoof, and David Meger. Addressing function approximation error in
  actor-critic methods. CoRR, 2018. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/1802.09477.

Yasuhiro Fujita, Kota Uenishi, Avinash Ummadisingu, Prabhat Nagarajan, Shimpei Masuda, and
  Mario Castro. Distributed reinforcement learning of targeted grasping with active vision for
  mobile manipulators. In IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems
  (IROS), pp. 9712–9719, Oct 2020.

Tuomas Haarnoja, Aurick Zhou, Pieter Abbeel, and Sergey Levine. Soft actor-critic: Off-policy
  maximum entropy deep reinforcement learning with a stochastic actor. In Jennifer Dy and An-
  dreas Krause (eds.), Proceedings of the 35th International Conference on Machine Learning,
  volume 80 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pp. 1861–1870. PMLR, 10–15 Jul
  2018. URL https://proceedings.mlr.press/v80/haarnoja18b.html.

Danijar Hafner, Timothy Lillicrap, Ian Fischer, Ruben Villegas, David Ha, Honglak Lee, and James
  Davidson. Learning latent dynamics for planning from pixels. In Kamalika Chaudhuri and Ruslan
  Salakhutdinov (eds.), Proceedings of the 36th International Conference on Machine Learning,
  volume 97 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pp. 2555–2565. PMLR, 09–15 Jun
  2019. URL https://proceedings.mlr.press/v97/hafner19a.html.

Frank S. He, Yang Liu, Alexander G. Schwing, and Jian Peng. Learning to play in a day: Faster deep
  reinforcement learning by optimality tightening. In 5th International Conference on Learning
  Representations, ICLR 2017, Toulon, France, April 24-26, 2017, Conference Track Proceedings.
  OpenReview.net, 2017. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=rJ8Je4clg.

Sabrina Hoppe and Marc Toussaint. Qgraph-bounded q-learning: Stabilizing model-free off-policy
  deep reinforcement learning. CoRR, abs/2007.07582, 2020. URL https://arxiv.org/
  abs/2007.07582.

Hao Hu, Jianing Ye, Guangxiang Zhu, Zhizhou Ren, and Chongjie Zhang. Generalizable episodic
  memory for deep reinforcement learning. In Marina Meila and Tong Zhang (eds.), Proceedings of
  the 38th International Conference on Machine Learning, volume 139 of Proceedings of Machine
  Learning Research, pp. 4380–4390. PMLR, 18–24 Jul 2021. URL https://proceedings.
  mlr.press/v139/hu21d.html.

Aviral Kumar, Abhishek Gupta, and Sergey Levine. Discor: Corrective feedback in reinforce-
  ment learning via distribution correction. In H. Larochelle, M. Ranzato, R. Hadsell, M. F. Bal-
  can, and H. Lin (eds.), Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 33, pp.
  18560–18572. Curran Associates, Inc., 2020. URL https://proceedings.neurips.
  cc/paper/2020/file/d7f426ccbc6db7e235c57958c21c5dfa-Paper.pdf.

Sameera Lanka and Tianfu Wu. Archer: Aggressive rewards to counter bias in hindsight experience
  replay. NeurIPS 2018 Deep Reinforcement Learning Workshop, 2018. URL https://arxiv.
  org/abs/1809.02070.

Timothy P. Lillicrap, Jonathan J. Hunt, Alexander Pritzel, Nicolas Heess, Tom Erez, Yuval Tassa,
  David Silver, and Daan Wierstra. Continuous control with deep reinforcement learning. In Yoshua
  Bengio and Yann LeCun (eds.), 4th International Conference on Learning Representations, ICLR
  2016, San Juan, Puerto Rico, May 2-4, 2016, Conference Track Proceedings, 2016. URL http:
  //arxiv.org/abs/1509.02971.

Zichuan Lin, Tianqi Zhao, Guangwen Yang, and Lintao Zhang. Episodic memory deep q-networks.
  In Proceedings of the Twenty-Seventh International Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence,
  IJCAI-18, pp. 2433–2439. International Joint Conferences on Artificial Intelligence Organiza-
  tion, 7 2018. doi: 10.24963/ijcai.2018/337. URL https://doi.org/10.24963/ijcai.
  2018/337.


                                               11
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Xiaoteng Ma, Yiqin Yang, Hao Hu, Jun Yang, Chongjie Zhang, Qianchuan Zhao, Bin Liang, and
  Qihan Liu. Offline reinforcement learning with value-based episodic memory. In International
  Conference on Learning Representations, 2022. URL https://openreview.net/forum?
  id=RCZqv9NXlZ.
Volodymyr Mnih, Koray Kavukcuoglu, David Silver, Alex Graves, Ioannis Antonoglou, Daan
  Wierstra, and Martin A. Riedmiller. Playing atari with deep reinforcement learning. CoRR,
  abs/1312.5602, 2013. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/1312.5602.
Rémi Munos, Tom Stepleton, Anna Harutyunyan, and Marc G. Bellemare. Safe and efficient off-
   policy reinforcement learning. In Daniel D. Lee, Masashi Sugiyama, Ulrike von Luxburg, Is-
   abelle Guyon, and Roman Garnett (eds.), Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems
   29: Annual Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems 2016, December 5-10, 2016,
   Barcelona, Spain, pp. 1046–1054, 2016. URL https://proceedings.neurips.cc/
   paper/2016/hash/c3992e9a68c5ae12bd18488bc579b30d-Abstract.html.
Suraj Nair and Chelsea Finn. Hierarchical foresight: Self-supervised learning of long-horizon tasks
  via visual subgoal generation. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2020.
  URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=H1gzR2VKDH.
Soroush Nasiriany, Vitchyr Pong, Steven Lin, and Sergey Levine. Planning with goal-conditioned
  policies. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2019.
Junhyuk Oh, Yijie Guo, Satinder Singh, and Honglak Lee. Self-imitation learning.            CoRR,
  abs/1806.05635, 2018. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/1806.05635.
Matthias Plappert, Marcin Andrychowicz, Alex Ray, Bob McGrew, Bowen Baker, Glenn Powell,
 Jonas Schneider, Josh Tobin, Maciek Chociej, Peter Welinder, Vikash Kumar, and Wojciech
 Zaremba. Multi-goal reinforcement learning: Challenging robotics environments and request
 for research. CoRR, abs/1802.09464, 2018. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/1802.09464.
Stuart J. Russell and Peter Norvig. Artificial Intelligence: A Modern Approach (4th Edition). Pear-
  son, 2020. ISBN 9780134610993. URL http://aima.cs.berkeley.edu/.
Marta Sarrico, Kai Arulkumaran, Andrea Agostinelli, Pierre Richemond, and Anil Anthony Bharath.
 Sample-efficient reinforcement learning with maximum entropy mellowmax episodic control.
 CoRR, abs/1911.09615, 2019. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/1911.09615.
Julian Schrittwieser, Ioannis Antonoglou, Thomas Hubert, Karen Simonyan, Laurent Sifre, Simon
  Schmitt, Arthur Guez, Edward Lockhart, Demis Hassabis, Thore Graepel, Timothy P. Lillicrap,
  and David Silver. Mastering atari, go, chess and shogi by planning with a learned model. CoRR,
  abs/1911.08265, 2019. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/1911.08265.
David Silver and Kamil Ciosek. Compositional Planning Using Optimal Option Models. In Pro-
  ceedings of the 29th International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 165. icml.cc / Omni-
  press, 2012.
Richard S. Sutton and Andrew G. Barto. Reinforcement Learning: An Introduction. A Bradford
  Book, Cambridge, MA, USA, 2018. ISBN 0262039249.
Yunhao Tang.     Self-imitation learning via generalized lower bound q-learning.            CoRR,
  abs/2006.07442, 2020. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2006.07442.
Philip Thomas. Bias in natural actor-critic algorithms. In Eric P. Xing and Tony Jebara (eds.),
  Proceedings of the 31st International Conference on Machine Learning, volume 32 of Proceed-
  ings of Machine Learning Research, pp. 441–448, Bejing, China, 22–24 Jun 2014. PMLR. URL
  https://proceedings.mlr.press/v32/thomas14.html.
Hado van Hasselt, Arthur Guez, and David Silver. Deep reinforcement learning with double q-
  learning. CoRR, abs/1509.06461, 2015. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/1509.06461.
Weirui Ye, Shaohuai Liu, Thanard Kurutach, Pieter Abbeel, and Yang Gao. Mastering atari games
 with limited data. CoRR, abs/2111.00210, 2021. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2111.
 00210.


                                                12
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Haonan Yu, Wei Xu, and Haichao Zhang. Taac: Temporally abstract actor-critic for continuous
  control. In NeurIPS, 2021.
Haichao Zhang, Wei Xu, and Haonan Yu. Generative planning for temporally coordinated explo-
  ration in reinforcement learning. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2022.
  URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=YZHES8wIdE.


                                               13
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


A     A PPENDIX

A.1   P ROOFS

Before going on to Theorem 2.3, we first prove the easier Corollary 2.4.
We want to show that given a lower bound of the optimal value, ∀s, f (s) ≤ B ∞ (v)(s), under the
new operator Bf , the value function converges to the same optimal value function given by the
Bellman operator B.

Proof. Let v ∗ be the fixed point and optimal value of the original Bellman operator: v ∗ := B ∞ (v),
v be any value function, and s any state.
First, for the simple case of ∀s, where f (s) ≤ B(v)(s), the new operator backs off to the Bellman
operator, and follows the convergence of the Bellman operator:
                                    |Bf (v)(s) − v ∗ (s)|
                                   =| max(B(v)(s), f (s)) − v ∗ (s)|
                                   =|B(v)(s) − v ∗ (s)|
                                   =|B(v)(s) − B(v ∗ )(s)|
                                   ≤γ||v − v ∗ ||∞

Second, ∀s, where f (s) > B(v)(s),
                    |Bf (v)(s) − v ∗ (s)|
                   =| max(B(v)(s), f (s)) − v ∗ (s)|
                   =|f (s) − v ∗ (s)|
                   =v ∗ (s) − f (s) (because f lower bounds v ∗ : v ∗ (s) ≥ f (s))
                   <v ∗ (s) − B(v)(s) (because f (s) > B(v)(s))
                   =|B(v)(s) − v ∗ (s)|
                   ≤|B(v)(s) − v ∗ (s)|
                   =|B(v)(s) − B(v ∗ )(s)|
                   ≤γ||v − v ∗ ||∞

Therefore, the distance to the optimal value shrinks by γ with every application of Bf :
||Bf (v) − v ∗ ||∞ = maxs |Bf (v)(s) − v ∗ (s)| ≤ γ||v − v ∗ ||∞ .
According to the definition of convergence to v ∗ , we need to find an N , such that ∀ϵ > 0, ∀v ̸= v ∗ ,
∀n > N, ||Bfn (v) − v ∗ ||∞ < ϵ.
We can easily calculate that any N ≥ logγ ||v−vϵ∗ ||∞ (note, γ < 1) satisfies the condition, which
concludes the proof that any value function v will converge to v ∗ under the lower bounded Bellman
operator Bf .

Note, from the proof above, we can see that Bf converges faster than γ (the speed of Bellman
contraction), when the lower bound is strictly above the Bellman value target, i.e. f (s) > B(v)(s).
Now for Theorem 2.3: given the maximum achievable value Ḡv (s) and given that f (s) ≤ Ḡv (s),
we want to show convergence to the optimal value.

Proof. First, ∀s, where f (s) < B(v)(s), the value target backs off to the original Bellman target,
and the distance to the optimal value shrinks at rate γ.
Second, ∀s, where f (s) < v ∗ (s), it follows from Corollary 2.4 that the distance to the optimal value
shrinks at rate γ.
Last, we only need to prove for any s, where f (s) ≥ v ∗ (s) and f (s) ≥ B(v)(s), the distance to the
optimal value still shrinks:


                                                   14
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


 |Bf (v)(s) − v ∗ (s)|
=| max(B(v)(s), f (s)) − v ∗ (s)|
=|f (s) − v ∗ (s)|
=f (s) − v ∗ (s)
≤Ḡv (s) − v ∗ (s)
  According to the definition of Ḡv in Equation 3 of the main text:
                             ∗
=     max       Gπ,v
                  n (s) − v (s)
  π∈Π,n∈[1,+∞)

  Now suppose π ′ and n(s) achieves the maximum bootstrapped value Ḡv (s):
      ′
  π ,v
=Gn(s) (s) − v ∗ (s)
  According to the definition of n-step bootstrapped value Gπ,v
                                                            n (s) in Equation 2 of the main text:
      ′
=Eπ {r1 + γr2 + ... + γ n(s)−1 rn(s) + γ n(s) v(sn(s) )} − v ∗ (s)
  (The expectation above is over all possible n(s)-step trajectories of the given policy π ′ and MDP.)
  Suppose π ∗ is the optimal policy, which achieves maximum value v ∗ for any number of steps n
  and state s:
      ′
=Eπ {r1 + γr2 + ... + γ n(s)−1 rn(s) + γ n(s) v(sn(s) )}−
      ∗
  Eπ {r1 + γr2 + ... + γ n(s)−1 rn(s) + γ n(s) v ∗ (sn(s) )}
      ′
≤Eπ {r1 + γr2 + ... + γ n(s)−1 rn(s) + γ n(s) v(sn(s) )}−
      ′
  Eπ {r1 + γr2 + ... + γ n(s)−1 rn(s) + γ n(s) v ∗ (sn(s) )}
  (This is because π ∗ maximizes the expected n-step bootstrapped value. So the expected value of
  any other policy, e.g. π ′ , bootstrapped with v ∗ cannot be greater.)
            ′
=γ n(s) Eπ {v(sn(s) ) − v ∗ (sn(s) )}
            ′
≤γ n(s) Eπ |v(sn(s) ) − v ∗ (sn(s) )|
        X       ′
=γ n(s)      {pπ (sn(s) |s) × |v(sn(s) ) − v ∗ (sn(s) )|}
          sn(s)

≤γ n(s) max |v(s) − v ∗ (s)|
           s

≤γ   mins n(s)
                  max |v(s) − v ∗ (s)|
                   s

=γ   mins n(s)
                 ||v − v ∗ ||∞

This means in the case of overestimated bootstrap values, the new operator promises to shrink at a
rate of γ mins n(s) , and overall, the new operator will at least shrink at a rate of γ.



Note, from the proof above, we can see that when the lower bound overestimates, i.e. f (s) ≥ v ∗ (s),
Bf converges at a speed of γ mins n(s) , which could be faster than γ, the speed of Bellman contraction.
These proofs work for stochastic MDPs, because we treat trajectory rewards and states as random
variables conditioned on the MDP and the policy. The proofs work for action values as well, by
simply replacing the value function above v(s) with the action value q(s, a), and the value lower
bound f (s) with the action value lower bound f (s, a).
π ′ in theory can be different for different state s, so that when unrolling from state s0 for a few steps
into si , it still follows π ′ (s0 ), instead of π ′ (si ). However, it’s easy to prove (by contradiction) that
there exists a single policy π ′ which achieves the maximum achievable value (as long as ties are split
deterministically).


                                                      15
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


A.2     E XPERIMENT SETUPS

We experiment on three sets of tasks with different input characteristics and control difficulty. Some
of the tasks are not goal conditioned, so only lower bounding with empirical discounted return is
available. Some of them are goal conditioned, so both empirical discounted return and hindsight
relabeling with discounted goal return are available as lower bounds.

A.2.1    ATARI GAMES
We experiment on the classical Atari games with image input to test using discounted episodic return
to lower bound value target. We picked the popular games Breakout, Seaquest, Space Invaders
(these three were used for hyperparameter tuning by Mnih et al. (2013)), Atlantis, Frostbite and
Q*bert (these three were highlighted in (He et al., 2017)), and sampled another 11 games from the
total 56 (simply using one out of every five games in alphabetical order). As with prior work (Mnih
et al., 2013; Oh et al., 2018), we evaluate on the standard NoFrameskip-v4 versions of the games
with actions repeated for a fixed four frames and each game started with up to 30 random number of
noop steps before handing to the agent (to initialize the pseudo random number generator differently
across episodes). Each episode of the games is capped at 10,000 time steps, with the last time step
having discount 0.99 when the time limit is reached, i.e. resetting the game without ending the
episode. For any regular game end, e.g. after losing all lives, the episode ends with a last step
discount of 0. Because the games are episodic, both lb-DR and lb-b-nstep methods can be applied.

A.2.2    F ETCH P USH , S LIDE AND P ICK A ND P LACE
The FetchEnv tasks (Plappert et al., 2018) are goal conditioned tasks with a MuJoCo simulated
robotic arm moving objects on a table. Robot states and object position serve as input. The agent
outputs continuous actions taking the form of relative positions to move to. A PID controller trans-
lates the relative position actions into the exact torque applied at each joint. Rewards are sparse and
goal-conditioned, with -1 for non-goal states and 0 for goal states.
By default the FetchEnv tasks are non-episodic. They reset every 50 steps, but all steps including
the step right before task reset have the same positive discount (Andrychowicz et al., 2017). As ex-
plained in Section 3.1, to use episodic discounted return as lower bound, we can make them episodic
by adding a gym wrapper around the environment to end an episode after its goal is achieved, and
reset the task. When a goal is not reached within 50 steps, we just reset the task without ending the
episode, as is done in the original FetchEnv, and such experience is not used in value target lower
bounding.3 This also changes the nature of the tasks, so the agent does not have to stay at the goal
state indefinitely, but instead only needs to reach the goal position as fast as possible. This makes the
episodic FetchEnv tasks slightly easier to train than the original tasks, because the agent only needs
to reach the goal state quickly, instead of having to reach and stay at the goal position indefinitely.
(There are ways to avoid changing the desired behavior by e.g. including agent’s speed into the
goal state or requiring the agent to stay at the goal position for several time steps before ending the
episode. This seems orthogonal to the main idea here, and is not included in this work.)
We experiment on both the original/non-episodic FetchEnv tasks (with lb-b-nstep methods) and the
episodic FetchEnv tasks (with lb-DR and lb-GD methods).
Compared with the Atari games, the inputs are simpler, no longer image based, but the control task
is continuous, under realistic physical simulation and harder.

A.2.3    P IONEER P USH AND R EACH TASKS
This is a set of challenging goal reaching and object pushing tasks for the car Pioneer 2dx, physically
simulated with Gazebo. The car is 0.4 meter long. Objects and goal positions are randomly initial-
ized between 0.5 meter to 1 meter of each other inside a 10 meter by 10 meter flat space. Inputs are
the car and object states and the goal positions, and actions are the forces applied on the two driving
wheels.
    3
      Fujita et al. (2020) chose to end episodes when either a maximum of T time steps is reached or the goal is
reached, and provided the agent with the number of timesteps since episode start as input to the agent, so that
the agent is aware of the approaching episode end.


                                                      16
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                   Figure 4: The Pioneer Push task and the Push and Reach task.


For the Pioneer Push task, the car has to push a block to within 0.5 meter of the 2 dimensional goal
position indicated by a small red dot on the ground. For the Pioneer Push and Reach task, the car
has to first push the object to the goal location (red dot) and then drive to a separate goal position
(red ball in the air); the goal is achieved when the concatenation of the two goal locations (for Push
and for Reach) is within 0.5 of the concatenated achieved positions (of the block and the car) in
L2 -distance.
These tasks are episodic with sparse goal reward, and we only test the lb-GD and lb-DR+GD meth-
ods on them with HER as baseline. (TD3 without HER takes too long to train.)
These tasks take longer time to accomplish, and also take longer time to train than the FetchEnv
tasks. Some of the reasons are the force based wheel control instead of the higher level position
control, and the arena space being much larger than just a tabletop.

A.3   H YPERPARAMETERS AND BASELINES

Table 1 lists the hyperparameters of the baseline algorithms. For FetchEnv, they follow published
work (Plappert et al., 2018). For Atari and Pioneer tasks, they are tuned using one set of random
seeds and after keeping the hyperparameters fixed, trained with a different set of random seeds and
evaluated. Value target lower bounding has no parameter, and we did not re-tune any parameters of
the baseline RL algorithms for value target lower bounding. When comparing lb-b-nstep methods
with other n-step methods, we simply use the same n as the other baselines.
For the Atari games, the original DQN setup with only one training environment takes too long
to train so we decided to tune SAC as baseline and found it to outperform published Actor-Critic
results (Oh et al., 2018) and our tuned DDQN (results in Appendix A.6).
To use SAC on discrete actions, we simply swap out SAC’s value networks (which take in continuous
action and state as input and produce the value) with DQN’s Q networks (which take in state as
input and output n heads, each head for one action logit). We pass the output of the Q networks
(administered by the temperature α) through softmax to compute the action probabilities, and to
further sample actions. We ignore actor losses because there is no separate actor network, and only
use critic losses to train the Q networks.
The reason we can use Q with temperature and softmax to compute action probabilities is that for
   P actions, maximizing the SAC objective maxp [p(ai , s)(Q(s, ai ) − α log p(ai , s))] subject
discrete
to i p(ai , s) = 1 directly gives the solution p(ai , s) ∝ exp(Q(s, ai )/α). See Appendix D of (Yu
et al., 2021) for a similar derivation.
For Pioneer Push and PushReach tasks, TD3 is used, (we simply equip DDPG with two critics for
clipped double Q learning (Fujimoto et al., 2018)), which works better than DDPG with one critic.


                                                 17
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                Table 1: Hyperparameters for all the tasks

    Hyperparameters\Tasks             Atari (SAC)              FetchEnv (DDPG)          Pioneer (TD3)
    Parallel environments             30                       38                       30
    Unrolls per train iteration       8                        50                       100
    Updates per train iteration       4                        40                       40
    Mini-batch size                   500                      5,000                    5,000
    Training updates per target       20                       40                       40
    network update
    Target update weight              0.95                     0.95                     0.95
    Discount per time step            0.99                     0.98                     0.99
    Initial collect steps             100,000                  10,000                   10,000
    Total training time steps         12 million (x4 en-       2 million                Push: 5 million,
                                      vironment frames)                                 PushReach: 14 mil
    Max steps before task reset       10,000                   50                       Push:          100,
                                                                                        PushReach: 200
    Replay buffer size                1 million                2 million                6 million
    Adam optimizer learn ratea        5e−4                     1e−3                     1e−3
    Network structure                 conv((32, 8, 4),         fc(256, 256, 256)        fc(256, 256, 256)
                                      (64, 4, 2), (64, 3,
                                      1)) + fc(512)b
    Number of critics                 2                        1                        2
    ϵ-greedy for evaluation           0.05                     0.3                      0.3
    Evaluation interval in train      1000                     40                       200
    iters
    Evaluation episodes               100                      200                      100
    Life loss as terminalc            Yes                      n/a                      n/a
    Action repeat                     4                        n/a                      n/a
    Image scaling                     [-1, 1]                  n/a                      n/a
    Frame stacking                    4                        n/a                      n/a
    Reward clipping                   [-1, 1]                  n/a                      n/a
    SAC target entropy                calculatedd              n/a                      n/a
    Hindsight percentage              n/a                      80%                      50%
    Observation normalizatione        No                       Yes                      No
    TD-lambda: λ                      0.95                     0.95                     n/a
    n-step bootstrap: n               3                        2                        n/a
a
  Adam ϵ̂ = 1e−7 for all tasks.
b
  Netowrk structure for Atari follows DDQN (van Hasselt et al., 2015).
c
  Life loss in Atari games is treated as a terminal state in training, following EfficientZero (Ye et al., 2021).
d
  The SAC target entropy is set to the entropy of uniformly distributing 0.1 probability mass across all but one
actions.
e
  Observations are normalized to have zero mean and unit variance based on the statistics of the training
observations, and we found the normalization to be critical in reproducing HER results on FetchEnv.


                                                       18
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


A.4     R ESULTS

Applying lower bounding (e.g. lb-DR) on different baseline algorithms e.g. DDPG or SAC results
in different treatment methods. Since we always compare treatment with its corresponding baseline,
throughout the paper, we simply call the treatment lb-DR etc. without mentioning the baseline
algorithm.

A.4.1     LB -DR ( EPISODIC RETURN ) VS BASELINE SAC/DDPG

Figure 5 compares lower bounding with discounted return (lb-DR) against SAC or DDPG baseline
on 17 sampled Atari games and the episodic FetchEnv tasks.
For 16 out of the 17 Atari games, lower bounding with episodic discounted return (lb-DR) performs
at least as well as the baseline, often much better. On more than half of the Atari games and on the
Fetch PickAndPlace task, there are large gains in both sample efficiency and final performance. On
FetchPush and a few of the Atari games (Alien, Bank Heist and Fishing Derby), there is about 70%
sample efficiency gain with similar converged performance. Among all the 20 tasks, only 1 task
(Atari Breakout) shows lb-DR underperforming the baseline.

A.4.1.1   Value learning plots
This section presents plots of learned value and how often value is improved by the proposed meth-
ods, in order to show the effect of lower bounding on value improvement.
Figure 6 shows the fraction of training experience where lb-DR value target is greater than the
Bellman target from SAC/DDPG on the 17 Atari games and the episodic FetchEnv tasks (without
hindsight). They correlate well with actual performance (Figure 5) and with how value is learning
(Figure 7).


                                                19
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                                                                                                                                                                                          1400                                                                                   400
                              2500                                      lb­DR (ours)                                                                                                                                      lb­DR (ours)                                                                                                    lb­DR (ours)
                                                                        sac                                                          lb­DR (ours)                                                                         sac                                                                    350                                      sac
                                                                                                                                     sac                                                                  1200
                                                                                                                  250000
                              2000                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               300


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Average Episodic Return
                                                                                                                                                                                                          1000
    Average Episodic Return


                                                                                                                                                                                Average Episodic Return
                                                                                        Average Episodic Return
                                                                                                                  200000                                                                                                                                                                         250
                              1500                                                                                                                                                                         800
                                                                                                                  150000                                                                                                                                                                         200
                                                                                                                                                                                                           600
                              1000                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               150
                                                                                                                  100000
                                                                                                                                                                                                           400                                                                                   100
                               500                                                                                 50000
                                                                                                                                                                                                           200                                                                                    50
                                 0                                                                                       0                                                                                   0                                                                                     0
                                      0.0    0.2    0.4 0.6 0.8           1.0     1.2                                        0.0     0.2    0.4 0.6 0.8            1.0    1.2                                       0.0   0.2     0.4 0.6 0.8            1.0     1.2                                    0.0   0.2     0.4 0.6 0.8            1.0    1.2
                                                    Environment Steps             1e7                                                       Environment Steps             1e7                                                     Environment Steps              1e7                                                  Environment Steps             1e7


                                       (a) Atari Alien                                                                  (b) Atari Atlantis                                                                (c) Atari Bank Heist                                                                     (d) Atari Breakout
                                                                                                                  800                                                                                       20            lb­DR (ours)                                                                        lb­DR (ours)
                              10000                                     lb­DR (ours)                                                                                                                                                                                                             4000
                                                                        sac                                                                                                                                               sac                                                                                 sac
                               8000                                                                                                                                                                          0
                                                                                                                  600
                                                                                        Average Episodic Return


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Average Episodic Return
                                                                                                                                                                                Average Episodic Return
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 3000
    Average Episodic Return


                               6000                                                                                                                                                                         20
                               4000                                                                               400                                                                                       40
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 2000
                               2000
                                                                                                                                                                                                            60
                                  0                                                                               200
                                                                                                                                                                                                            80                                                                                   1000
                               2000
                                                                                                                                                                lb­DR (ours)                               100
                               4000                                                                                 0                                           sac                                                                                                                                 0
                                       0.0   0.2    0.4 0.6 0.8            1.0    1.2                                    0.0       0.2     0.4 0.6 0.8            1.0     1.2                                       0.0   0.2     0.4 0.6 0.8            1.0     1.2                                    0.0   0.2     0.4 0.6 0.8            1.0    1.2
                                                    Environment Steps             1e7                                                      Environment Steps              1e7                                                     Environment Steps              1e7                                                  Environment Steps             1e7


                               (e) Atari Centipede                                                                       (f) Atari Enduro                                                                   (g) Fishing Derby                                                                      (h) Atari Frostbite
                                5.0                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              8000
                                                                        lb­DR (ours)                              3000                                          lb­DR (ours)                                                                           lb­DR (ours)                                           lb­DR (ours)
                                                                                                                                                                sac                                       12000                                                                                               sac
                                7.5                                     sac                                                                                                                                                                            sac                                       7000
                                                                                                                  2500
                                                                                                                                                                                                          10000                                                                                  6000
                               10.0
                                                                                        Average Episodic Return


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Average Episodic Return
    Average Episodic Return


                                                                                                                                                                                Average Episodic Return


                                                                                                                  2000                                                                                                                                                                           5000
                                                                                                                                                                                                           8000
                               12.5
                                                                                                                  1500                                                                                                                                                                           4000
                               15.0                                                                                                                                                                        6000
                                                                                                                  1000                                                                                                                                                                           3000
                               17.5                                                                                                                                                                        4000
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 2000
                               20.0                                                                                500                                                                                     2000
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 1000
                               22.5                                                                                  0                                                                                          0                                                                                   0
                                      0.0    0.2    0.4 0.6 0.8           1.0     1.2                                    0.0       0.2     0.4 0.6 0.8             1.0    1.2                                       0.0    0.2     0.4 0.6 0.8           1.0     1.2                                    0.0   0.2     0.4 0.6 0.8            1.0    1.2
                                                    Environment Steps             1e7                                                      Environment Steps              1e7                                                      Environment Steps             1e7                                                  Environment Steps             1e7


                              (i) Atari Ice Hockey                                                                (j) Atari Ms Pacman                                                                            (k) Atari Q*bert                                                                  (l) Atari River raid
                                                                                                                                                                                                          1200                                                                                   6000
                              50000          lb­DR (ours)                                                                                                       lb­DR (ours)                                              lb­DR (ours)                                                                                                    lb­DR (ours)
                                                                                                                  5000                                          sac                                                       sac                                                                                                             sac
                                             sac                                                                                                                                                          1000                                                                                   5000
                              40000                                                                               4000
                                                                                        Average Episodic Return


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Average Episodic Return
                                                                                                                                                                                Average Episodic Return


                                                                                                                                                                                                           800
    Average Episodic Return


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 4000
                              30000                                                                               3000                                                                                     600
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 3000
                              20000                                                                                                                                                                        400
                                                                                                                  2000
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 2000
                                                                                                                                                                                                           200
                              10000                                                                               1000                                                                                                                                                                           1000
                                                                                                                                                                                                             0
                                  0                                                                                  0                                                                                                                                                                              0
                                                                                                                                                                                                           200
                                      0.0    0.2    0.4 0.6 0.8            1.0    1.2                                    0.0       0.2     0.4 0.6 0.8             1.0    1.2                                       0.0   0.2     0.4 0.6 0.8            1.0     1.2                                    0.0   0.2     0.4 0.6 0.8            1.0    1.2
                                                    Environment Steps             1e7                                                      Environment Steps              1e7                                                     Environment Steps              1e7                                                  Environment Steps             1e7


                                 (m) Road Runner                                                                    (n) Atari Seaquest                                                                      (o) Space Invaders                                                                   (p) Atari Time Pilot
                                                                                                                                                                                                           15
                                             lb­DR (ours)                                                                          lb­DR (ours)                                                                           lb­DR (ours)                                                            15                                      lb­DR (ours)
                                                                                                                   10              ddpg                                                                                   ddpg                                                                                                            ddpg
                                             sac                                                                                                                                                           20
                              8000                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                20
                                                                                                                   15
                                                                                                                                                                                                           25
                                                                                        Average Episodic Return


                                                                                                                                                                                Average Episodic Return


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Average Episodic Return
    Average Episodic Return


                                                                                                                   20                                                                                                                                                                             25
                              6000
                                                                                                                   25                                                                                      30
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  30
                              4000                                                                                 30                                                                                      35                                                                                     35
                                                                                                                   35                                                                                      40
                              2000                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                40
                                                                                                                   40
                                                                                                                                                                                                           45                                                                                     45
                                 0
                                                                                                                   45
                                                                                                                                                                                                           50                                                                                     50
                                      0.0    0.2    0.4 0.6 0.8           1.0     1.2                                0.0             0.5          1.0       1.5           2.0                                0.0            0.5          1.0       1.5           2.0                                0.0         0.5          1.0       1.5          2.0
                                                    Environment Steps             1e7                                                      Environment Steps              1e6                                                     Environment Steps              1e6                                                  Environment Steps             1e6


                                  (q) Atari Zaxxon                                                                             (r) FetchPush                                                                          (s) FetchSlide                                                                   (t) PickAndPlace

Figure 5: Evaluated average return of value target lower bounding with discounted return (lb-DR)
vs SAC or DDPG on Atari games and episodic FetchEnv tasks. Solid curves are the mean across
five (for Atari) or three (others) seeds, and shaded areas are +/- one standard deviation.


                                                                                                                                                                               20
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                                                                                                     0.10                                                                                      0.12                                                                                      0.30
                                 0.12                                    lb­DR (ours)                                                                          lb­DR (ours)                                                                              lb­DR (ours)                                                     lb­DR (ours)

                                 0.10                                                                                                                                                                          0.10                                                                                      0.25
                                                                                                                     0.08
     lb­DR Return Greater Rate


                                                                                         lb­DR Return Greater Rate


                                                                                                                                                                                   lb­DR Return Greater Rate


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             lb­DR Return Greater Rate
                                 0.08                                                                                                                                                                          0.08                                                                                      0.20
                                                                                                                     0.06
                                 0.06                                                                                                                                                                          0.06                                                                                      0.15
                                                                                                                     0.04
                                 0.04                                                                                                                                                                          0.04                                                                                      0.10
                                                                                                                     0.02                                                                                                                                                                                0.05
                                 0.02                                                                                                                                                                          0.02

                                 0.00                                                                                0.00                                                                                      0.00                                                                                      0.00
                                        0      1      2          3         4        5                                       0       1       2          3           4          5                                        0     1        2          3           4          5                                       0          1         2          3            4          5
                                                   Training Iterations             1e4                                                   Training Iterations                 1e4                                                   Training Iterations                 1e4                                                        Training Iterations                  1e4


                                            (a) Atari Alien                                                             (b) Atari Atlantis                                                                     (c) Atari Bank Heist                                                                        (d) Atari Breakout
                                                                         lb­DR (ours)                                0.10                                      lb­DR (ours)                                                                              lb­DR (ours)                                    0.12                                           lb­DR (ours)
                                 0.12
                                                                                                                                                                                                               0.08
                                                                                                                     0.08                                                                                                                                                                                0.10
                                 0.10
     lb­DR Return Greater Rate


                                                                                         lb­DR Return Greater Rate


                                                                                                                                                                                   lb­DR Return Greater Rate


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             lb­DR Return Greater Rate
                                                                                                                                                                                                               0.06                                                                                      0.08
                                 0.08                                                                                0.06
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         0.06
                                 0.06                                                                                0.04                                                                                      0.04
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         0.04
                                 0.04
                                                                                                                     0.02                                                                                      0.02                                                                                      0.02
                                 0.02
                                                                                                                     0.00                                                                                      0.00                                                                                      0.00
                                 0.00
                                        0      1      2          3         4        5                                       0       1       2          3           4          5                                        0     1        2          3           4          5                                       0          1         2          3            4          5
                                                   Training Iterations             1e4                                                   Training Iterations                 1e4                                                   Training Iterations                 1e4                                                        Training Iterations                  1e4


                                  (e) Atari Centipede                                                                       (f) Atari Enduro                                         (g) Atari Fishing Derby                                                                                               (h) Atari Frostbite
                                                                                                                                                                                                               0.16
                                                                         lb­DR (ours)                                                                          lb­DR (ours)                                                                              lb­DR (ours)                                    0.16                                           lb­DR (ours)
                                 0.08                                                                                0.16
                                                                                                                                                                                                               0.14                                                                                      0.14
                                                                                                                     0.14
                                                                                                                                                                                                               0.12                                                                                      0.12
     lb­DR Return Greater Rate


                                                                                         lb­DR Return Greater Rate


                                                                                                                                                                                   lb­DR Return Greater Rate


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             lb­DR Return Greater Rate
                                 0.06                                                                                0.12
                                                                                                                                                                                                               0.10                                                                                      0.10
                                                                                                                     0.10
                                 0.04                                                                                                                                                                          0.08                                                                                      0.08
                                                                                                                     0.08
                                                                                                                                                                                                               0.06                                                                                      0.06
                                                                                                                     0.06
                                 0.02                                                                                                                                                                          0.04                                                                                      0.04
                                                                                                                     0.04
                                                                                                                                                                                                               0.02                                                                                      0.02
                                                                                                                     0.02
                                 0.00                                                                                                                                                                          0.00                                                                                      0.00
                                        0      1      2          3         4        5                                       0       1       2          3           4          5                                        0     1        2          3           4          5                                       0          1         2          3            4          5
                                                   Training Iterations             1e4                                                   Training Iterations                 1e4                                                   Training Iterations                 1e4                                                        Training Iterations                  1e4


                                 (i) Atari Ice Hockey                                                                (j) Atari Ms Pacman                                                                               (k) Atari Q*bert                                                                    (l) Atari River raid
                                 0.10                                                                                                                                                                          0.16                                                                                      0.12
                                                                         lb­DR (ours)                                                                          lb­DR (ours)                                                                              lb­DR (ours)                                                                                   lb­DR (ours)
                                                                                                                     0.10                                                                                      0.14
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         0.10
                                 0.08                                                                                                                                                                          0.12
     lb­DR Return Greater Rate


                                                                                         lb­DR Return Greater Rate


                                                                                                                                                                                   lb­DR Return Greater Rate


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             lb­DR Return Greater Rate


                                                                                                                     0.08                                                                                                                                                                                0.08
                                                                                                                                                                                                               0.10
                                 0.06
                                                                                                                     0.06                                                                                      0.08                                                                                      0.06
                                 0.04                                                                                                                                                                          0.06
                                                                                                                     0.04                                                                                                                                                                                0.04
                                                                                                                                                                                                               0.04
                                 0.02                                                                                0.02                                                                                                                                                                                0.02
                                                                                                                                                                                                               0.02
                                 0.00                                                                                0.00                                                                                      0.00                                                                                      0.00
                                        0      1      2          3         4        5                                       0       1       2          3           4          5                                        0     1        2          3           4          5                                       0          1         2          3            4          5
                                                   Training Iterations             1e4                                                   Training Iterations                 1e4                                                   Training Iterations                 1e4                                                        Training Iterations                  1e4


           (m) Atari Road Runner                                                                                       (n) Atari Seaquest                                          (o) Atari Space Invaders                                                                                               (p) Atari Time Pilot
                                 0.08                                    lb­DR (ours)                                                                          lb­DR (ours)
                                                                                                                     0.04                                                                                                                                lb­DR (ours)                                    0.0200
                                                                                                                                                                                                               0.035                                                                                                                                    lb­DR (ours)
                                 0.07
                                                                                                                                                                                                               0.030                                                                                     0.0175
                                 0.06
     lb­DR Return Greater Rate


                                                                                         lb­DR Return Greater Rate


                                                                                                                     0.03
                                                                                                                                                                                   lb­DR Return Greater Rate


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             lb­DR Return Greater Rate


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         0.0150
                                 0.05                                                                                                                                                                          0.025
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         0.0125
                                 0.04                                                                                0.02                                                                                      0.020
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         0.0100
                                 0.03                                                                                                                                                                          0.015
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         0.0075
                                 0.02                                                                                0.01                                                                                      0.010                                                                                     0.0050
                                 0.01                                                                                                                                                                          0.005                                                                                     0.0025
                                 0.00                                                                                0.00                                                                                      0.000                                                                                     0.0000
                                        0      1      2          3         4        5                                       0.0    0.2    0.4       0.6      0.8       1.0                                             0.0   0.2    0.4       0.6      0.8       1.0                                                0.0     0.2     0.4       0.6      0.8       1.0
                                                   Training Iterations             1e4                                                   Training Iterations                 1e3                                                   Training Iterations                 1e3                                                         Training Iterations                 1e3


                                        (q) Atari Zaxxon                                                                          (r) FetchPush                                                                            (s) FetchSlide                                               (t) FetchPickAndPlace

Figure 6: Fraction of training experience where lb-DR value target is greater than the Bellman target,
on Atari games and episodic FetchEnv tasks, plotted against the number of training iterations. Solid
curves are the mean across five (for Atari) or three (others) seeds, and shaded areas are +/- one
standard deviation.


                                                                                                                                                                               21
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                                                                                               5                                               lb­DR (ours)                                9                                                lb­DR (ours)                               3.5                                            lb­DR (ours)
                           10                                                                                                                                  sac                                                                                          sac
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      sac
                                                                                                                                                                                                           8
                            9                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          3.0
                                                                                                               4                                                                                           7


                                                                                         Mean Training Value


                                                                                                                                                                                     Mean Training Value
     Mean Training Value


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Mean Training Value
                            8                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          2.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                           6
                            7                                                                                  3
                                                                                                                                                                                                           5                                                                                           2.0
                            6
                                                                                                               2                                                                                           4                                                                                           1.5
                            5
                                                                                                                                                                                                           3
                            4                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          1.0
                                                                         lb­DR (ours)                          1                                                                                           2
                            3                                            sac                                                                                                                                                                                                                           0.5
                                0         1          2          3          4        5                               0          1            2          3         4              5                               0          1            2          3          4             5                                   0          1       2          3           4          5
                                                  Training Iterations              1e4                                                   Training Iterations                   1e4                                                   Training Iterations                   1e4                                                  Training Iterations                 1e4


                                        (a) Atari Alien                                                             (b) Atari Atlantis                                                                     (c) Atari Bank Heist                                                                             (d) Atari Breakout
                           13            lb­DR (ours)                                                                                                          lb­DR (ours)                                10                                               lb­DR (ours)
                                         sac                                                                   14                                              sac                                                                                          sac
                                                                                                                                                                                                            8                                                                                          17.5
                           12
                                                                                                               12                                                                                           6                                                                                          15.0
                           11
     Mean Training Value


                                                                                         Mean Training Value


                                                                                                                                                                                     Mean Training Value


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Mean Training Value
                                                                                                               10                                                                                           4                                                                                          12.5
                           10                                                                                   8                                                                                           2                                                                                                                                         lb­DR (ours)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       10.0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      sac
                            9                                                                                   6                                                                                           0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        7.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                            2
                            8                                                                                   4                                                                                                                                                                                       5.0
                                                                                                                                                                                                            4
                            7                                                                                   2                                                                                                                                                                                       2.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                            6
                                0         1          2          3          4        5                               0           1           2          3             4          5                               0          1            2          3             4          5                                      0       1       2          3           4          5
                                                  Training Iterations              1e4                                                   Training Iterations                   1e4                                                   Training Iterations                   1e4                                                  Training Iterations                 1e4


                               (e) Atari Centipede                                                                       (f) Atari Enduro                                              (g) Atari Fishing Derby                                                                                              (h) Atari Frostbite
                                                                         lb­DR (ours)                          16              lb­DR (ours)                                                                                                                                                                                                           lb­DR (ours)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            lb­DR (ours)                               10
                           10                                            sac                                                   sac                                                                         17.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            sac
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      sac
                                                                                                               14                                                                                          15.0
                            8                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           8
     Mean Training Value


                                                                                         Mean Training Value


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Mean Training Value
                                                                                                                                                                                     Mean Training Value


                                                                                                               12                                                                                          12.5
                            6
                                                                                                               10                                                                                          10.0                                                                                         6
                            4
                                                                                                                8                                                                                           7.5
                            2                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           4
                                                                                                                6                                                                                           5.0

                            0                                                                                                                                                                               2.5
                                                                                                                4                                                                                                                                                                                       2
                                0         1          2          3          4        5                               0           1           2          3             4          5                                    0         1         2          3            4          5                                  0       1          2          3            4          5
                                                  Training Iterations              1e4                                                   Training Iterations                   1e4                                                    Training Iterations                  1e4                                                 Training Iterations                  1e4


                           (i) Atari Ice Hockey                                                                (j) Atari Ms Pacman                                                                                   (k) Atari Q*bert                                                                      (l) Atari River raid
                                                                                                               10                                                                                          6                                                lb­DR (ours)                               8                                              lb­DR (ours)
                                                                                                                                                               lb­DR (ours)
                                          lb­DR (ours)                                                                                                                                                                                                      sac                                                                                       sac
                           20.0           sac
                                                                                                                                                               sac
                                                                                                                9                                                                                                                                                                                      7
                                                                                                                                                                                                           5
                           17.5                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        6
                                                                                                                8
                                                                                                                                                                                     Mean Training Value


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Mean Training Value
                                                                                         Mean Training Value
     Mean Training Value


                           15.0                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        5
                                                                                                                7                                                                                          4
                           12.5                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        4
                                                                                                                6
                           10.0                                                                                                                                                                            3                                                                                           3
                                                                                                                5
                            7.5                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        2
                                                                                                                4
                                                                                                                                                                                                           2
                            5.0                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        1
                                                                                                                3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       0
                                    0         1       2          3         4        5                               0           1           2          3             4          5                               0          1            2          3          4             5                               0          1          2          3            4          5
                                                   Training Iterations             1e4                                                   Training Iterations                   1e4                                                   Training Iterations                   1e4                                                 Training Iterations                  1e4


         (m) Atari Road Runner                                                                                      (n) Atari Seaquest                                               (o) Atari Space Invaders                                                                                          (p) Atari Time Pilot
                                                                         lb­DR (ours)                                                                                                                                                                                                                      0
                                                                         sac                                       0.0                                                                                         0.0                                                                                                                                    lb­DR (ours)
                           8                                                                                                                                    lb­DR (ours)                                                                                 lb­DR (ours)
                                                                                                                                                                ddpg                                                                                         ddpg                                                                                     ddpg
                                                                                                                   2.5                                                                                         2.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           5
                                                                                                                   5.0                                                                                         5.0
     Mean Training Value


                           6
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Mean Training Value
                                                                                         Mean Training Value


                                                                                                                                                                                     Mean Training Value


                                                                                                                   7.5                                                                                         7.5                                                                                      10
                                                                                                                                                                                                            10.0
                           4                                                                                   10.0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        15
                                                                                                                                                                                                            12.5
                                                                                                               12.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                            15.0                                                                                        20
                           2                                                                                   15.0
                                                                                                                                                                                                            17.5
                                                                                                               17.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                            20.0                                                                                        25
                           0                                                                                   20.0
                                0         1          2          3          4        5                                    0.0       0.2      0.4       0.6      0.8       1.0                                         0.0       0.2      0.4       0.6      0.8       1.0                                        0.0    0.2       0.4       0.6      0.8       1.0
                                                  Training Iterations              1e4                                                     Training Iterations                 1e3                                                     Training Iterations                 1e3                                                  Training Iterations                 1e3


                                    (q) Atari Zaxxon                                                                       (r) FetchPush                                                                                 (s) FetchSlide                                                  (t) FetchPickAndPlace

Figure 7: Learned values of lb-DR and SAC (for Atari games) and DDPG (for FetchEnv tasks),
evaluated on the training experience and plotted against the number of training iterations. Solid
curves are the mean across five (for Atari) or three (others) seeds, and shaded areas are +/- one
standard deviation.


                                                                                                                                                                                 22
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                                                                                                               15
                                                                                                                                           lb­DR+GD (ours)                                                                              10
                              10                                                                                                           lb­GD (ours)
                                                                                                                               20
                                                                                                                                           her                                                                                          15
                              15
                                                                                                                               25

    Average Episodic Return


                                                                                                     Average Episodic Return


                                                                                                                                                                                                              Average Episodic Return
                              20                                                                                                                                                                                                        20

                              25                                                                                               30                                                                                                       25

                              30                                                                                               35                                                                                                       30
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        35
                              35                                                                                               40
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        40
                              40                                                 lb­DR+GD (ours)                                                                                                                                                                          lb­DR+GD (ours)
                                                                                                                               45
                                                                                 lb­GD (ours)                                                                                                                                           45                                lb­GD (ours)
                              45
                                                                                 her                                           50                                                                                                                                         her
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        50
                               0.0       0.5          1.0       1.5                            2.0                               0.0          0.5          1.0       1.5                                2.0                               0.0         0.5          1.0       1.5       2.0
                                               Environment Steps                               1e6                                                  Environment Steps                                   1e6                                                 Environment Steps          1e6

                                        (a) FetchPush                                                                                     (b) FetchSlide                                                                                         (c) PickAndPlace
                                                                                40
                                                                                                                                                                                     60
                                                                                50
                                                                                                                                                                                     80
                                                     Average Episodic Return


                                                                                                                                                          Average Episodic Return
                                                                                60                                                                                                  100
                                                                                70                                                                                                  120

                                                                                80                                                                                                  140
                                                                                                                                                                                    160
                                                                                90
                                                                                                                                    lb­DR+GD (ours)                                 180                                                      lb­DR+GD (ours)
                                                                               100                                                  lb­GD (ours)                                                                                             lb­GD (ours)
                                                                                                                                    her                                             200                                                      her
                                                                                     0     1       2       3                              4          5                                    0.00   0.25    0.50 0.75 1.00                              1.25
                                                                                               Environment Steps                                    1e6                                                 Environment Steps                                   1e7

                                                                                         (d) PioneerPush                                                                                         (e) PushReach

Figure 8: Value target lower bounding with goal distance return (lb-GD) and lb-DR+GD vs HER
on episodic FetchEnv and Pioneer tasks. Solid curves are the mean across three seeds, and shaded
areas are +/- one standard deviation.


A.4.2                              LB -GD ( GOAL DISTANCE RETURN ) AND LB -DR+GD VS HER

Figure 8 compares lower bounding with goal distance return (lb-GD) and lower bounding with both
goal distance and discounted return combined (lb-DR+GD) against the much stronger HER baseline,
on the goal conditioned episodic FetchEnv and Pioneer tasks.
On the easier FetchEnv tasks, lower bounding is similar as HER, but on the more challenging Pioneer
Push and Reach tasks, lower bounding is able to achieve over 70% more sample efficiency. It seems
the harder the task, the wider the margin of gain.

A.4.2.1                              Value learning plots
This section presents plots of learned value and how often value is improved by the proposed meth-
ods, in order to show the effect of lower bounding on value improvement.
Figure 9 shows the fraction of training experience where the lb-GD is higher than the Bellman value
target from HER, in the goal conditioned (episodic FetchEnv and Pioneer) tasks, and the learned
value. It seems, for FetchEnv tasks, where lb-GD only performs slightly better than HER, the
fraction of experience with improved value target is quite small (less than 1%). Hindsight relabeling
is probably already producing fairly high value targets. For Pioneer Push and Reach tasks, lb-GD
performs much better in average return, and the fraction of experience with higher value target is
also much larger (peaking around 2-8%).


                                                                                                                                                      23
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                0.0040                                                                                                                 0.012                                                                                                             0.004                                    lb­DR+GD (ours)
                                                                                                    lb­DR+GD (ours)
                                0.0035                                                              lb­GD (ours)                                                                                                                                                                                                  lb­GD (ours)
                                                                                                                                                       0.010
                                0.0030


                                                                                                                           lb­GD Return Greater Rate


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             lb­GD Return Greater Rate
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         0.003
    lb­GD Return Greater Rate


                                                                                                                                                       0.008
                                0.0025
                                0.0020                                                                                                                 0.006
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         0.002
                                0.0015                                                                                                                 0.004
                                0.0010                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   0.001
                                                                                                                                                       0.002
                                0.0005
                                                                                                                                                       0.000                                                           lb­DR+GD (ours)
                                0.0000                                                                                                                                                                                 lb­GD (ours)                                      0.000
                                           0.0     0.2      0.4       0.6      0.8                            1.0                                              0.0    0.2       0.4       0.6      0.8                           1.0                                             0.0       0.2     0.4       0.6      0.8   1.0
                                                           Training Iterations                                      1e3                                                        Training Iterations                                     1e3                                                        Training Iterations             1e3

                                                 (a) FetchPush                                                                                                       (b) FetchSlide                                                                                           (c) FetchPickAndPlace
                                                                                            0.025                                                                                                               0.08
                                                                                                                                                             lb­DR+GD (ours)                                                                                                  lb­DR+GD (ours)
                                                                                                                                                             lb­GD (ours)                                       0.07                                                          lb­GD (ours)
                                                                                            0.020
                                                                                                                                                                                                                0.06


                                                                                                                                                                                    lb­GD Return Greater Rate
                                                                lb­GD Return Greater Rate


                                                                                            0.015                                                                                                               0.05
                                                                                                                                                                                                                0.04
                                                                                            0.010                                                                                                               0.03
                                                                                                                                                                                                                0.02
                                                                                            0.005
                                                                                                                                                                                                                0.01
                                                                                            0.000                                                                                                               0.00
                                                                                                     0.0            0.5           1.0                                1.5                                                0       1          2         3                                 4          5
                                                                                                                      Training Iterations                                   1e3                                                        Training Iterations                                       1e3

                                                                                                           (d) PioneerPush                                                                                             (e) PioneerPushReach
                                                                                                  lb­DR+GD (ours)                                                                                                      lb­DR+GD (ours)                                    1                                      lb­DR+GD (ours)
                                 1                                                                lb­GD (ours)                                                                                                                                                                                                   lb­GD (ours)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       lb­GD (ours)
                                                                                                  her                                                    2                                                             her                                                2                                      her
                                 2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          3
    Mean Training Value


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Mean Training Value


                                                                                                                                                         4
                                                                                                                           Mean Training Value


                                 3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          4
                                 4                                                                                                                       6
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          5
                                 5                                                                                                                       8                                                                                                                6
                                 6                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        7
                                                                                                                                                        10
                                 7                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        8
                                                                                                                                                        12
                                     0.0         0.2      0.4       0.6      0.8                             1.0                                             0.0     0.2     0.4       0.6      0.8                              1.0                                          0.0      0.2        0.4       0.6      0.8    1.0
                                                         Training Iterations                                        1e3                                                     Training Iterations                                        1e3                                                       Training Iterations              1e3

                                                 (f) FetchPush                                                                                                       (g) FetchSlide                                                                                           (h) FetchPickAndPlace
                                                                                              0                                                              lb­DR+GD (ours)                                      0                                                           lb­DR+GD (ours)
                                                                                                                                                             lb­GD (ours)                                                                                                     lb­GD (ours)
                                                                                             10                                                              her                                                                                                              her
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 20
                                                                                             20
                                                                Mean Training Value


                                                                                                                                                                                    Mean Training Value


                                                                                             30                                                                                                                  40

                                                                                             40
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 60
                                                                                             50

                                                                                             60                                                                                                                  80

                                                                                             70
                                                                                                  0.0          0.5           1.0                                     1.5                                                0       1          2         3                                 4          5
                                                                                                                 Training Iterations                                        1e3                                                        Training Iterations                                       1e3

                                                                                                           (i) PioneerPush                                                                                                  (j) PioneerReach

Figure 9: Fraction of training experience where lb-GD or lb-DR+GD value target is greater than
the Bellman target (a-e) and learned values (f-j), on episodic FetchEnv and Pioneer tasks, plotted
against the number of training iterations. Solid curves are the mean across three seeds, and shaded
areas are +/- one standard deviation.


                                                                                                                                                                                24
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                              400
                                                                                                                             lb­b­3step (ours)                                                                lb­b­3step (ours)
                              350                                                                               6000         opt­tighten­3step                                                  3000          opt­tighten­3step
                                                                                                                             td­lambda                                                                        td­lambda
                              300                                                                               5000         retrace                                                            2500          retrace


    Average Episodic Return


                                                                                      Average Episodic Return


                                                                                                                                                                      Average Episodic Return
                                                                                                                             sac                                                                              sac
                              250                                                                                                                                                               2000
                                                                                                                4000
                              200
                                                                                                                3000                                                                            1500
                              150
                                                                 lb­b­3step (ours)                              2000                                                                            1000
                              100                                opt­tighten­3step
                                                                 td­lambda                                      1000                                                                             500
                               50                                retrace
                                0                                sac                                               0                                                                               0
                                     0.0     0.2   0.4 0.6 0.8          1.0     1.2                                    0.0   0.2    0.4 0.6 0.8         1.0     1.2                                    0.0    0.2     0.4 0.6 0.8         1.0   1.2
                                                   Environment Steps            1e7                                                 Environment Steps           1e7                                                   Environment Steps         1e7

                                           (a) Atari Breakout                                                              (b) Atari Seaquest                                                              (c) Atari Frostbite
                                             lb­b­3step (ours)                                                                                                                                                lb­b­2step (ours)
                              8000           opt­tighten­3step                                                                                                                                   25           opt­tighten­2step
                                                                                                                 10                                                                                           td­lambda
                                             td­lambda
                                             retrace                                                                                                                                                          ddpg
                                                                                                                                                                                                 30
                                                                                      Average Episodic Return


                                                                                                                                                                      Average Episodic Return
    Average Episodic Return


                              6000           sac
                                                                                                                 20
                                                                                                                                                                                                 35
                              4000
                                                                                                                 30
                                                                                                                                                                                                 40
                              2000                                                                                                               lb­b­2step (ours)
                                                                                                                 40                                                                              45
                                                                                                                                                 opt­tighten­2step
                                                                                                                                                 td­lambda
                                 0                                                                                                               ddpg                                            50
                                                                                                                 50
                                     0.0     0.2    0.4 0.6 0.8         1.0     1.2                                    0      1        2       3        4        5                                     0        1        2       3        4      5
                                                    Environment Steps           1e7                                                Environment Steps            1e6                                                  Environment Steps          1e6

                                            (d) Atari Q*bert                                                                 (e) FetchPush                                                                   (f) PickAndPlace

Figure 10: Evaluated average return of value target lower bounding with n-step bootstrapped return
(lb-b-nstep) vs SAC or DDPG, td-lambda, Retrace and optimality-tightening on Atari games and the
original/non-episodic FetchEnv tasks. n = 3 for Atari and 2 for FetchEnv tasks. Solid curves are
the mean across five (for Atari) or three (others) seeds; shaded areas are +/- one standard deviation.


A.4.3                               n- STEP BOOTSTRAPPED METHODS

Figure 10 shows performance of lb-b-nstep methods on a subset of the Atari games (episodic) and
the original (non-episodic) FetchEnv tasks. Besides SAC/DDPG, baselines also include n-step meth-
ods such as td-lambda, Retrace (Munos et al., 2016) and optimality tightening (He et al., 2017).
lb-b-nstep methods are at least as good as the best baseline method, and clearly outperforms the
baselines in two of the six tasks.

A.4.3.1                               Value learning plots
Figure 11 shows the fraction of experience where lb-b-nstep lower bounds are above one step Bell-
man value targets. There seems to be a correlation between improving the value target over more
experience and actually improving the policy, at least for FetchEnv tasks. The correlation does not
seem as clear as that of lb-DR. With bootstrapping, the fractions are generally higher than those of
lb-DR in Figure 6, potentially due to overestimated bootstrap values.

A.4.4                               n- STEP METHOD ABLATIONS

The following three sections include ablations which show the lower bounding methods to be robust
to variations in the hyperparameters.

A.4.4.1                               lb-b-nstep with different n (number of steps)
Figure 12 shows the effect of how the number of steps n in n-step bootstrapped return impacts
lower bounding performance. The lb-b-nstep method is not very sensitive to the value n, typically,
the higher the value n the better the performance, while n-step methods like td-lambda or Retrace
would degrade a lot as n increases above 3 or 4. We also observe lower value overestimation as n
increases (Figure 16).


                                                                                                                                      25
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                0.9
                                                                 lb­b­3step (ours)                                                                     lb­b­3step (ours)                                                                      lb­b­3step (ours)
                                                                 opt­tighten­3step                                0.7                                  opt­tighten­3step                                0.7                                   opt­tighten­3step
                                0.8
                                                                                                                  0.6


    lb­DR Return Greater Rate


                                                                                      lb­DR Return Greater Rate


                                                                                                                                                                            lb­DR Return Greater Rate
                                                                                                                                                                                                        0.6
                                0.7
                                                                                                                  0.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                        0.5
                                0.6
                                                                                                                  0.4
                                0.5                                                                                                                                                                     0.4
                                                                                                                  0.3
                                0.4                                                                                                                                                                     0.3
                                                                                                                  0.2
                                0.3                                                                                                                                                                     0.2
                                                                                                                  0.1
                                      0      1      2          3       4         5                                       0       1        2          3       4         5                                       0       1         2          3       4         5
                                                 Training Iterations            1e4                                                    Training Iterations            1e4                                                     Training Iterations            1e4

                                           (a) Atari Breakout                                                                  (b) Atari Seaquest                                                                    (c) Atari Frostbite
                                0.8
                                                                 lb­b­3step (ours)                                                                     lb­b­2step (ours)                                0.30           lb­b­2step (ours)
                                                                                                                  0.35
                                                                 opt­tighten­3step                                                                     opt­tighten­2step                                               opt­tighten­2step
                                0.7
                                                                                                                  0.30                                                                                  0.25
    lb­DR Return Greater Rate


                                                                                      lb­DR Return Greater Rate


                                                                                                                                                                            lb­DR Return Greater Rate
                                0.6                                                                               0.25                                                                                  0.20

                                0.5                                                                               0.20
                                                                                                                                                                                                        0.15
                                                                                                                  0.15
                                0.4                                                                                                                                                                     0.10
                                                                                                                  0.10
                                0.3                                                                                                                                                                     0.05
                                                                                                                  0.05
                                                                                                                  0.00                                                                                  0.00
                                0.2
                                      0      1      2          3       4         5                                       0.0     0.5     1.0      1.5      2.0     2.5                                         0.0     0.5      1.0      1.5      2.0     2.5
                                                 Training Iterations            1e4                                                    Training Iterations            1e3                                                     Training Iterations            1e3

                                            (d) Atari Q*bert                                                                     (e) FetchPush                                                                 (f) FetchPickAndPlace

Figure 11: Fraction of training experience where lb-b-nstep value target or optimality-tightening
lower bound is greater than the value target of baselines SAC (for Atari games) and DDPG (for
FetchEnv tasks), plotted against the number of training iterations. Solid curves are the mean across
five (for Atari) or three (others) seeds, and shaded areas are +/- one standard deviation.


A.4.4.2                                   lb-b-nstep vs lb-b-nstep-only (only n-th step)
Figure 13 shows the effect of taking a maximum of all 2- to n-step bootstrapped returns versus only
using the n-step bootstrapped return. It seems using the maximum bootstrapped return of all 2- to
n-steps, hence a tighter lower bound, works better than only using the n-step return.

A.4.4.3                                   lb-b-nstep (bootstrap) or lb-DR (episodic return)
In continuing tasks (with negative rewards), we have to use the bootstrapped lb-b-nstep method. But
for episodic tasks, should we use bootstrapped return or episodic return as value target lower bound?
In theory, lb-b-nstep-only becomes lb-DR when n is large enough. In practice, in terms of effec-
tiveness, we can compare lb-b-nstep with lb-DR on the Atari games (Figure 10 and 5 respectively).
lb-b-nstep is better than lb-DR on Atari Breakout. On Seaquest, the two are similar. On the other
two games: Frostbite and Q*bert, episodic return is better. It seems lb-DR is better on tasks where
rewards are more sparse and longer term planning is needed. In terms of efficiency, as n becomes
larger, the memory and compute efficient lb-DR method will become more attractive. Overall, both
methods show a clear advantage over the baselines.

A.4.4.4                                   Value learning plots
Figure 14 shows the fraction of experience where lb-b-nstep lower bounds are above one step Bell-
man value targets.
Figures 15 and 16 show the learned value of the lb-b-nstep and lb-b-nstep-only methods. It’s con-
venient to look at the FetchEnv tasks which should always have non-positive value. From Figure
16(a,b), it seems as n increases, value decreases, maybe due to more accurate estimates of value.
From Figure 16(c,d), it seems the tighter lower bounds of lb-b-nstep method do lead to slightly more
overestimation in value.


                                                                                                                                          26
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                                                                               10                                                                                                                                 20              lb­b­2step (ours)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  lb­b­7step (ours)
                                                                                               15                                                                                                                                 25              lb­b­11step (ours)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  ddpg


                                                                     Average Episodic Return


                                                                                                                                                                                                 Average Episodic Return
                                                                                               20
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  30
                                                                                               25
                                                                                               30                                                                                                                                 35

                                                                                               35                                                                                                                                 40
                                                                                               40                                                                   lb­b­2step (ours)
                                                                                                                                                                    lb­b­7step (ours)                                             45
                                                                                               45                                                                   lb­b­11step (ours)
                                                                                                                                                                    ddpg                                                          50
                                                                                               50
                                                                                                      0                                  1           2       3                4         5                                               0             1         2       3                       4                           5
                                                                                                                                                 Environment Steps                     1e6                                                                  Environment Steps                                              1e6

                                                                                                                        (a) FetchPush                                                                                                         (b) PickAndPlace

Figure 12: Evaluated average return of value target lower bounding with n-step bootstrapped return
(lb-b-nstep) with different n on the original/non-episodic FetchEnv tasks. Solid curves are the mean
across three seeds, and shaded areas are +/- one standard deviation.


                                                                                               10                                                                                                                                 20              lb­b­7step (ours)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  lb­b­11step (ours)
                                                                                               15                                                                                                                                 25              lb­b­7step­only (ours)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  lb­b­11step­only (ours)
                                                                     Average Episodic Return


                                                                                                                                                                                                 Average Episodic Return


                                                                                               20                                                                                                                                                 ddpg
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  30
                                                                                               25
                                                                                               30                                                                                                                                 35

                                                                                               35                                                                                                                                 40
                                                                                                                                                             lb­b­7step (ours)
                                                                                               40                                                            lb­b­11step (ours)
                                                                                                                                                             lb­b­7step­only (ours)                                               45
                                                                                               45                                                            lb­b­11step­only (ours)
                                                                                                                                                             ddpg                                                                 50
                                                                                               50
                                                                                                      0                                  1           2       3                4         5                                               0             1         2       3                       4                           5
                                                                                                                                                 Environment Steps                     1e6                                                                  Environment Steps                                              1e6

                                                                                                                        (a) FetchPush                                                                                                         (b) PickAndPlace

Figure 13: Evaluated average return of value target lower bounding with all n-step bootstrap (lb-b-
nstep) and nth-step only (lb-b-nstep-only) on the original/non-episodic FetchEnv tasks. Solid curves
are the mean across three seeds, and shaded areas are +/- one standard deviation.


                                 0.4          lb­b­2step (ours)                                                                                       lb­b­2step (ours)                                                     0.4             lb­b­7step (ours)                                                                                         lb­b­7step (ours)
                                              lb­b­7step (ours)                                                                          0.30                                                                                               lb­b­11step (ours)                                                    0.30
                                                                                                                                                      lb­b­7step (ours)                                                                                                                                                                               lb­b­11step (ours)
                                              lb­b­11step (ours)                                                                                      lb­b­11step (ours)
                                                                                                                                         0.25                                                                                                                                                                     0.25
     lb­DR Return Greater Rate


                                                                                                                                                                                                lb­DR Return Greater Rate


                                 0.3                                                                                                                                                                                        0.3
                                                                                                             lb­DR Return Greater Rate


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      lb­DR Return Greater Rate


                                                                                                                                         0.20                                                                                                                                                                     0.20
                                 0.2                                                                                                     0.15                                                                               0.2                                                                                   0.15
                                                                                                                                         0.10                                                                                                                                                                     0.10
                                 0.1                                                                                                                                                                                        0.1
                                                                                                                                         0.05                                                                                                                                                                     0.05

                                 0.0                                                                                                     0.00                                                                               0.0                                                                                   0.00
                                       0.0    0.5      1.0      1.5      2.0                        2.5                                         0.0   0.5      1.0      1.5      2.0   2.5                                        0.0       0.5      1.0      1.5      2.0   2.5                                         0.0     0.5     1.0      1.5      2.0     2.5
                                                     Training Iterations                               1e3                                                   Training Iterations          1e3                                                      Training Iterations          1e3                                                    Training Iterations            1e3


                                             (a) FetchPush                                                         (b) FetchPickAndPlace                                                                                                (c) FetchPush                                       (d) FetchPickAndPlace

Figure 14: Fraction of training experience where lb-b-nstep or lb-b-nstep-only improves over the
baseline Bellman value target, evaluated on the training experience and plotted against the number
of training iterations. Solid curves are the mean across three seeds, and shaded areas are +/- one
standard deviation.


                                                                                                                                                                                            27
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               1e6
                                       lb­b­3step (ours)                                                                                   lb­b­3step (ours)                          20.0
                           70                                                                                                                                                                       lb­b­3step (ours)                                                                                      lb­b­3step (ours)
                                       opt­tighten­3step                                                80                                 opt­tighten­3step                                                                                                             1.0
                                                                                                                                                                                      17.5          opt­tighten­3step                                                                                      opt­tighten­3step
                           60          td­lambda                                                                                           td­lambda                                                td­lambda                                                                                              td­lambda
                                       retrace                                                                                             retrace                                    15.0                                                                               0.8
                                                                                                                                                                                                    retrace                                                                                                retrace
                           50          sac                                                              60                                 sac
     Mean Training Value


                                                                                  Mean Training Value
                                                                                                                                                                                                    sac                                                                                                    sac


                                                                                                                                                                Mean Training Value


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Mean Training Value
                                                                                                                                                                                      12.5                                                                               0.6
                           40
                                                                                                        40                                                                            10.0                                                                               0.4
                           30
                                                                                                                                                                                       7.5                                                                               0.2
                           20                                                                           20                                                                             5.0                                                                               0.0
                           10                                                                                                                                                          2.5                                                                               0.2
                            0                                                                            0
                                                                                                                                                                                       0.0                                                                               0.4
                                0       1        2          3        4      5                                0      1         2          3       4         5                                 0        1        2          3          4        5                                0      1       2          3           4      5
                                              Training Iterations          1e4                                             Training Iterations            1e4                                               Training Iterations              1e4                                           Training Iterations             1e4


                                (a) Atari Breakout                                                           (b) Atari Seaquest                                                          (c) Atari Frostbite                                                                   (d) Atari Q*bert
                                                                                                        40          lb­b­2step (ours)
                                                                                                                    opt­tighten­2step                                                   0
                                                                                                                    td­lambda
                                                                                                        20          ddpg                                                               10
                                                                                  Mean Training Value


                                                                                                                                                                Mean Training Value
                                                                                                                                                                                       20
                                                                                                         0
                                                                                                                                                                                       30
                                                                                                        20
                                                                                                                                                                                       40           lb­b­2step (ours)
                                                                                                                                                                                                    opt­tighten­2step
                                                                                                        40                                                                                          td­lambda
                                                                                                                                                                                       50           ddpg
                                                                                                             0.0    0.5      1.0      1.5      2.0     2.5                                   0.0    0.5      1.0      1.5      2.0        2.5
                                                                                                                           Training Iterations            1e3                                              Training Iterations               1e3


                                                                                                                   (e) FetchPush                                       (f) FetchPickAndPlace

Figure 15: Learned values of lb-b-nstep and SAC (for Atari games), DDPG (for FetchEnv tasks),
optimality-tightening, td-lambda and Retrace, evaluated on the training experience and plotted
against the number of training iterations. Solid curves are the mean across five (for Atari) or three
(others) seeds, and shaded areas are +/- one standard deviation.


                           20          lb­b­2step (ours)                                                 5                                                                              5
                                       lb­b­7step (ours)                                                                                                                                                                                                                  0
                                                                                                         0                                                                              0
                                       lb­b­11step (ours)
                           10          ddpg                                                                                                                                                                                                                               5
                                                                                                         5                                                                              5
     Mean Training Value


                                                                                  Mean Training Value


                                                                                                                                                                Mean Training Value


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Mean Training Value


                                                                                                                                                                                                                        lb­b­7step (ours)                                10                lb­b­7step (ours)
                            0                                                                           10                                                                             10                               lb­b­11step (ours)                                                 lb­b­11step (ours)
                                                                                                        15                                                                                                              lb­b­7step­only (ours)                           15                lb­b­7step­only (ours)
                                                                                                                                                                                       15                               lb­b­11step­only (ours)                                            lb­b­11step­only (ours)
                           10
                                                                                                        20                                                                                                              ddpg                                             20                ddpg
                                                                                                                                                                                       20
                           20                                                                           25          lb­b­2step (ours)                                                                                                                                    25
                                                                                                                    lb­b­7step (ours)                                                  25
                                                                                                        30          lb­b­11step (ours)                                                                                                                                   30
                           30                                                                                       ddpg                                                               30
                                0.0     0.5      1.0      1.5      2.0   2.5                                 0.0    0.5      1.0      1.5      2.0     2.5                                   0.0    0.5      1.0      1.5      2.0        2.5                                  0.0   0.5     1.0      1.5      2.0       2.5
                                               Training Iterations          1e3                                            Training Iterations            1e3                                              Training Iterations               1e3                                           Training Iterations              1e3


                                      (a) FetchPush                                   (b) FetchPickAndPlace                                                                                        (c) FetchPush                                       (d) FetchPickAndPlace

Figure 16: Learned values of lb-b-nstep, lb-b-nstep-only, DDPG (for FetchEnv tasks), optimality-
tightening, td-lambda and Retrace, evaluated on the training experience and plotted against the num-
ber of training iterations. Solid curves are the mean across three seeds, and shaded areas are +/- one
standard deviation.


                                                                                                                                                               28
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


A.5                             n- STEP RETURN BASED METHODS

A.5.1                                 n- STEP RETURN METHODS

lb-b-nstep methods and n-step return methods are similar in their data and computation require-
ments, and we already compare their performance in Figure 10.
Here, we additionally compare lb-DR directly with n-step methods in Figure 17.

                                400
                                                 lb­DR (ours)                                                                                                   lb­DR (ours)                                           lb­DR (ours)
                                                 td­lambda                                                                                                                                                4000
                                350                                                                                    6000                                     td­lambda                                              td­lambda
                                                 retrace                                                                                                        retrace                                                retrace
                                300              sac                                                                   5000                                     sac                                                    sac
      Average Episodic Return


                                                                                             Average Episodic Return


                                                                                                                                                                                Average Episodic Return
                                                                                                                                                                                                          3000
                                250
                                                                                                                       4000
                                200
                                                                                                                       3000                                                                               2000
                                150
                                                                                                                       2000
                                100                                                                                                                                                                       1000
                                                                                                                       1000
                                 50
                                  0                                                                                       0                                                                                  0
                                      0.0        0.2    0.4 0.6 0.8            1.0     1.2                                    0.0   0.2     0.4 0.6 0.8            1.0    1.2                                    0.0   0.2    0.4 0.6 0.8            1.0    1.2
                                                        Environment Steps              1e7                                                  Environment Steps             1e7                                                 Environment Steps             1e7

                                            (a) Atari Breakout                                                                  (b) Atari Seaquest                                                                 (c) Atari Frostbite
                                                                                                                                    lb­DR (ours)                                                           15                                     lb­DR (ours)
                                12000                                        lb­DR (ours)                               10          td­lambda                                                                                                     td­lambda
                                                                             td­lambda                                              ddpg                                                                                                          ddpg
                                                                             retrace                                    15                                                                                 20
                                10000
                                                                             sac
                                                                                             Average Episodic Return


                                                                                                                                                                                Average Episodic Return
                                                                                                                        20                                                                                 25
      Average Episodic Return


                                 8000
                                                                                                                        25                                                                                 30
                                 6000                                                                                   30                                                                                 35
                                 4000                                                                                   35
                                                                                                                                                                                                           40
                                 2000                                                                                   40
                                                                                                                                                                                                           45
                                                                                                                        45
                                      0                                                                                                                                                                    50
                                          0.0     0.2    0.4 0.6 0.8           1.0     1.2                                0.0         0.5          1.0       1.5          2.0                                0.0        0.5          1.0       1.5          2.0
                                                         Environment Steps             1e7                                                  Environment Steps             1e6                                                 Environment Steps             1e6

                                                (d) Atari Q*bert                                                                    (e) FetchPush                                                                (f) FetchPickAndPlace

Figure 17: Evaluated average return of value target lower bounding with discounted return (lb-DR)
vs SAC or DDPG, td-lambda and Retrace on four Atari games and the episodic FetchEnv tasks.
Solid curves are the mean across five (for Atari) or three (others) seeds, and shaded areas are +/- one
standard deviation.

During experimentation, we found that n-step methods are typically harder to tune and more expen-
sive to compute.
1) Tuning n: A small n for n-step methods works similarly as the baseline one-step method, and
a larger n hurts performance. This is likely due to the off-policy bias in n-step return causing the
n-step estimate to be potentially worse than the one-step estimate. Introducing importance sampling
weights (Retrace) would help reduce the bias, but at the same time significantly downweight the
off-policy high return experiences, making an ineffective use of such experiences.
None of these issues exist in value target lower bounding: (a) It does not incur any off-policy bias,
and (b) as long as an experience renders high reward, being off-policy does not affect its ability to
improve the value target.
2) Tuning involves other hyperparameters like the td-lambda parameter, replay buffer size, priori-
tized replay (to potentially expire old experiences and sample recent ones more frequently), target
network update parameters (to reduce potential overestimation), and parameters for importance sam-
pling. But still, after all the tuning, it only slightly outperforms one-step DDPG on FetchEnv or SAC
on Atari games, and is often below the lower bounding methods. For td-lambda and Retrace, the best
performance comes from 2-step (for FetchEnv) or 3-step (for Atari) td with λ = 0.95, all other pa-
rameters the same as the baseline DDPG or SAC. Retrace underperforming the baseline in Breakout
and Frostbite is similarly observed in the original paper (Munos et al., 2016).


                                                                                                                                              29
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                          4.5                                                                                                                      lb­DR (ours)
                                                                    lb­DR (ours)
                          4.0                                       td­lambda                             12                                       td­lambda                                 17.5
                                                                    retrace                                                                        retrace
                          3.5                                       sac                                                                            sac                                       15.0
                                                                                                          10


                                                                                    Mean Training Value
    Mean Training Value


                                                                                                                                                                       Mean Training Value
                          3.0                                                                                                                                                                12.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        lb­DR (ours)
                          2.5                                                                              8                                                                                 10.0                                       td­lambda
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        retrace
                          2.0                                                                                                                                                                 7.5                                       sac
                                                                                                           6
                          1.5                                                                                                                                                                 5.0
                          1.0                                                                              4
                                                                                                                                                                                              2.5
                          0.5
                                                                                                                                                                                              0.0
                                 0     1        2          3          4        5                               0       1        2          3           4          5                                 0        1       2          3           4          5
                                             Training Iterations              1e4                                            Training Iterations                 1e4                                              Training Iterations                 1e4

                                     (a) Atari Breakout                                                              (b) Atari Seaquest                                                                   (c) Atari Frostbite
                                                                                                           0                                       lb­DR (ours)                                0                                        lb­DR (ours)
                          17.5         lb­DR (ours)
                                       td­lambda                                                                                                   td­lambda                                                                            td­lambda
                                       retrace                                                                                                     ddpg                                        5                                        ddpg
                          15.0                                                                             5
                                       sac
                                                                                    Mean Training Value                                                                                       10


                                                                                                                                                                       Mean Training Value
    Mean Training Value


                          12.5
                                                                                                          10
                          10.0
                                                                                                                                                                                              15

                           7.5                                                                            15                                                                                  20

                           5.0                                                                                                                                                                25
                                                                                                          20
                           2.5                                                                                                                                                                30

                                 0      1        2          3         4        5                               0.0     0.2    0.4       0.6      0.8       1.0                                      0.0     0.2    0.4       0.6      0.8       1.0
                                              Training Iterations             1e4                                            Training Iterations                 1e3                                              Training Iterations                 1e3

                                      (d) Atari Q*bert                                                                 (e) FetchPush                                                                (f) FetchPickAndPlace

Figure 18: Learned values of lb-DR and SAC (for Atari games), DDPG (for FetchEnv tasks), td-
lambda and Retrace, evaluated on the training experience and plotted against the number of training
iterations. Solid curves are the mean across five (for Atari) or three (others) seeds, and shaded areas
are +/- one standard deviation.


On the other hand, value target lower bounding with episodic return requires no hyperparameter
tuning, (lb-b-nstep with bootstrapping is not very sensitive to the choice of n), and learns faster on
most tasks and converges higher on many tasks.
3) Computing n-step td-lambda return requires more computation due to evaluating value networks
on all n-steps of the experience. It limits how large n can be due to GPU memory limits, and slows
down training time significantly with a large n.
On the other hand, value target lower bounding precomputes and stores episodic discounted return
in the replay buffer, and incurs very little additional computation.
Overall, n-step methods are much more expensive and difficult to use, and the much simpler and
effective lower bounding methods maintain an advantage in both effectiveness and efficiency. We
show the performance comparison in Figure 17 with learned values in Figure 18.

A.5.2                            O PTIMALITY TIGHTENING WITH N - STEP RETURNS
He et al. (2017) use bootstrapped n-step return to lower and upper bound the value during training.
They frame the problem as a constrained optimization problem where the distance between the value
and the Bellman value target is minimized subject to the constraints that the value function must be
within the lower (and upper) bounds. This is similar to our lb-b-nstep method, except instead of
applying a constraint on the value, we use the bootstrapped return to directly lower bound and
improve the value target, which is likely more optimal and more efficient. In their experiments, the
Lagrangian multiplier was fixed, which would likely lead to suboptimal solutions, and no theoretical
guarantee was given. For episodic tasks, even more efficient and effective methods like lb-DR exist.
Some detailed differences:
1) The prior work bounds the value function itself (similar to lower bound q learning (Oh et al., 2018;
Tang, 2020)), instead of bounding the Bellman value target. This could cause suboptimal training


                                                                                                                                30
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


because the Bellman target itself could be outside the bounds, causing contradictory training targets
and losses. Imagine the current value for a state is 1, its Bellman value target may be a low 0, and
the lower bound may be a high 2, then it’s unclear which way the value function should go. It will
depend largely on the mixing weight between the two losses λ and whether initial values overesti-
mate, which can be hard to tune in practice. In their experiments, a fixed Lagrangian multiplier λ
was used, which makes the method likely non-optimal.
2) In order to compute the bootstrapped values, the value network needs to be evaluated on all n
future time steps, severely increasing GPU memory consumption and compute. Because of this
increase in compute, in experiments, it could only look at a limited (4) timesteps into the future,
while lb-DR and lb-b-nstep-only can look ahead much further with very little extra computation
and storage.
We implemented the optimality tightening method (He et al., 2017), using only the lower bounds to
be comparable to the other methods, and integrated it into our baselines. We ran on FetchPush and
FetchPickAndPlace with hyperparameters number of time steps n = 2, and the penalty coefficient
λ = 4 following the original paper. Results in Figure 10 show optimality tightening to be either not
as stable or not as optimal as our lb-b-nstep. We also ran it on Atari games, and found that optimality
tightening overestimates value a lot, leading to much worse behavior than even the SAC baseline.
The constrained optimization formulation might have an adverse effect during RL training, and the
upper bounds in the original optimality tightening work may be necessary to bring training back on
track.
It will be interesting to see whether value target upper bounding with bootstrapped values (as pro-
posed in (He et al., 2017) as value upper bound constraints) can lead to optimal converged value in
theory, and whether the upper bounds would help optimality tightening in experiments. However,
tight upper bounds are not as readily available as lower bounds. This is because during RL training,
the agent’s performance hopefully increases, which makes it difficult to come up with a proper up-
per bound before the optimal value is known. Additionally, the motivation for using upper bounding
would be, for example, to avoid value overestimation, which is very different from the motivation
of faster value improvement for lower bounding. Hence, we see upper bounding as out of the scope
of this work.


A.6                             VALUE TARGET LOWER BOUNDING ON DDQN

Because DQN is a more popular baseline for the Atari games, we’ve also applied value target lower
bounding (lb-DR) on DDQN, and ran on a subset of the Atari games. Different from (van Hasselt
et al., 2015), our implementation of DDQN finds the maximal action using the target critic network
and evaluates the target value on the target network. It also uses two critic replicas like in (Fujimoto
et al., 2018). Figure 19 shows the results. Compared to SAC (Figure 5), DDQN either lowers the
baseline performance or the treatment (lb-DR) performance, and does not seem as strong as SAC.


                                            lb­DR (ours)                                                                  lb­DR (ours)                                                                                            lb­DR (ours)                                                                     lb­DR (ours)
                                350         dqn                                                                                                                                            2500
                                                                                                             5000         dqn                                                                                                     dqn                                                                              dqn
                                300                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         8000
                                                                                                                                                                                           2000
      Average Episodic Return


                                                                                                             4000
                                                                                   Average Episodic Return


                                                                                                                                                                 Average Episodic Return


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Average Episodic Return


                                250
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            6000
                                                                                                             3000                                                                          1500
                                200
                                150                                                                                                                                                        1000                                                                             4000
                                                                                                             2000
                                100
                                                                                                             1000                                                                           500                                                                             2000
                                 50
                                  0                                                                             0                                                                             0                                                                                0
                                      0.0   0.2    0.4 0.6 0.8         1.0   1.2                                    0.0   0.2    0.4 0.6 0.8         1.0   1.2                                    0.0   0.2   0.4 0.6 0.8           1.0     1.2                                    0.0   0.2   0.4 0.6 0.8           1.0     1.2
                                                   Environment Steps         1e7                                                 Environment Steps         1e7                                                Environment Steps             1e7                                                Environment Steps             1e7


                                  (a) Atari Breakout                                                           (b) Atari Seaquest                                                            (c) Atari Frostbite                                                                   (d) Atari Q*bert

Figure 19: Evaluated average return of value target lower bounding with discounted return (lb-DR)
implemented on DDQN vs DDQN baseline on four of the Atari games. Solid curves are the mean
across five seeds, and shaded areas are +/- one standard deviation.


                                                                                                                                                             31
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


A.7      U NBIASED EXPERIENCE REPLAY

RL methods like Hindsight Experience Replay can introduce a hindsight bias (Plappert et al., 2018;
Lanka & Wu, 2018; Blier & Ollivier, 2021) in training due to a future step from an experience
being used to relabel an earlier step of the same experience, possibly biasing the distribution of
training experience, overestimating value and making the task seem easier than it really is. MuZero
(Schrittwieser et al., 2019) assumes deterministic transitions and could also exhibit bias in stochastic
environments (Antonoglou et al., 2022). Similar to HER, in this work, the future return from an
experience when directly used to lower bound the value target computed from the same experience
could also introduce bias to the value target. This bias could lead to value overestimation, as shown
in the example below.
Assume state S0 always goes to S1 . S1 gives reward +2 or −2, 50% of the times randomly, and
transitions to the terminal state. For this case, the true values are v(S0 ) = v(S1 ) = 0. For one
lucky experience with reward +2, empirical return for S0 is 2γ, and for an unlucky one, −2γ.
Averaging the two leads to the unbiased estimate of return for S0 , 0, which could be safely used
as a valid lower bound. However, if the lower bound is computed only using one lucky experience
or one unlucky experience, then the lower bounded value target for S0 is γ max(2, v(S1 )) and
γ max(−2, v(S1 )) respectively, averaging to be γ max(2,v(S1 ))+γ2
                                                                   max(−2,v(S1 ))
                                                                                  = 2γ+0
                                                                                      2  = γ, which
                      4
overestimates v(S0 ).
Existing work ARCHER (Lanka & Wu, 2018) and stochastic MuZero (Antonoglou et al., 2022) al-
ready follow up HER and MuZero, proposing unbiased sampling or model enhancements to address
the bias. Thus, the specific way of using the episodic or bootstrapped return from the sampled tran-
sition to lower bound the value target of the transition could be biased in stochastic environments,
but future work may propose unbiased sampling methods to reduce or remove the bias of empirical
return based lower bounds.
Luckily, when reward sequences are reproducible, which is largely satisfied for many tasks in the
macroscopic physical world, where reproducibility is often assumed, empirical return lower bound-
ing always produces an unbiased estimate of the value target. For the tasks in this paper, both
Atari games and physical simulators have near deterministic transitions, with pseudo randomness
affecting reproducibility. However, it seems the impact is small, as we do not observe any apparent
overestimation, and lower bounding still produces quite large improvements. This is consistent with
the observations of prior works such as Fujita et al. (2020).

A.8      M ORE ABOUT EPISODIC CONTROL

The original episodic control (Blundell et al., 2016) simply applies Q(s, a) = max(Q(s, a), R)
where R is the newly observed return for the entry (s, a) in the episodic memory Q. This lower
bounds the Q value directly, and if Q is already overestimated due to initialization or function ap-
proximation, it will stay overestimated, because the overestimation never goes through Bellman
contraction.
Hu et al. (2021) corrects the problem by using implicit memory based planning in the following
way. For an episode of length T , current step t ≤ T , the value target is defined recursively as


                                      rt + γ max(Rt+1 , Qθ (st+1 , at+1 ))     if t < T
                           Rt =                                                                    (12)
                                      rt                                       if t = T

This back propagation process can be further unrolled as follows. Define value as


                                                   rt + γVt+1,h−1   if h > 0
                                      Vt,h =                                                       (13)
                                                   Qθ (st , at )    if h = 0

Given planning horizon h, the value target for the value Qθ (st , at ) is just Rt :
   4
       For this argument, we can simply assume v(S1 ) to be 0, the correct value.


                                                         32
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                Rt = Vt,h∗ , where h∗ = arg max Vt,h                                (14)
                                                             h>0

The maximum over planning horizons h in Equation 14 allows existing values from the episodic
memory Qθ (si , ai ) for t < i ≤ T to influence and lower bound the return of the current trajectory.
As the episodic memory contains information about the trajectories from past experience, the final
value target is influenced not just by the current trajectory, but also past trajectories that share a
similar state as any of the states on the current trajectory.
Qθ (st , at ) and Vt,h are carefully defined to be 0 for all states after the episode ends i.e. t > T .
This allows the episode end to always have the correct value to begin with, so proper value can be
backed up the trajectory to all earlier states. Equation 14 also importantly requires h to be above 0
when taking the maximum over planning horizons. This way, the value target for Qθ (st , at ) is not
influenced by Qθ (st , at ) itself. Only Qθ (st+i , at+i ) (for i > 0) can influence the value target for
Qθ (st , at ), and they have to go through the Bellman operator (see Equation 13 when h > 0). This
means any initial overestimation will contract.
Episodic memory provides an interesting tool to compute tight value target lower bounds for near
deterministic tasks, with a computational cost similar to a typical n-step return method.

A.9    A DDITIONAL RELATED WORKS

Planning methods can look into the future to achieve higher value targets and better control. Ex-
amples include Monte Carlo Tree Search (MCTS) (Schrittwieser et al., 2019; Ye et al., 2021) and
Model Predictive Control (MPC) or receding horizon planning with raw actions (Chua et al., 2018;
Hafner et al., 2019; Zhang et al., 2022), options (Silver & Ciosek, 2012), or subgoals (Nasiriany
et al., 2019; Nair & Finn, 2020; Chane-Sane et al., 2021). Planning methods use either a dynamics
model together with the learned value or just the learned value (in the case of goal conditioned tasks)
(Nasiriany et al., 2019) to improve policy or value estimates. Planning typically happens during roll
out (Nasiriany et al., 2019), but can also be used to improve the value target, as in Reanalyze of
MuZero (Schrittwieser et al., 2019; Ye et al., 2021). During value improvement, if planning takes
the maximum over a set of possible future values (e.g. from different trajectories as in the case
of MPC), and if this set includes the one step Bellman value target, then the planner is essentially
using alternative trajectories and their values to lower bound the Bellman value target. In this sense,
the theory developed here can potentially justify and improve Reanalyze. In general, planning is
orthogonal to value target lower bounding, and typically requires additional components and a lot
more compute than the basic TD learning does. Therefore, we leave it to future work to explore the
synergy between the two.
Our work can be seen as an extension of the admissible heuristics (bounds) method (Russell &
Norvig, 2020) into the RL domain. Admissible heuristics speed up the search for the optimal so-
lution. For example, it is common practice to lower and upper bound the returns to the possible
                                                                            1
region, e.g. Andrychowicz et al. (2017) bounds value targets between [− 1−γ   , 0]. Episodic return
(Section 3.1) provides a tighter bound. In addition, our work extends the idea to the case of lower
bounding with bootstrapped values, which can overestimate the value. We prove it still converges to
the optimal value.
Kumar et al. (2020) (DisCor) also recognizes that bootstrapped value targets can be inaccurate. This
bias impacts learning adversely under function approximation. DisCor uses distribution correc-
tion to sample experience with accurate bootstrap targets more frequently, while value target lower
bounding aims to directly reduce the bias.

A.10    P OTENTIAL IMPROVEMENT

Note that the goal distance based return (lb-GD) of Section 3.1.1 is a very simple way of arriving
at a reasonable lower bound with near zero additional computation. The bound could be made
tighter. Typically, an L2 distance threshold is used to judge goal achievement, which will likely be
satisfied a few time steps before exactly arriving at the hindsight goal. To compute such a tighter
bound would require evaluating the reward function across the trajectories of experience using all
possible hindsight goal states, and storing them in the replay buffer, i.e. episode length squared more


                                                   33
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


computation and more storage space. It may be worth doing when episodes are short, or doing it
only for a small number of time steps into the future when e.g. rewards are non-negative.


                                             34
