Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


N EURAL F IELD D ISCOVERY D ISENTANGLES E QUIV-
ARIANCE IN I NTERACTING DYNAMICAL S YSTEMS

 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                             A BSTRACT
         Systems of interacting objects often evolve under the influence of underlying field
         effects that govern their dynamics, e.g. electromagnetic fields in physics, or map
         topologies and traffic rules in traffic scenes. While the interactions between objects
         depend on local information, the underlying fields depend on global states. Pedes-
         trians and vehicles in traffic scenes, for example, follow different traffic rules and
         social norms depending on their absolute geolocation. The entanglement of global
         and local effects makes recently popularized equivariant networks inapplicable,
         since they fail to capture global information. To address this, in this work, we
         propose to disentangle local object interactions –which are equivariant to global
         roto-translations and depend on relative positions and orientations– from external
         global field effects –which depend on absolute positions and orientations. We
         theorize the presence of latent fields, which we aim to discover without directly
         observing them, but infer them instead from the dynamics alone. We propose neural
         fields to learn the latent fields, and model the interactions with equivariant graph
         networks operating in local coordinate frames. We combine the two components in
         a graph network that transforms field effects in local frames and operates solely
         there. Our experiments show that we can accurately discover the underlying fields
         in charged particles settings, traffic scenes, and gravitational n-body problems, and
         effectively use them to learn the system and forecast future trajectories.


1    I NTRODUCTION
Systems of interacting objects are omnipresent
in nature, with examples ranging from the sub-
atomic to the astronomical scale –including col-
liding particles and n-body systems of celestial
objects– as well as human-centric settings like
traffic scenes, governed by social dynamics. The
majority of these systems does not evolve in a              Input Trajectories        Discovered Field
vacuum, they instead evolve under the influences
of underlying fields. For example, electromag- Figure 1: N-body system simulation with underly-
netic fields may govern the dynamics of charged ing gravitational field. We uncover fields that un-
particles. In traffic scenes, the road network and derlie interacting systems using trajectories only.
traffic rules govern the actions of traffic scene
participants. N-body systems might swirl around supermassive black holes that create gravitational
fields. Earlier work on learning interacting systems proposed graph networks (Kipf et al., 2018;
Battaglia et al., 2016; Sanchez-Gonzalez et al., 2020), while state-of-the-art methods for interacting
systems propose equivariant graph networks (Walters et al., 2021; Satorras et al., 2021; Kofinas et al.,
2021; Brandstetter et al., 2022) to model dynamics while respecting their underlying symmetries.
These networks exhibit increased robustness and performance, while maintaining parameter efficiency
due to weight sharing. They are, however, not compatible with underlying field effects, since they can
only capture local states, such as relative positions, while fields depend on absolute states (positions
or orientations). In other words, global fields violate the strict equivariance hypothesis. We are, thus,
in need of an augmented notion of equivariance that encapsulates both local and global effects.
In many real-world settings, strict SE(3) equivariance, –equivariance to the special Euclidean group of
translations and rotations– does not hold. A function f that predicts trajectories in interacting systems


                                                   1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


is equivariant to translations if f (x) + τ = f (x + τ ) for a translation vector τ , and equivariant
to rotations if Qf (x) = f (Qx) for a rotation matrix Q. That is, even if the symmetries exist in a
particular setting, they only manifest themselves in local interactions, yet they are entangled with
global effects that stem from absolute states. For instance, pedestrians and vehicles in traffic scenes
operate within egocentric perspectives; individual local coordinate frames allow for differentiating
objects based on relative states. Objects, however, behave differently depending on their absolute
geolocation, e.g. people in different countries or cities follow different traffic rules and social norms,
and exhibit different driving habits. In such cases, global transformations are not even properly
defined; it would be illogical to perform a translation or a rotation within the global coordinate frame
of the Earth, since this would coincide with a different location on the globe.
Even within a local region of space, though, certain effects may only depend on global object
states. N-body systems from physics, for example, exhibit roto-translational symmetries, since
gravitational forces only depend on relative positions. Dynamics, however, may be influenced by
external gravitational fields, which are either unknown or not subject to transformations. Thus, strict
equivariance is violated, since equivariant object interactions are entangled with global field effects.
In this work, we disentangle the interactions between objects –which are equivariant to global roto-
translations and depend on relative positions and orientations– from external field effects –which
depend on absolute positions and orientations. Furthermore, we propose neural fields to model the
underlying field effects. Neural fields depend on absolute positions, and potentially orientations, and
predict latent force fields. We model discrete object interactions with equivariant local coordinate
frame graph networks, and continuous field effects with neural fields.
We make the following contributions. First, we introduce the notion of entangled equivariance that
intertwines global and local effects, and propose a novel architecture that disentangles equivariant
local object interactions from global field effects. Second, we introduce neural fields to discover
global latent fields in interacting dynamical systems, and infer them by observing the dynamics alone.
Third, we propose an approximately equivariant graph network that extends local coordinate frame
graph networks by introducing an auxiliary origin node, resulting in a mixture of global and local
coordinate frames. Finally, we conduct experiments on a number of field settings, and observe that
explicitly modelling fields is mandatory for effective future forecasting, while their unsupervised
discovery opens a window for model explainability.
We term our method Aether, inspired by the postulated medium that permeates all throughout space
and allows for the propagation of light.


2     BACKGROUND

In this section, we introduce background knowledge on interacting systems, local coordinate frame
graph networks, and neural fields, which will serve as a foundation for our method.

2.1   I NTERACTING DYNAMICAL SYSTEMS

An interacting dynamical system comprises trajectories of N objects, recorded for T timesteps.
The snapshot of the i-th object at timestep t describes the state xti = [pti , uti ], i ∈ {1, . . . , N }, t ∈
{1, . . . , T }, where p denotes the position and u denotes the velocity, using [·, ·] to denote vector
concatenation along the feature dimension. Interacting dynamical systems can be naturally formalized
as spatio-temporal geometric graphs (Battaglia et al., 2016; Kipf et al., 2018; Graber & Schwing,
                     T
2020), G = {G t }t=1 , with graph snapshots G t = (V t , E t ) at different time steps. The set of graph
nodes V t = {v 1t , . . . , vN
                             t
                                } describes the objects in the system; vit corresponds to xti . The
                                                                                                   set of edges
E ⊆ vj , vi | vj , vi ∈ V × V describes pair-wise object interactions; vjt , vit corresponds
  t          t t         t t         t     t

to an interaction from node j to node i. Finally, we denote the graph neighbors of node vi with N (i).

2.2   L OCAL COORDINATE FRAME GRAPH NETWORKS

Local coordinate frame graph networks have been popularized in recent years (Kofinas et al., 2021;
Luo et al., 2022) as a method to achieve SE(3) equivariance, due to their low computational overhead
and high performance. Kofinas et al. (2021) proposed LoCS and introduced local coordinate frames


                                                      2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


for all node-objects at all timesteps. They define augmented node states vit = [pti , ωit , uti ], where ωit
denotes the angular position of node i at timestep t. Each local coordinate frame is translated to match
the target object’s position and rotated to match its orientation. Considering the representation of
node j in the local coordinate frame of node i, they first compute the relative positions rtj,i = ptj − pti
and then they rotate the state using the matrix representation of the angular position Q(ωit ):
                                       t
                                                    >   t
                                          = R̃ ωit     rj,i , ωjt , utj ,

                                     vj|i                                                                (1)
where R̃(ωit ) = Q(ωit ) ⊕ Q(ωit ) ⊕ Q(ωit ), and ⊕ denotes a direct sum. LoCS then proposes a graph
neural network (Scarselli et al., 2008; Li et al., 2016; Gilmer et al., 2017) that uses local states:
                                          h             i
                              htj,i = fe vj|i t      t
                                                 , vi|i   ,                                           (2)
                                                                            
                                                            1    X
                           ∆xt+1                   t
                               i|i = fv gv vi|i + |N (i)|
                                                                      htj,i ,                       (3)
                                                                  j∈N (i)

where fv , fe , and gv are MLPs. The output of this graph network comprises differences in positions
and velocities from the previous time step, in the local frame of each object. Since these outputs are
invariant, LoCS performs an inverse transformation to convert them back to the global coordinate
frame and achieve equivariance, xt+1
                                   i   = xti + R(ωit ) · ∆xt+1                t         t
                                                             i|i , where R(ωi ) = Q(ωi ) ⊕ Q(ωi ).
                                                                                                  t



2.3   N EURAL FIELDS

Finally, we make a brief introduction to neural fields. Neural fields, or coordinate-based MLPs, are
a class of neural networks that parameterize fields using neural networks (Xie et al., 2022). They
take as input spatial or temporal coordinates and predict some quantity. Neural fields can learn
prior behaviors and generalize to new fields via conditioning on a latent variable z that encodes
the properties of a specific field. Perez et al. (2018) proposed Feature-wise Linear Modulation
(FiLM), a conditioning mechanism that modulates a signal. It comprises two sub-networks α, β
that perform multiplicative and additive modulation to the input signal, and can be described by
FiLM(h, z) = α(z) h + β(z), where z is the conditioning latent variable, h is the signal to be
modulated, and α, β are MLPs that scale the signal, and add a bias term, respectively.

3     M ETHOD
In this section, we present our method, termed Aether. First, we describe the notion of entangled
equivariance, and introduce our architecture that disentangles global field effects from local object
interactions. Then, we continue with the description of the neural field that infers latent fields
by observing the dynamics alone. Finally, we formulate approximately equivariant global-local
coordinate frame graph networks. We note that throughout this work, we focus on 2-dimensional
settings, and fields that are unaffected by the observable objects and their interactions thereof.

3.1   A ETHER

Interacting dynamical systems rarely evolve in a vacuum,
rather they evolve under the influence of external field
effects. While object interactions depend on local infor-
mation, the underlying fields depend on global states. On
the one hand, locality in object interactions stems from the
fact that dynamics obey a number of symmetries. By ex-
tension, object interactions are equivariant to a particular
group of transformations. On the other hand, field effects
are non-local; they depend on absolute object states. Thus,
strict equivariance is violated, since equivariant object in- Figure 2: Two objects in a gravitational
teractions are entangled with global field effects. We refer field. We only observe the total force
to this phenomenon as entangled equivariance.                 exerted at each particle, i.e. the sum of
                                                              equivariant particle forces and global
As an example, in fig. 2 we observe a system of 2 objects field effects.
that evolve under the influence of a gravitational field. The


                                                     3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


arrows positioned on the objects represent the forces exerted on them. One constituent of the net
force is caused by the object interactions, and is thus equivariant, while the other can be attributed to
the gravitational pull. However, we can only observe the net force exerted at each particle, i.e. the
sum of equivariant particle forces and non-equivariant force field effects. Hence, in this system, we
say that equivariance is entangled.

               Neural Field f (p, ω | z)                                   Groundtruth Trajectories
                        fx              fy
                                                      Predicted Field
         Graph
       Aggregation
                              FiLM

                 z
                             Encoding


                       px            py


                                                                                                      Loss


                                                      Graph Network
            Input Trajectories                                              Predicted Trajectories

                                             Figure 3: The pipeline of our method, Aether.

We now propose our architecture that disentangles local object interactions from global field effects.
We model the object interactions with local coordinate frame graph networks (Kofinas et al., 2021),
and field effects with neural fields. During training, and given a multitude of input systems, neural
fields will, in principle, be able to isolate global from local effects, since only global effects are
recurring phenomena. We hypothesize that field effects can be attributed to force fields, and therefore,
our neural fields learn to discover latent force fields. The pipeline of our method is shown in fig. 3.
Our inputs comprise states xti for trajectories of N objects for T timesteps. Since neural fields model
global field effects, they depend on absolute states. Thus, we feed positions pti , and potentially
orientations ωit , of the trajectories as input to a neural field that predicts latent forces fit = f (pti , ωit ).
The predicted field forces can be now considered part of the node states, and further, they can be
treated similarly to other state variables like velocities; as vectors, forces are translation invariant
and rotation equivariant. Thus, moving onward, we can treat the problem setup as if we were once
again back in the strict equivariance regime. We append the predicted forces fit for each node-object
i and each timestep t to the node states, and transform them to corresponding local coordinate frames,
similarly to eq. (1). Namely, the force exerted on node j, expressed in the local coordinate frame of
node i is computed as:
                                            t
                                                = Q> ωit fjt .

                                           fj|i                                                      (4)
We feed the new local node states to a local coordinate frame graph network as follows:

                        htj,i = fe vj|i t      t
                                          , fj|i       t
                                                   , vi|i    t
                                                          , fi|i                                               (5)
                                                                                    

                                                                   1      X
                     ∆xt+1
                         i|i = fv gv
                                             t
                                           vi|i      t
                                                 , fi|i       +                htj,i                          (6)
                                                                 |N (i)|
                                                                         j∈N (i)
                         t+1      t         t          t+1

                       xi = xi + R ωi · ∆xi|i ,                                                                (7)

where R(ωit ) = Q(ωit ) ⊕ Q(ωit ). The equations above are similar to eqs. (2) and (3), with the
addition of the highlighted parts that denote the predicted forces expressed at local coordinate frames.
In practice, we closely follow (Kipf et al., 2018; Graber & Schwing, 2020; Kofinas et al., 2021) and
formulate our model as a variational autoencoder (Kingma & Welling, 2014; Rezende et al., 2014)
with latent edge types. The exact details are presented in appendix A.2.2.


                                                                    4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


3.2   F IELD DISCOVERY

In many settings, fields might not be directly observable for us to probe them at will and use them
for supervision. For example, astronomical observations of solar systems and galaxies might not
include black holes, yet we can observe their effects. Moreover, fields are often not even measurable
or quantifiable, or they are not explicitly defined. For instance, social “fields” that guide traffic,
cannot be measured or defined explicitly, but we can safely assume they exist. Motivated by these
observations, we design an architecture that performs unsupervised field discovery, while solving the
surrogate supervised task of trajectory forecasting.
In this work, we aim to discover two different types of fields, which we term “static” and “dynamic”
fields. Static fields refer to settings in which we have a single field shared throughout the whole
dataset. On the other hand, dynamic fields refer to settings in which we have a different field for each
input system, and fields also differ between train, validation, and test sets.
We now describe neural fields, used in this work, to model the underlying field effects. Neural fields
depend on absolute positions, and potentially orientations, and predict latent force fields. When
dealing with static fields, we use an unconditional neural field, i.e. a neural field that is a function
only of the input positions-orientations, as the field values are common across data samples. In
contrast, for dynamic fields, we use a conditional neural field, i.e. a neural field that also depends on
a latent vector z ∈ RDz that represents the underlying field. The latent z will be inferred from the
input trajectories and can be thought of as representing unusual non-equivariant dynamics. We use z
to explicitly condition the neural field, and thus, its general form is f : R2 × S 1 × RDz → R2 .

Static fields We start with the description of unconditional neural fields used in static field settings,
since conditional neural fields share the same backbone. First, we encode the input positions using
Gaussian random Fourier features (Gaussian RFF) (Tancik et al., 2020). They are defined as:
                                                                     >
                                 γ(p) = [cos(2πBp), sin(2πBp)] ,                                     (8)
where p ∈ RDin are the input coordinates, and B ∈ RDc ×Din is a matrix with entries sampled
from a Gaussian distribution, Bkl ∼ N (0, σ 2 ). The variance σ 2 can be chosen per task with a
hyperparameter sweep.
                                                                                 >
We use a unit vector representation for the orientations θ, θ = [cos θ, sin θ] . Following Kofinas
et al. (2021), we use the angles of the velocity vectors as a proxy for the orientations. Then, we use
a linear layer to encode the orientation vectors, δ(θ) = Wω θ. We finally concatenate the encoded
positions and orientations in a single vector that is being fed as input to the neural field.
After encoding the input coordinates, we use a 3-layer MLP with SiLU (Ramachandran et al., 2018)
activations in-between, that outputs a latent force field, f (p, θ) = MLP([γ(p), δ(θ)]).

Dynamic fields The neural fields used to model the dynamic fields are conditioned on a latent
vector representation z ∈ RDz that describes prior knowledge about the underlying field, and are
defined as f (p, θ | z). In our case, the latent representation should “summarize” the input graph
such that it isolates only global effects from the field. To that end, we employ a simple global
spatio-temporal attention mechanism, similar to Li et al. (2016), that aggregates the input  system
in a latent vector representation. First, we define object embeddings oi = GRU Wg x1:T i    , where
Wg is a matrix used to linearly transform the inputs, and GRU is the Gated Recurrent Unit (Cho
et al., 2014). We also define temporal embeddings t = PE(t), where PE are positional encodings
(Vaswani et al., 2017). The aggregation is then defined as follows:
                        X
                            softmax fa sti · fb sti , with sti = xti , oi + t,

                    z=                                                                           (9)
                         i,t

where fa : RDs → R, fb : RDs → RDz are 2-layer MLPs with SiLU activations Ramachandran et al.
(2018) in between.
After having obtained a latent vector representation z that summarizes the input system, we condition
the neural field using FiLM (Perez et al., 2018). We include FiLM layers after the first two linear
layers of the neural field. The exact details are presented in appendix A.2.1.


                                                   5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


3.3   A PPROXIMATE EQUIVARIANCE WITH GLOBAL - LOCAL COORDINATE FRAMES

Equivariant neural networks cannot capture non-local information, such as global field effects. In this
work, we explicitly aim to discover these fields and disentangle them from local object interactions.
An alternative, or rather complementary approach, would be to directly combine global and local
information, following the recently proposed notion of approximate equivariance (Wang et al., 2022).
Starting from LoCS (Kofinas et al., 2021), we can combine global information and still operate in
local coordinate frames by defining an auxiliary node-object corresponding to the global coordinate
frame, i.e. an object positioned at the origin, and oriented to match the x-axis.
Similar to all objects in the system, the full state of the origin node O comprises the concatenation
                                                               >
of its position and velocity, xO = [pO , uO ] = (0, 0, 1, 0) . We temporarily add this node in the
geometric graph, and we further connect it with edges to all other objects. Thus, the new vertex set is
V 0 = V ∪ {O}, and the new edge set is E 0 = E ∪ {eO,i ∀i ∈ V}. The origin state can be expressed in
local coordinate frames using similar transformations to eq. (1). The origin transformed in the local
coordinate frame of the i-th object is computed as follows:
                             t
                                 = Rt>
                                          t
                                         pO − pti , utO = Rt>
                                                                    t t
                            vO|i      i                         i  −pi , uO .                     (10)
Since graph networks are permutation equivariant, we have to distinguish between this auxiliary
origin node and the other nodes, otherwise, the origin would be treated as an actual object, and there
is no way for the network to understand which the origin is. Hence, we augment each object’s state
with the origin node information expressed in local coordinate frames, extending eqs. (2) and (3) to

                          t           t     t     t
                         hj,i = fe vj|i , vi|i , vO|i    ,                                        (11)
                                                                              

                         t+1               t      t           1      X
                     ∆xi|i = fv gv vi|i , vO|i
                                                        +               htj,i .                 (12)
                                                           |N (i)|
                                                                     j∈N (i)

This approach allows us to remove the origin node from the actual graph, and push the information
in the node states. We term this method G-LoCS (Global-Local Coordinate FrameS). In practice,
similar to Aether, we formulate our model as a variational autoencoder (Kingma & Welling, 2014;
Rezende et al., 2014) with latent edge types. The full details are presented in appendix A.2.3. Finally,
in practice, we integrate G-LoCS in Aether, since it can enhance the performance of our method.

4     R ELATED WORK
Equivariant graph networks The seminal works of (Cohen & Welling, 2016; 2017; Worrall
et al., 2017) introduced equivariant convolutional neural networks and demonstrated effectiveness,
robustness, and increased parameter efficiency. Recently, many works have proposed equivariant
graph networks (Schütt et al., 2017; Thomas et al., 2018; Fuchs et al., 2020; Walters et al., 2021;
Satorras et al., 2021; Kofinas et al., 2021; Brandstetter et al., 2022; Luo et al., 2022). Walters
et al. (2021) propose rotationally equivariant continuous convolutions for trajectory prediction.
Satorras et al. (2021) propose a computationally efficient equivariant graph network that leverages
invariant euclidean distances between node pairs. Kofinas et al. (2021) introduce roto-translated local
coordinate frames for all objects in an interacting system and propose equivariant local coordinate
frame graph networks. Brandstetter et al. (2022) generalize equivariant graph networks using steerable
MLPs (Thomas et al., 2018) and incorporate geometric and physical information in message passing.
Equivariant graph networks differ from our work since they cannot capture non-local information,
while our work disentangles equivariant local interactions from global effects and captures them both.

Approximate equivariance Recently, a number of works has proposed to shift away from strict
equivariance, in what (Wang et al., 2022) termed as approximate equivariance. Wang et al. (2022)
propose approximately equivariant networks for dynamical systems, by relaxing equivariance con-
straints in group convolutions and steerable convolutions. van der Ouderaa et al. (2022) propose
to relax strict equivariance by interpolating between equivariant and non-equivariant operations,
using non-stationary kernels that also depend on the absolute input group element. Romero & Lohit
(2021) propose Partial G-CNNs that learn layer-wise partial equivariances from data. We note that


                                                   6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


even though these works and approximate equivariance share similarities with our work, our notion
of disentangled equivariance is conceptually different. That is because related work uses the term
approximate equivariance to denote that equivariance is “broken” due to noise or imperfections, while
our work disentangles the system dynamics that are actually equivariant, from the global field effects
that are not, and in fact, might be unaffected by such transformations.

Neural fields Neural fields have recently exploded in popularity in 3D computer vision, popularized
by NeRF (Mildenhall et al., 2021). Since MLPs are universal function approximators (Hornik et al.,
1989), neural fields parameterized by MLPs can, in principle, encode continuous signals at arbitrary
resolution. However, neural networks can suffer from “spectral bias” (Rahaman et al., 2019; Basri
et al., 2020), i.e. they are biased to fit functions with low spatial frequency. To address this issue, a
number of solutions have been proposed. Tancik et al. (2020) leverage Neural Tangent Kernel (NTK)
theory and propose Random Fourier Features (RFF), showing that they can overcome the spectral bias.
They also show that RFF are a generalization of positional encodings, popularized in recent years in
natural language processing by Transformers (Vaswani et al., 2017). Concurrently, Sitzmann et al.
(2020) proposed SIREN, neural networks with sinusoidal activation functions. While neural fields
have been used extensively in computer vision problems including 3D scene reconstruction (Park
et al., 2019; Mescheder et al., 2019) and differentiable rendering (Sitzmann et al., 2019; Mildenhall
et al., 2021), they have not seen wide usage in dynamical systems. Notably, Raissi et al. (2019)
proposed Physics-Informed Neural Networks (PINNs), neural PDE solvers based on neural fields.

5     E XPERIMENTS
We evaluate our proposed method, Aether, on settings that include static as well as dynamic fields.
First, we explore charged particles (Kipf et al., 2018) that evolve under the effect of a static elec-
trostatic field. Then, we evaluate our method on a subset of inD (Bock et al., 2020) that contains
a single location, and thus a static field as well. Finally, we explore gravitational n-body problems
(Brandstetter et al., 2022) with dynamic fields.
We compare our method against dNRI (Graber & Schwing, 2020) and LoCS (Kofinas et al., 2021).
DNRI (Graber & Schwing, 2020) is a graph network operating in global coordinates, and is, in
principle, able to uncover both the global and the local dynamics. It is formulated as a VAE (Kingma
& Welling, 2014; Rezende et al., 2014) with latent edge types and explicitly infers a latent graph
structure. LoCS (Kofinas et al., 2021), on the other hand, operates in local coordinates, and is, thus,
unable to uncover the global dynamics. For all methods, we use their publicly available source code.
Our source code, data, and models will be shared upon publication.
Our architecture and experimental setup closely follow Graber & Schwing (2020); Kofinas et al.
(2021). Unless specified differently, our neural field has a hidden size of 512. In charged particles and
in n-body problems, we only use positions as input to the neural field, while in traffic scenes we also
use orientations. The full implementation details are presented in appendix A.2.2. In all settings, we
                                                                                     PN
report the mean squared error of positions and velocities over time, E(t) = N1D n=1 kxtn − x̂tn k22 .
Here we demonstrate indicative visualizations, and provide more extensive qualitative results in
appendix C.

5.1   C HARGED PARTICLES

First, we study the effect of static fields, i.e. a single field across all train, validation, and test
simulations. We extend the charged particles dataset from Kipf et al. (2018) by adding a number of
immovable sources. Overall, these sources act like regular particles, exerting forces on the observable
particles, except we ignore any forces exerted to them, and fix their positions and velocities to zero.
We use M = 20 “source” particles and N = 5 “observable” particles. Sources particles can in
principle have different charge magnitudes than the observable particles, but for simplicity we set all
magnitudes to |q| = 1. All particles carry either positive or negative charges with equal probability.
Following Satorras et al. (2021); Fuchs et al. (2020); Kofinas et al. (2021), we remove virtual borders
that cause elastic collisions. We generate a dataset of 50,000 simulations for training, 10,000 for
validation and 10,000 for testing. Following Kipf et al. (2018), each simulation lasts for 49 timesteps.
During inference, we use the first 29 steps as input and predict the remaining 20 steps.


                                                   7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                   dNRI               LoCS                      G-LoCS                  Aether (Ours)
                            Total Errors                                 Total Errors                                Total Errors
              1.0                                          2.5                                         2.5

              0.8                                          2.0                                         2.0

              0.6                                          1.5                                         1.5
        MSE


                                                     MSE


                                                                                                 MSE
              0.4                                          1.0                                         1.0

              0.2                                          0.5                                         0.5

              0.0                                          0.0                                         0.0
                    1   5      9     13    17   20               1   3    5      7   9   11 12               1   2        3         4   5
                                Step                                          Step                                       Step


                            (a)                                          (b)                                         (c)

                        Figure 4: Results on (a) charged particles, (b) inD, and (c) gravity.


Figure 6: Discovered field on inD (Bock   et al., 2020). For simplicity, we only visualize the field for
discrete input orientations in C4 = 0, π2 , π, 3π

                                                2 .



We compare our method against dNRI and LoCS, as well as
G-LoCS, which should in principle be able to model both local
and global dynamics effectively. We plot MSE in fig. 4a and
L2 errors in fig. 20, and visualize the learned field in fig. 5. We
visualize sample predictions in fig. 8a, and showcase more pre-
dicted trajectories in appendix C.1. We observe that equivariant
methods like LoCS perform poorly, while the approximately
equivariant G-LoCS performs much better than equivariant
and non-equivariant methods. Aether outperforms all other Figure 5: Learned Field (left) in
methods, demonstrating that it can disentangle equivariance. charged particle settings compared
Furthermore, as shown in fig. 5, and fig. 12 in appendix C.1.1, to groundtruth (right).
Aether can effectively discover the underlying field.

5.2   T RAFFIC SCENES

Next, we study the effectiveness of static field discovery in traffic scenes. We use inD (Bock et al.,
2020), a dataset with real-world traffic scenes that comprises trajectories of pedestrians, vehicles,
and cyclists, recorded at 4 different locations. We create a subset that contains scenes from a single
location. Namely, we choose “Frankenburg, Aachen”, since it is the location with most interactions
in the dataset. The subset corresponds to 12 recordings; we use 8 for training, 2 for validation, and 2
for testing. We follow a similar experimental setting with Graber & Schwing (2020); Kofinas et al.
(2021). We divide each scene into 18-step sequences. We use the first 6 time steps as input and predict
the next 12 time steps. We plot MSE in fig. 4b and L2 errors in fig. 21, and visualize the learned
field in fig. 6, and in fig. 17 in appendix C.2.1. Since the learned field is a function of  positions and
orientations, we only visualize it for 4 discrete orientations, namely the group C4 = 0, π2 , π, 3π    2 .
We visualize predictions in fig. 8b, and showcase more in appendix C.2. Again, we see that Aether
outperforms all other methods. The discovered field, while hard to interpret, shows high activations
that coincide with road locations and directions, indicating that it can guide objects through the
topology of the road network.

5.3   G RAVITATIONAL FIELD


                                                                          8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                (a)                                  (b)                                  (c)

            Figure 8: Aether predictions on (a) charged particles, (b) inD, and (c) gravity.


We now study the task of field discovery with dynamic fields, i.e.
fields that are different across simulations. We extend the gravity
dataset by Brandstetter et al. (2022) by adding gravitational sources.
We create a dataset of 5,000 simulations for training, 1,000 for
validation and 1,000 for testing. We use N = 5 particles and M = 1
source. We set the masses of particles to mp = 1, while the source
has a mass of ms = 10. We generate trajectories of 49 timesteps.
We use the first 44 timesteps as input and predict the remaining 5
steps.
We plot MSE fig. 4c and L2 errors in fig. 22, and visualize the
learned field in fig. 7. We visualize sample predictions in fig. 8c, and
showcase more in appendix C.3. We observe that Aether outperforms Figure 7: Learned dynamic
other methods, and can accurately discover the correct “shape” of fields (left) in n-body problem
the force fields, as well as the location of the sources.                vs groundtruth (right).

5.4   A BLATION EXPERIMENTS

Significance of discovered field In a simulated environment like the                      Total Errors
                                                                                 1.0
charged particles setting, we have access to the simulator, and by exten-                Particle Oracle
sion, to the groundtruth fields and the sources that generate them. We can       0.8     Force Oracle
                                                                                         Aether
leverage the simulator to study the significance of the discovered field         0.6
                                                                                   MSE


in the task of trajectory forecasting, and establish an upper bound to our       0.4
performance. To that end, we create two “oracle” models that have access
                                                                                 0.2
to the groundtruth fields, a force oracle and a source oracle. The force
oracle is identical to Aether, but uses the groundtruth forces from the          0.0
                                                                                     1 5      9     13   17 20
simulator at each point instead of predicting them with a neural field. The                    Step
source oracle assumes knowledge of the “field sources”. Thus, there is no
longer need for disentanglement, and the problem is strictly equivariant Figure 9: Results on the
again. We include the sources as virtual nodes in the graph, add include importance of the learned
edges from the sources to the particles. We modify LoCS to use virtual field in charged particles.
nodes, and predict future states for all the “observable” particles, but not
for the “source” particles. We describe this oracle in detail in appendix A.2.4. We plot the MSE in
fig. 9 and the L2 errors in fig. 23 in appendix D.4. We observe that our model’s performance closely
follows the two oracle models, and is, in fact, on par, for roughly 10 steps. This demonstrates that the
discovered field is almost as helpful as the groundtruth.

6     C ONCLUSION
In this work, we introduced Aether, a method that disentangles local object interactions from global
field effects in interacting dynamical systems. We proposed neural fields to discover such field
effects, and infer them from the dynamics alone. We combined neural fields with equivariant graph
networks to learn the dynamical systems. We demonstrate that our method can accurately discover
the underlying fields in a range of settings with fixed and dynamic fields, and effectively use them to
forecast future trajectories.

Limitations Fields are not always passive, but they may react to the observable environment.


                                                      9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


R EFERENCES
Alexandre Alahi, Kratarth Goel, Vignesh Ramanathan, Alexandre Robicquet, Fei-Fei Li, and Silvio Savarese.
  Social LSTM: Human Trajectory Prediction in Crowded Spaces. In 2016 IEEE Conference on Computer
  Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), 2016.

Dzmitry Bahdanau, Kyunghyun Cho, and Yoshua Bengio. Neural Machine Translation by Jointly Learning to
  Align and Translate. In 3rd International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR), 2015.

Ronen Basri, Meirav Galun, Amnon Geifman, David Jacobs, Yoni Kasten, and Shira Kritchman. Frequency Bias
  in Neural Networks for Input of Non-Uniform Density. In Proceedings of the 37th International Conference
  on Machine Learning (ICML), 2020.

Peter W. Battaglia, Razvan Pascanu, Matthew Lai, Danilo Jimenez Rezende, and Koray Kavukcuoglu. Interaction
  Networks for Learning about Objects, Relations and Physics. In Advances in Neural Information Processing
  Systems 29 (NIPS), 2016.

Julian Bock, Robert Krajewski, Tobias Moers, Steffen Runde, Lennart Vater, and Lutz Eckstein. The inD dataset:
   A Drone Dataset of Naturalistic Road User Trajectories at German Intersections. In 2020 IEEE Intelligent
   Vehicles Symposium (IV), 2020.

Johannes Brandstetter, Rob Hesselink, Elise van der Pol, Erik Bekkers, and Max Welling. Geometric and
  Physical Quantities Improve E(3) equivariant Message Passing. In Tenth International Conference on
  Learning Representations (ICLR), 2022.

Polo Calafiura, Steven Farrell, Heather Gray, Jean-Roch Vlimant, Vincenzo Innocente, Andreas Salzburger,
  Sabrina Amrouche, Tobias Golling, Moritz Kiehn, Victor Estrade, et al. TrackML: A High Energy Physics
  Particle Tracking Challenge. In 2018 IEEE 14th International Conference on e-Science (e-Science), 2018.

Ming-Fang Chang, John Lambert, Patsorn Sangkloy, Jagjeet Singh, Slawomir Bak, Andrew Hartnett, De Wang,
  Peter Carr, Simon Lucey, Deva Ramanan, and James Hays. Argoverse: 3D Tracking and Forecasting With
  Rich Maps. In IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), 2019.

Kyunghyun Cho, Bart van Merriënboer, Caglar Gulcehre, Dzmitry Bahdanau, Fethi Bougares, Holger Schwenk,
  and Yoshua Bengio. Learning Phrase Representations using RNN Encoder–Decoder for Statistical Machine
  Translation. In Proceedings of the 2014 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing
  (EMNLP), 2014.

Junyoung Chung, Kyle Kastner, Laurent Dinh, Kratarth Goel, Aaron C. Courville, and Yoshua Bengio. A
  Recurrent Latent Variable Model for Sequential Data. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems
  28 (NIPS), 2015.

Djork-Arné Clevert, Thomas Unterthiner, and Sepp Hochreiter. Fast and Accurate Deep Network Learning by
  Exponential Linear Units (ELUs). In 4th International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR),
  2016.

CMU. Carnegie-Mellon Motion Capture Database, 2003. URL http://mocap.cs.cmu.edu.

Taco Cohen and Max Welling. Group Equivariant Convolutional Networks. In Proceedings of the 33rd
  International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML), 2016.

Taco S. Cohen and Max Welling. Steerable CNNs. In 5th International Conference on Learning Representations
  (ICLR), 2017.

Pim de Haan, Maurice Weiler, Taco Cohen, and Welling Max. Gauge Equivariant Mesh CNNs: Anisotropic
  convolutions on geometric graphs. In 9th International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR),
  2021.

Haowen Deng, Tolga Birdal, and Slobodan Ilic. PPF-Foldnet: Unsupervised Learning of Rotation Invariant 3D
  Local Descriptors. In Proceedings of the European Conference on Computer Vision (ECCV), 2018.

Matthias Fey, Jan Eric Lenssen, Frank Weichert, and Heinrich Müller. SplineCNN: Fast Geometric Deep
 Learning With Continuous B-Spline Kernels. In 2018 IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
 Recognition (CVPR), 2018.

Fabian Fuchs, Daniel E. Worrall, Volker Fischer, and Max Welling. SE(3)-transformers: 3D Roto-Translation
  Equivariant Attention Networks. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 33 (NeurIPS), 2020.


                                                     10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Justin Gilmer, Samuel S. Schoenholz, Patrick F. Riley, Oriol Vinyals, and George E. Dahl. Neural Message
   Passing for Quantum Chemistry. In Proceedings of the 34th International Conference on Machine Learning
  (ICML), 2017.

Colin Graber and Alexander G. Schwing. Dynamic Neural Relational Inference. In 2020 IEEE/CVF Conference
  on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), 2020.

William L. Hamilton, Zhitao Ying, and Jure Leskovec. Inductive Representation Learning on Large Graphs. In
  Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 30 (NIPS), 2017.

Dirk Helbing and Peter Molnar. Social Force Model for Pedestrian Dynamics. Physical review E, 51(5), 1995.

Sepp Hochreiter and Jürgen Schmidhuber. Long Short-term Memory. Neural computation, 9(8), 1997.

Kurt Hornik, Maxwell Stinchcombe, and Halbert White. Multilayer feedforward networks are universal
  approximators. Neural networks, 2(5):359–366, 1989.

Eric Jang, Shixiang Gu, and Ben Poole. Categorical Reparameterization with Gumbel-Softmax. In 5th
  International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR), 2017.

Xu Jia, Bert De Brabandere, Tinne Tuytelaars, and Luc Van Gool. Dynamic Filter Networks. In Advances in
  Neural Information Processing Systems 29 (NIPS), 2016.

Diederik P. Kingma and Max Welling. Auto-Encoding Variational Bayes. In 2nd International Conference on
  Learning Representations (ICLR), 2014.

Thomas N. Kipf and Max Welling. Semi-Supervised Classification with Graph Convolutional Networks. In 5th
  International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR), 2017.

Thomas N. Kipf, Ethan Fetaya, Kuan-Chieh Wang, Max Welling, and Richard S. Zemel. Neural Relational
  Inference for Interacting Systems. In Proceedings of the 35th International Conference on Machine Learning
  (ICML), 2018.

Miltiadis Kofinas, Naveen Shankar Nagaraja, and Efstratios Gavves. Roto-translated Local Coordinate Frames
  For Interacting Dynamical Systems. In Thirty-Fifth Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems
  (NeurIPS), 2021.

Alon Lerner, Yiorgos Chrysanthou, and Dani Lischinski. Crowds by Example. In Computer graphics forum,
  volume 26. Wiley Online Library, 2007.

Yujia Li, Daniel Tarlow, Marc Brockschmidt, and Richard S. Zemel. Gated Graph Sequence Neural Networks.
  In 4th International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR), 2016.

Shitong Luo, Jiahan Li, Jiaqi Guan, Yufeng Su, Chaoran Cheng, Jian Peng, and Jianzhu Ma. Equivariant Point
  Cloud Analysis via Learning Orientations for Message Passing. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference
  on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), 2022.

Chris J. Maddison, Andriy Mnih, and Yee Whye Teh. The Concrete Distribution: A Continuous Relaxation of
  Discrete Random Variables. In 5th International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR), 2017.

Lars Mescheder, Michael Oechsle, Michael Niemeyer, Sebastian Nowozin, and Andreas Geiger. Occupancy
  Networks: Learning 3D Reconstruction in Function Space. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on
  computer vision and pattern recognition (CVPR), 2019.

Ben Mildenhall, Pratul P Srinivasan, Matthew Tancik, Jonathan T Barron, Ravi Ramamoorthi, and Ren Ng.
  NeRF: Representing Scenes as Neural Radiance Fields for View Synthesis. Communications of the ACM, 65
  (1):99–106, 2021.

Abduallah Mohamed, Kun Qian, Mohamed Elhoseiny, and Christian G. Claudel. Social-STGCNN: A Social
  Spatio-Temporal Graph Convolutional Neural Network for Human Trajectory Prediction. In 2020 IEEE/CVF
  Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), 2020.

Federico Monti, Davide Boscaini, Jonathan Masci, Emanuele Rodolà, Jan Svoboda, and Michael M. Bronstein.
  Geometric Deep Learning on Graphs and Manifolds Using Mixture Model CNNs. In 2017 IEEE Conference
  on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), 2017.

Nigamaa Nayakanti, Rami Al-Rfou, Aurick Zhou, Kratarth Goel, Khaled S Refaat, and Benjamin Sapp.
  Wayformer: Motion Forecasting via Simple & Efficient Attention Networks. arXiv preprint arXiv:2207.05844,
  2022.


                                                    11
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Jeong Joon Park, Peter Florence, Julian Straub, Richard Newcombe, and Steven Lovegrove. DeepSDF: Learning
   Continuous Signed Distance Functions for Shape Representation. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference
   on computer vision and pattern recognition (CVPR), 2019.

Adam Paszke, Sam Gross, Francisco Massa, Adam Lerer, James Bradbury, Gregory Chanan, Trevor Killeen,
  Zeming Lin, Natalia Gimelshein, Luca Antiga, Alban Desmaison, Andreas Köpf, Edward Yang, Zachary
  DeVito, Martin Raison, Alykhan Tejani, Sasank Chilamkurthy, Benoit Steiner, Lu Fang, Junjie Bai, and
  Soumith Chintala. Pytorch: An imperative style, high-performance deep learning library. In Advances in
  Neural Information Processing Systems 32 (NeurIPS), 2019.

Stefano Pellegrini, Andreas Ess, Konrad Schindler, and Luc Van Gool. You’ll Never Walk Alone: Modeling
   Social Behavior for Multi-target Tracking. In IEEE 12th International Conference on Computer Vision
  (ICCV), 2009.

Ethan Perez, Florian Strub, Harm De Vries, Vincent Dumoulin, and Aaron Courville. FiLM: Visual Reasoning
  with a General Conditioning Layer. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, 2018.

Nasim Rahaman, Aristide Baratin, Devansh Arpit, Felix Draxler, Min Lin, Fred Hamprecht, Yoshua Bengio,
  and Aaron Courville. On the Spectral Bias of Neural Networks. In Proceedings of the 36th International
  Conference on Machine Learning (ICML), 2019.

Maziar Raissi, Paris Perdikaris, and George E Karniadakis. Physics-informed neural networks: A deep learning
  framework for solving forward and inverse problems involving nonlinear partial differential equations. Journal
  of Computational physics, 378:686–707, 2019.

Prajit Ramachandran, Barret Zoph, and Quoc V. Le. Searching for Activation Functions. In 6th International
  Conference on Learning Representations, (ICLR), 2018.

Danilo Jimenez Rezende, Shakir Mohamed, and Daan Wierstra. Stochastic Backpropagation and Approximate
  Inference in Deep Generative Models. In Proceedings of the 31st International Conference on Machine
  Learning (ICML), 2014.

David W Romero and Suhas Lohit. Learning Equivariances and Partial Equivariances from Data. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2110.10211, 2021.

Tim Salzmann, Boris Ivanovic, Punarjay Chakravarty, and Marco Pavone. Trajectron++: Dynamically-Feasible
  Trajectory Forecasting With Heterogeneous Data. In European Conference on Computer Vision (ECCV),
  2020.

Alvaro Sanchez-Gonzalez, Jonathan Godwin, Tobias Pfaff, Rex Ying, Jure Leskovec, and Peter W. Battaglia.
  Learning to Simulate Complex Physics with Graph Networks. In Proceedings of the 37th International
  Conference on Machine Learning (ICML), 2020.

Víctor Garcia Satorras, Emiel Hoogeboom, and Max Welling. E(n) Equivariant Graph Neural Networks. In
  Proceedings of the 38th International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML), 2021.

Franco Scarselli, Marco Gori, Ah Chung Tsoi, Markus Hagenbuchner, and Gabriele Monfardini. The Graph
  Neural Network Model. IEEE transactions on neural networks, 20(1), 2008.

Kristof Schütt, Pieter-Jan Kindermans, Huziel Enoc Sauceda Felix, Stefan Chmiela, Alexandre Tkatchenko,
  and Klaus-Robert Müller. SchNet: A continuous-filter convolutional neural network for modeling quantum
  interactions. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 30 (NIPS), 2017.

Martin Simonovsky and Nikos Komodakis. Dynamic Edge-Conditioned Filters in Convolutional Neural
 Networks on Graphs. In 2017 IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), 2017.

Vincent Sitzmann, Michael Zollhöfer, and Gordon Wetzstein. Scene Representation Networks: Continuous
  3D-Structure-Aware Neural Scene Representations. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 32
  (NeurIPS), 2019.

Vincent Sitzmann, Julien Martel, Alexander Bergman, David Lindell, and Gordon Wetzstein. Implicit Neural
  Representations with Periodic Activation Functions. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 33
  (NeurIPS), 2020.

Matthew Tancik, Pratul Srinivasan, Ben Mildenhall, Sara Fridovich-Keil, Nithin Raghavan, Utkarsh Singhal,
 Ravi Ramamoorthi, Jonathan Barron, and Ren Ng. Fourier Features Let Networks Learn High Frequency
 Functions in Low Dimensional Domains. In Thirty-Fourth Conference on Neural Information Processing
 Systems (NeurIPS), 2020.


                                                      12
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Nathaniel Thomas, Tess Smidt, Steven Kearnes, Lusann Yang, Li Li, Kai Kohlhoff, and Patrick Riley. Tensor
  field networks: Rotation-and translation-equivariant neural networks for 3D point clouds. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:1802.08219, 2018.
Tycho FA van der Ouderaa, David W Romero, and Mark van der Wilk. Relaxing Equivariance Constraints with
  Non-stationary Continuous Filters. arXiv preprint arXiv:2204.07178, 2022.

Ashish Vaswani, Noam Shazeer, Niki Parmar, Jakob Uszkoreit, Llion Jones, Aidan N Gomez, Łukasz Kaiser,
  and Illia Polosukhin. Attention Is All You Need. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 30
  (NeurIPS), 2017.

Petar Velickovic, Guillem Cucurull, Arantxa Casanova, Adriana Romero, Pietro Liò, and Yoshua Bengio. Graph
  Attention Networks. In 6th International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR), 2018.
Anirudh Vemula, Katharina Muelling, and Jean Oh. Social Attention: Modeling Attention in Human Crowds. In
  2018 IEEE international Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA), 2018.

Robin Walters, Jinxi Li, and Rose Yu. Trajectory Prediction using Equivariant Continuous Convolution. In 9th
  International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR), 2021.

Rui Wang, Robin Walters, and Rose Yu. Approximately Equivariant Networks for Imperfectly Symmetric
  Dynamics. In Proceedings of the 39th International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML), 2022.
Shenlong Wang, Simon Suo, Wei-Chiu Ma, Andrei Pokrovsky, and Raquel Urtasun. Deep Parametric Continuous
  Convolutional Neural Networks. In 2018 IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition
  (CVPR), 2018.
Yue Wang, Yongbin Sun, Ziwei Liu, Sanjay E Sarma, Michael M Bronstein, and Justin M Solomon. Dynamic
  Graph Cnn for Learning on Point Clouds. Acm Transactions On Graphics (tog), 38(5), 2019.

Maurice Weiler and Gabriele Cesa. General E(2)-Equivariant Steerable CNNs. In Advances in Neural Information
 Processing Systems 32 (NeurIPS), 2019.

Daniel E. Worrall, Stephan J. Garbin, Daniyar Turmukhambetov, and Gabriel J. Brostow. Harmonic Networks:
  Deep Translation and Rotation Equivariance. In 2017 IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
  Recognition (CVPR), 2017.
Yiheng Xie, Towaki Takikawa, Shunsuke Saito, Or Litany, Shiqin Yan, Numair Khan, Federico Tombari, James
  Tompkin, Vincent Sitzmann, and Srinath Sridhar. Neural Fields in Visual Computing and Beyond. In
  Computer Graphics Forum, 2022.
Yisong Yue, Patrick Lucey, Peter Carr, Alina Bialkowski, and Iain Matthews. Learning Fine-Grained Spatial
  Models for Dynamic Sports Play Prediction. In 2014 IEEE international conference on data mining, 2014.


                                                    13
