Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


K NN-D IFFUSION : I MAGE G ENERATION VIA L ARGE -
S CALE R ETRIEVAL
 Shelly Sheynin∗ , Oron Ashual∗ ,
 Adam Polyak, Uriel Singer, Oran Gafni, Eliya Nachmani, Yaniv Taigman
 ∗
  Equal Contribution                           Meta AI
 {shellysheynin,oron}@meta.com


Figure 1: (a) Samples of stickers generated from text inputs, (b) Semantic text-guided manipulations applied
to the "Original" image without using edit masks.

                                              A BSTRACT
         Recent text-to-image models have achieved impressive results. However, since
         they require large-scale datasets of text-image pairs, it is impractical to train them
         on new domains where data is scarce or not labeled. In this work, we propose
         using large-scale retrieval methods, in particular, efficient k-Nearest-Neighbors
         (kNN), which offers novel capabilities: (1) training a substantially small and ef-
         ficient text-to-image diffusion model using only pre-trained multi-modal embed-
         dings, but without an explicit text-image dataset, (2) generating out-of-distribution
         images by simply swapping the retrieval database at inference time, and (3) per-
         forming text-driven local semantic manipulations while preserving object identity.
         To demonstrate the robustness of our method, we apply our kNN approach on two
         state-of-the-art diffusion backbones, and show results on several different datasets.
         As evaluated by human studies and automatic metrics, our method achieves state-
         of-the-art results compared to existing approaches that train text-to-image gener-
         ation models using images-only dataset.


1    I NTRODUCTION
Large-scale generative models have been applied successfully to image generation tasks (Gafni et al.,
2022; Ramesh et al., 2021; Nichol et al., 2021; Saharia et al., 2022; Yu et al., 2022), and have shown
outstanding capabilities in extending human creativity using editing and user control. However,
these models face several significant challenges: (i) Large-scale paired data requirement. To
achieve high-quality results, text-to-image models rely heavily on large-scale datasets of (text, im-
age) pairs collected from the internet. Due to the requirement of paired data, these models cannot be
applied to new or customized domains with only unannotated images. (ii) Computational cost and
efficiency. Training these models on highly complex distributions of natural images usually requires
scaling the size of the model, data, batch-size, and training time, which makes them challenging to
train and less accessible to the community. Recently, several works proposed text-to-image models


                                                     1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


trained without an explicit paired text-image datasets. Liu et al. (2021) performed a direct opti-
mization to a pre-trained model based on a CLIP loss (Radford et al., 2021). Such approaches are
time-consuming, since they require optimization for each input. Zhou et al. (2021) proposed train-
ing with CLIP image embedding perturbed with Gaussian noise. However, to achieve high-quality
results, an additional model needs to be trained with an annotated text-image pairs dataset.
In this work, we introduce a novel generative model, kNN-Diffusion, which tackles these issues and
progresses towards more accessible models for the research community and other users. Our model
leverages a large-scale retrieval method, k-Nearest-Neighbors (kNN) search, in order to train the
model without an explicit text-image dataset. Specifically, our diffusion model is conditioned on
two inputs: (1) image embedding (at training time) or text embedding (at inference), extracted using
pre-trained CLIP encoder, and (2) kNN embeddings, representing the k most similar images in the
CLIP latent space. During training, we assume that no paired text is available, hence condition
only on CLIP image embedding and on k additional image embeddings, selected using the retrieval
model. At inference, only text inputs are given, so instead of image embeddings, we use the text
embedding that shares a joint embedding space with the image embeddings. Here, the kNN image
embeddings are retrieved using the text embeddings.
The additional kNN embeddings have three main benefits: (1) they extend the distribution of con-
ditioning embeddings and ensure the distribution is similar in train and inference, thus helping to
bridge the gap between the image and text embedding distributions (see Fig. 5); (2) they teach the
model to learn to generate images from a target distribution by using samples from that distribution.
This allows generalizing to different distributions at test time and generating out-of-distribution sam-
ples; (3) they hold information that does not need to be present in the model, which allows it to be
substantially smaller. We demonstrate the effectiveness of our kNN approach in Sec. 4.
To assess the performance of our method, we train our model on two large-scale datasets: the Public
Multimodal Dataset (Singh et al., 2021) and an image-only stickers dataset collected from the Inter-
net. We show state-of-the-art zero-shot results on MS-COCO (Lin et al., 2014), LN-COCO (Pont-
Tuset et al., 2020) and CUB (Wah et al., 2011). To further demonstrate the advantage of retrieval
methods in text-to-image generation, we train two diffusion backbones using our kNN approach:
continuous (Ramesh et al., 2022) and discrete (Gu et al., 2021). In both cases we outperform the
model trained without kNN. In comparison to alternative methods presented in Sec. 4, we achieve
state-of-the-art results in both human evaluations and FID score, with only 400 million parameters
and 7 seconds inference time.
Lastly, we introduce a new approach for local and semantic manipulations that is based on CLIP and
kNN, without relying on user-provided masks. Specifically, we fine-tune our model to perform local
and complex modifications that satisfies a given target text prompt. For example, given the teddy
bear’s image in Fig. 4, and the target text "holds a heart", our method automatically locates the local
region that should be modified and synthesizes a high-resolution manipulated image in which (1)
the teddy bear’s identity is accurately preserved and (2) the manipulation is aligned with the target
text. We demonstrate our qualitative advantage by comparing our results with two state-of-the-art
models, Text2Live (Bar-Tal et al., 2022) and Textual Inversion (Gal et al., 2022), that perform image
manipulations without masks (Fig. 4, 21 and 22).
We summarize the contributions of this paper as follows: (1) We propose kNN-Diffusion, a novel and
efficient model that utilizes a large-scale retrieval method for training a text-to-image model with
only pre-trained multi-modal embeddings, but without an explicit text-image dataset. (2) We demon-
strate efficient out-of-distribution generation, which is achieved by substituting retrieval databases.
(3) We present a new approach for local and semantic image manipulation, without utilizing masks.
(4) We evaluate our method on two diffusion backbones, discrete and continuous, as well as on
several datasets, and present state-of-the-art results compared to baselines.

2   R ELATED W ORK

Text-to-image models.       Text-to-image generation is a well-studied task that focuses on gener-
ating images from text descriptions. While GANs (Xu et al., 2018; Zhu et al., 2019; Zhang et al.,
2021) and Transformer-based methods (Ramesh et al., 2021; Gafni et al., 2022; Yu et al., 2022; Ding
et al., 2021) have shown remarkable results, recently impressive results have been attained with dis-


                                                   2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Figure 2: Qualitative comparisons with baselines. Nearest Neighbor is the first kNN of the text in PMD dataset.

crete (Gu et al., 2021) and continuous (Nichol et al., 2021; Saharia et al., 2022; Ramesh et al., 2022;
Rombach et al., 2022) diffusion models. Most recent works trained diffusion models conditioned
on text embeddings extracted using a pre-trained text encoder (Saharia et al., 2022; Yu et al., 2022)
or image embedding extracted using CLIP (Ramesh et al., 2022). While producing impressive re-
sults, all previous works described above are supervised and trained with paired text-image datasets.
Several works have proposed training text-to-image models without an explicit text-image dataset.
FuseDream (Liu et al., 2021) proposed a direct optimization to a pre-trained generative model based
on CLIP loss. This method relies on a pre-trained GAN and requires a time-consuming optimization
process for each image. LAFITE (Zhou et al., 2021) recently demonstrated text-to-image gener-
ation results without requiring paired text-image datasets. Here, the CLIP embeddings are used
interchangeably at train and test to condition a GAN-based model. The joint text-image embedding
enables inference given a text input, whereas in training the model is fed with the visual embed-
ding only. However, the gap between the text and image distributions in the joint embeddings space
leads to results with substantially lower quality, as we show in our experiments. To overcome this
gap, LAFITE added noise to the image embeddings during training. Our remedy to this gap is to
condition the model on the retrieval of an actual image embeddings, using a text-image joint space.
Retrieval for generation. The Information Retrieval (IR) literature tackles the challenge of re-
trieving a small amount of information from a large database, given a user’s query. A simple, yet
efficient retrieval mechanism is to retrieve the K nearest neighbors (kNN) between the query and
the entities in the database in some pre-calculated embedding space (Bijalwan et al., 2014). The
database allows the model to leverage extensive world-knowledge for its specific task Borgeaud
et al. (2021). Recently, language models were augmented with a memory component, allowing
them to store representations of past inputs (Wu et al., 2022). The latter were then queried using a
lookup operation, improving performance in various benchmarks and tasks. Retrieval models have
been used for various tasks in learning problems, for example, language modeling (Borgeaud et al.,
2021), machine translation (Gu et al., 2018), question answering (Lee et al., 2019) and image gen-
eration (Tseng et al., 2020; Qi et al., 2018). RetrieveGAN (Tseng et al., 2020) uses a differentiable
retrieval module for image generation from a scene description, RetrievalFuse (Siddiqui et al., 2021)
proposed a neural 3D scene reconstruction based on a retrieval system. SIMS (Qi et al., 2018) pro-
posed generating an image using semantic layout and compatible image segments that are retrieved
from image segments database, and (Iskakov, 2018) showed that the use of retrieval database in
inpainting task significantly boosts visual quality. In this work we utilize the kNN retrieval mech-
anism over the shared text-image embedding space, CLIP (Radford et al., 2021). Using extensive
ablation studies, we show the importance of the retrieval model both for training and inference, and
demonstrate its large impact on performance. kNN-Diffusion significantly outperforms prior work


                                                      3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


      Train                                                                       Inference
                      Image                kNN retrieval                  Text      “a man with
                     encoder                                            encoder      a pink hat”
                                         (Embedding space)

                           Image                …                   Text
                         embedding           kNN image       ×𝑘   embedding
                                            embeddings



                                              Decoder


Figure 3: The overall framework of our kNN-Diffusion model. In both training and inference, the decoder
is conditioned on CLIP embedding, and kNN image embeddings. During training, we condition the model on
image CLIP embedding, and its kNN image embeddings extracted using the retrieval method. At inference
time, given an input text, the kNN image embeddings are retrieved based on the CLIP text embedding that
shares a joint embedding space with the image embedding.

with zero-shot FID of 12.5, including RDM (Blattmann et al., 2022)(with FID of 22.1), a concurrent
work which similarly to our approach, proposes conditioning LDM (Rombach et al., 2022) on kNN.
Multi-modal feature learning. Learning a joint and aligned feature space for several modalities
is challenging, as it requires alignment between the modalities (paired datasets), whose distribu-
tions may vary. Specifically, the joint feature space of vision-and-language has been a long-standing
problem. CLIP (Radford et al., 2021) successfully tackled this by leveraging contrastive learning
over a large dataset of text-image pairs. BLIP (Li et al., 2022), (Mu et al., 2021) and FLAVA (Singh
et al., 2021), followed this idea and further improved the joint representation. The joint represen-
tation was shown to hold a strong semantic alignment between the two modalities, enabling image
generation (Liu et al., 2021; Wang et al., 2022), image manipulation (Patashnik et al., 2021; Avra-
hami et al., 2022b), and image captioning (Mokady et al., 2021). In this work we leverage the joint
representation in two ways: (i) enabling textless training with only visual data, while using text at
inference time, and (ii) creating an efficient embedding space for the use of the retrieval model.

3   M ETHOD
Our main goal is to facilitate language-guided generation of user-specified concepts while using an
images-only dataset during training. A possible way to achieve this goal is to use a shared text-
image encoder that will map text-image pairs into the same latent space, thus allowing training with
an image embedding, and inferring from text embedding. A candidate for this encoder is CLIP,
which has been trained with a contrastive loss on a large-scale dataset of text-image pairs. However,
as we show quantitatively in Tab. 1, 2 and qualitatively in Fig. 15, 16, 5, CLIP embeddings alone
cannot accurately bridge the gap between the text and image distributions. In order to reduce this
gap, several methods have been proposed. The closest work to ours is LAFITE, which perturbs the
CLIP image embedding with adaptive Gaussian noise. Under the assumption that there is a large
paired text-image dataset, Ramesh et al. (2022) have proposed a prior that is used during inference,
and is trained to generate possible CLIP image embeddings from a given text caption. In this regard,
we propose using a large-scale and non-trainable image embedding index as an integral part of the
diffusion process. Our method, kNN-Diffusion, assumes that only image data and a pre-trained
multi-modal text-image encoder are provided during training. As shown in Fig. 3, our model is
comprised of three main components: (1) A multi-modal text-image encoder (CLIP); (2) A retrieval
model - A data structure containing image embeddings, which is indexed for a fast kNN search; (3)
An image generation network - A trainable diffusion-based image generation model, conditioned on
the projected retrievals. For both training and inference, the image generation network is conditioned
on K additional image embeddings, chosen using the retrieval model to ensure a similar distribution
of the condition in training and inference. The following sections describe these components.
Retrieval model.    Our retrieval model has three non-trainable modules: a pre-trained text en-
coder ftxt (CLIP text encoder), a pre-trained image encoder fimg (CLIP image encoder) and


                                                    4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Figure 4: Results for text-guided image manipulations without using masks. The original image is shown in
the left column, our manipulated images are shown in the center. The images of Bar-Tal et al. (2022); Gal et al.
(2022) were generated using the authors’ official code. The full comparison is available in the supplement.

an index H. The encoders map text descriptions and image samples to a joint multi-modal d-
dimensional feature space Rd . The index stores an efficient representation of the images database
- H := {fimg (i) ∈ Rd |i ∈ I} where I denotes the dataset of images. During training, we use
the index to efficiently extract the k nearest neighbors in the feature space of the image embed-
ding fimg (I) ∈ Rd - knnimg (I, k) := arg minkh∈H s(fimg (I), h) where s is a distance function and
arg mink output the minimal k elements. The set {fimg (I), knnimg (I, k)} is used as the condition to
the generative model. During inference, given a query text t, an embedding ftxt (t) is extracted. The
generative model is conditioned on this embedding and its k nearest neighbors from the database -
knntxt (t, k) := arg minkh∈H s(ftxt (t), h). During training, we add embeddings of real images, by
applying the retrieval method to the input image embedding. The extracted kNN should have a large
enough distribution to cover the potential text embedding. During inference, the kNN are retrieved
using the text embedding (See Fig. 17). In all of our experiments we use the cosine similarity metric
as the distance function s, k = 10 for the number of nearest neighbors and d = 512. The full
implementation details can be found in Sec. 6.6 in the supplement.
Image generation network. In order to demonstrate the robustness of our method, we apply our
kNN approach on two different diffusion backbones: Discrete (Gu et al., 2021) and Continuous
(Nichol et al., 2021; Sohl-Dickstein et al., 2015; Ho et al., 2020; Dhariwal & Nichol, 2021). Al-
though very different in practice, these models share the same theoretical idea. Let x0 ∼ q(x0 ) be a
sample from our images distribution. A forward diffusion process is a Markov chain that adds noise
at each step q(xn |xn−1 ). The reverse process, pθ (xn−1 |xn , x0 ), is a denoising process that removes
noise from an initialized noise state. At inference time, the model can generate an output, start-
ing with noise and gradually removing it using pθ . For additional background on diffusion models
please refer to Sec. 6.1 in the supplement.
In the discrete diffusion model, q(xn |xn−1 ) := v T (xn )Qn v(xn−1 ) where v(xn ) is a one-hot vec-
tor with entry 1 at xn , and Qn is a transition matrix, modeling the probability to move from state
xn−1 to xn , using uniform probability over the vocabulary and a pre-defined probability for ad-
ditional special [MASK] token. We can compute the reverse transition distribution according to:
                     Pk
pθ (xn−1 |xn , y) := x̂0 =1 q(xn−1 |xn , xˆ0 )pθ (xˆ0 |xn , x0 , y) where x0 is a discrete vector, tokenized
by the VQGAN (Esser et al., 2021) encoder and y is the conditioning signal. For modeling pθ we
have followed (Gu et al., 2021) and used a conditional Transformer √        (Vaswani et al., 2017).
In the continuous diffusion model, q(xn |xn−1 ) := N (xn ; αt xn−1 , (1 − αn )x0 ) and
pθ (xn−1 |xn , y) := N (µθ (xn , y), Σθ (xn , y)). Here, the noise function is Gaussian noise. Fol-
lowing (Ho et al., 2020; Nichol et al., 2021) we trained a model ϵθ to predict the added noise using
a standard mean-squared error loss: L := En∼[1,N ],x0 ∼q(x0 ),ϵ∼N (0,I) [||ϵ − ϵθ (xn , n, y||2 ] where ϵθ
is a U-net model and y is the conditioning signal.



                                                       5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Figure 5: tSNE visualization of 500 random text-image CLIP embeddings pairs taken from COCO validation.
The leftmost figure demonstrates the gap between the text and image distributions. By gradually adding kNN
to the mean CLIP embedding of the text, the gap decreases, demonstrating the importance of the kNN.
                                                 Table 1: Results for zero-shot Text-to-Image generation
                                                 on the MS-COCO, CUB and LN-COCO test sets. Image-
                                                 quality and Text-alignment report the percentage of majority
                                                 human raters votes in favor of our method when comparing
                                                 between a certain model and ours.

                                                               MS-COCO             CUB            LN-COCO
                                                                  Im. Txt           Im. Txt           Im. Txt
                                                    Model    FID↓             FID↓              FID↓
                                                                 qual. align.      qual. align.      qual. align.
                                                   LAFITE    26.9 72.1 65.3   89.7 74.0 59.6 42.8 68.4 61.9
                                                   FuseDream 21.2 64.0 79.3   50.2 79.1 60.9 37.5 71.1 59.0
Figure 6: FID on MS-COCO, including models         no-kNN    32.8 70.8 68.3   95.1 81.0 61.2 65.0 61.4 59.8
trained on image-only datasets and text-image      Ours      12.5 -     -     42.9 -     - 35.6 -       -
datasets.


In both cases, we condition our model on y = (fimg (x0 ), knnimg (x0 , k)) where fimg (x0 ) is the
CLIP image embedding, knnimg (x0 , k) is the k nearest neighbors in the feature space of the image
embedding. Following (Ramesh et al., 2022; Rombach et al., 2022) conditional injection, we con-
dition our model on the image CLIP embedding, and the kNN clip embeddings by applying cross
attention in the attention layers of the architecture. We sample both our models using Classifier Free
Guidance (CFG) (Nichol et al., 2021; Ho & Salimans, 2021). Since CFG was originally proposed
for continuous models, we propose a method for using it with discrete models as well. Full im-
plementation details of the discrete and continuous models can be found in Sec. 6.7 and Sec. 6.8,
respectively, in the supplement.

3.1   T EXT- ONLY IMAGE MANIPULATION
The majority of previous works in the task of image manipulation either rely on user-provided
masks (Nichol et al., 2021; Avrahami et al., 2022b;a), or are limited to global editing (Crowson
et al., 2022; Kim et al., 2022). Recently, several works (Bar-Tal et al., 2022; Hertz et al., 2022;
Gal et al., 2022) have made progress with local manipulations without relying on user edited masks.
Nevertheless, most of the techniques suffer from several shortcomings: (1) They enable local texture
changes, yet cannot modify complex structures, (2) they struggle to preserve the identity of the
object, for example, when manipulating humans, (3) they require optimization for each input.
We address these issues by extending kNN-Diffusion to perform local and semantic-aware image
manipulations without any provided mask. Illustration of the approach is provided in Fig. 18 and
Fig. 19 in the supplement. For this task, the model is trained to predict the original image from
a manipulated version. Specifically, we create a manipulated version of the image, which differs
from the original image only in some local area. Given a random local area M in the image I,
the manipulated image Imanip is constructed by replacing the area with the corresponding nearest
neighbor: Imanip = I · (1 − M ) + nnimg (I, 1) · M , where nnimg (I, 1) is the the nearest neighbor
obtained after aligning it with I using the ECC alignment algorithm (Evangelidis & Psarakis, 2008).
The model then receives as input the manipulated image, together with the CLIP embedding of the
original image only in the local area: fimg (I · M ). This CLIP embedding represents the required
modification that should be applied to the manipulated image in order to predict the original image.
During inference, instead of using the CLIP embedding of the local area, the desired modification is


                                                    6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Table 2: Results on the stickers dataset. We report the percentage of human raters prefer our method over
the baselines with respect to image quality and text alignment. Discrete no-kNN refers to VQ-diffusion, and
Continuous no-kNN, to DALL·E2 decoder, both trained without an explicit text-image dataset.
                                         Ours Discrete               Ours Continuous
        Model                FID↓ Image quality Text alignment Image quality Text alignment
        DALL·E2+ClipCap       55.5       71.6            69.2            67.0            68.3
        LAFITE                58.7       63.5            59.9            76.0            71.2
        no-kNN                52.7       72.1            67.6            66.8            69.4
        Ours                  40.8        -               -               -               -

represented using the CLIP embedding of the user text query. We modified the model to be capable
of receiving as a condition both the manipulated image and the CLIP embedding of the local area.

4     E XPERIMENTS
First, we conduct qualitative and quantitative comparisons on MS-COCO, LN-COCO and CUB
datasets. To further demonstrate the advantage of our method, we provide comparison on an image-
only stickers dataset, where we apply our approach on two diffusion backbones. Next, we demon-
strate image manipulation and out-of-distribution capabilities. Finally, to better assess the effect of
each contribution, an ablation study is provided.
Datasets and Metrics. For photo-realistic experiments, our model was trained only on the im-
ages (omitting the text) of a modified version of the Public Multimodal Dataset (PMD) used by
FLAVA (Singh et al., 2021). More information about the dataset is available in Sec. 6.4 of the sup-
plement. To further demonstrate the capabilities of our method, we collected 400 million sticker
images from the web, containing combinations of concepts such as objects, characters/avatars and
text. The collected stickers do not have paired text, and are substantially different from photo-
realistic data. Furthermore, since they have no paired text, they were not part of CLIP’s training
data, which makes the text-to-image generation task more challenging.
Evaluation metrics are based on objective and subjective metrics: (i) FID (Heusel et al., 2017) is an
objective metric used to assess the quality of synthesized images, (ii) human evaluation - we ask hu-
man raters for their preference, comparing two methods based on image quality and text alignment.
We used 600 image pairs; five raters rated each pair. The results are shown as a percentage of ma-
jority votes in favor of our method over the baselines. We report the full human evaluation protocol
in the supplement. We chose to omit Inception-Score, since it is shown by Barratt & Sharma (2018)
to be a misleading metric for models that were not trained on Imagenet.

4.1   Q UALITATIVE AND Q UANTITATIVE R ESULTS
We begin by comparing our model, trained on the PMD dataset, with the previous works LAFITE
and FuseDream, that trained on image-only datasets. To demonstrate the advantage of using a
retrieval method in text-to-image generation, we trained a model variant, no-kNN . This baseline was
trained solely on image embeddings (omitting the kNN), while during inference, the images were
generated using the text embedding. Tab. 1 displays zero-shot results on three different datasets:
MS-COCO, CUB and LN-COCO. We follow the evaluation protocol of LAFITE, reporting our
results on 30,000 images from MS-COCO validation set without training, nor using it’s training
partition in the kNN index. Similarly, we follow LAFITE for CUB and LN-COCO evaluation.
As can be seen, our model achieves the lowest FID score in all scenarios. In addition, human
evaluations rate our method as better aligned to text and with the highest images quality. In Fig. 2, 15
and 11 we present a qualitative comparison between the methods. One can observe that while the
simple retrieval baseline outputs non-generated images with high-quality, the images generated by
our method are more faithful to the input text. To further demonstrate the effectiveness of our
method, we present in Fig. 6 a comparison of our model with the latest text-to-image models trained
on paired text-image datasets: DALL·E, CogView, VQ-Diffusion, GLIDE, LDM, Make-A-Scene,
DALL·E2, Parti and Imagen. As can be seen, our model achieves comparable results to recent
models trained with full text-image pairs (e.g LDM, GLIDE), despite being trained on an image-
only dataset, with significantly lower computational costs. The results demonstrate that leveraging
an external retrieval database allows to compensate for different trade-offs, in particular, reducing the
number of parameters in the model. Additional samples are provided in Fig. 13 in the supplement.


                                                    7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Figure 7: Comparison between various indexes used by the same model. (1) Aesthetic. Images from the first
quantile of an aesthetic classifier, (2) Unaesthetic. Images from the last quantile of an aesthetic classifier, (3)
Image search engine. Images retrieved from Google Images, (4) The stickers index.


Text-to-sticker generation. As the sticker dataset does not have paired text, and is substantially
different from photo-realistic data, it allows us to illustrate the advantage of our model on an image-
only dataset. A selection of stickers generated by our model is presented in Fig. 1 and Fig. 14, 12.
To demonstrate the importance of using kNN on image-only datasets, we evaluate our approach on
two diffusion backbones. To this end, we trained a continuous diffusion model (Ramesh et al.,
2022) and a discrete diffusion model (Gu et al., 2021), both conditioned on the kNN image em-
beddings. For each backbone, we compare our method with the following baselines: (1) no-kNN -
this baseline was trained using both the continuous and the discrete methods conditioned only on
image CLIP embedding, without using kNN. In the discrete case, we trained a VQ-diffusion model,
while in the continuous case, we trained a re-implementation of DALL·E2’s decoder (without prior).
(2) DALL·E2+ClipCap baseline - here, we first captioned the entire sticker dataset using Clip-
Cap (Mokady et al., 2021), then trained DALL·E2 decoder on the captioned dataset. (3) LAFITE -
we trained LAFITE language-free model on our stickers dataset using the authors’ published code.
We present the results in Tab. 2. The FID is calculated over a subset of 3, 000 stickers, generated
from the ClipCap captioned dataset. As can be seen, our model achieves the lowest FID score. In
addition, it outperforms all baselines in human evaluation comparison, using continuous and discrete
backbones. In particular, compared with the same model trained without kNN, our model achieves
significantly higher favorability in both text alignment and image quality.

4.2    A PPLICATIONS

Text-only image manipulation. We demonstrate the manipulation capabilities of our model in
Fig. 1, 4 and 20. Furthermore, we qualitatively compare our model with Text2LIVE (Bar-Tal et al.,
2022) and Textual Inversion (Gal et al., 2022), using the authors’ published code. Text2LIVE pro-
posed generating an edit layer that is composed over the original input, using a generator trained for
each training image. Textual Inversion utilized the pre-trained Latent Diffusion model to invert the
input image into a token embedding. The embedding is then used to compose novel textual queries
for the generative model. Fig. 4 shows representative results, and the rest are included in Fig. 21
and 22 in the supplement. In contrast to our model, baseline methods lack text correspondence
or they do not preserve the identity of the object. Since Text2LIVE is optimized to perform local
changes, it has the difficulty changing the structure of the object (e.g. the "raising his hand" example
in Fig. 4). Textual Inversion baseline changes the identity of the object because it struggles recon-
structing the textual representation of the source image. Our model, on the other hand, can perform
challenging manipulations that are aligned with the text, while preserving the object identity.


                                                        8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Figure 8: Mean aesthetics score      Figure 9: MS-COCO test FID score       Figure 10: MS-COCO test FID
of the generated images as a func-   on various K’s in: (1) Zero-Shot (2)   score for different model sizes.
tion of the conditioned kNN mean     Index includes MS-COCO train sub-      As can be seen, adding kNN to
aesthetics score.                    set. No kNN trained with kNN, but      the model allows it to be smaller,
                                     did not employ kNN in inference.       while having better performance.

Out-of-distribution generation. Using the retrieval index as part of the generation process en-
ables using different databases during inference, without fine-tuning. This allows generatig images
from distributions that were not part of the training set, enabling out-of-distribution generation. This
novel capability is demonstrated with the same model trained on PMD, using three different retrieval
databases: (i) A stickers database presented in Sec. 4. (ii) Aesthetic database: This database is con-
structed by filtering images according to a classifier score. Let C be a classifier that for each image
i ∈ I outputs a score s = C(i). This classifier enables filtering the kNN using L ≤ s < H, where L
and H are low and high thresholds, respectively. Here, we use an open source pre-trained aesthetics
classifier A (Christoph Schuhmann, 2022): For each text input t ∈ T , we apply A on the kNN, and
then divide the kNN into five equal quantiles based on A score. As can be seen in Fig. 8, using
kNN with higher aesthetics score result in generated images with higher aesthetics mean score. (iii)
Image search engine: Generative models are stationary in the sense that they are unable to learn
new concepts after being trained, hence fine-tuning is required to represent new styles and concepts.
Here, we use an online image search engine, which allows the model to adapt to new data without
additional fine-tuning. A qualitative comparison of all three methods is shown in Fig.7.

4.3   A BLATION S TUDY

We conclude our experiments with an ablation study, to quantify the contribution of our different
components. We provide ablation study on index size and different kNN conditioning approaches in
Sec. 6.5 of the supplement. Number of nearest neighbors. The results in Fig. 9 demonstrate the
importance of applying the retrieval mechanism during training and inference. Here, we evaluate
our model, trained on PMD dataset, with different numbers of kNN during inference. Furthermore,
we examined the baseline no-kNN, in which during inference, the model is conditioned only on
the text embedding ftxt (t), without using kNN. Best performance is achieved using 10 neighbors.
Scalability analysis. To evaluate the effectiveness of our approach at different model sizes, we
trained three additional models with varying sizes for both settings - with and without kNN. As can
be seen in Fig. 10, utilizing kNN consistently improves performance for all sizes. Furthermore, a
performance improvement can be achieved using much smaller models with kNN. For example, the
35M kNN model outperforms the 400M model without kNN.

5     C ONCLUSION
“We shall always find, that every idea which we examine is copied from a similar impression", Hume
(1748). In this paper, we propose using a large-scale retrieval method in order to train a novel text-
to-image model, with only pre-trained multi-modal embeddings, but without an explicit text-image
dataset. Our extensive experiments demonstrate that using an external knowledge-base alleviates
much of the model’s burden of learning novel concepts, enabling the use of a relatively small model.
In addition, it provides the model the capability of learning to adapt to new samples, which it only
observes during test time. Lastly, we present a new technique utilizing the retrieval method for text-
driven semantic manipulations without user-provided masks. As evaluated by human studies and
automatic metrics, our method is significantly preferable to the baselines in terms of image quality
and text alignment.


                                                     9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


R EFERENCES
Omri Avrahami, Ohad Fried, and Dani Lischinski.        Blended latent diffusion.   arXiv preprint
 arXiv:2206.02779, 2022a.
Omri Avrahami, Dani Lischinski, and Ohad Fried. Blended diffusion for text-driven editing of
 natural images. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
 Recognition, pp. 18208–18218, 2022b.
Jimmy Lei Ba, Jamie Ryan Kiros, and Geoffrey E Hinton. Layer normalization. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:1607.06450, 2016.
Artem Babenko and Victor Lempitsky. The inverted multi-index. IEEE transactions on pattern
  analysis and machine intelligence, 37(6):1247–1260, 2014.
Omer Bar-Tal, Dolev Ofri-Amar, Rafail Fridman, Yoni Kasten, and Tali Dekel. Text2live: Text-
 driven layered image and video editing. arXiv preprint arXiv:2204.02491, 2022.
Shane Barratt and Rishi Sharma. A note on the inception score. arXiv preprint arXiv:1801.01973,
  2018.
Vishwanath Bijalwan, Vinay Kumar, Pinki Kumari, and Jordan Pascual. Knn based machine learning
  approach for text and document mining. International Journal of Database Theory and Applica-
  tion, 7(1):61–70, 2014.
Andreas Blattmann, Robin Rombach, Kaan Oktay, Jonas Müller, and Björn Ommer. Semi-
  parametric neural image synthesis. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2022.
Sebastian Borgeaud, Arthur Mensch, Jordan Hoffmann, Trevor Cai, Eliza Rutherford, Katie Milli-
  can, George van den Driessche, Jean-Baptiste Lespiau, Bogdan Damoc, Aidan Clark, et al. Im-
  proving language models by retrieving from trillions of tokens. arXiv preprint arXiv:2112.04426,
  2021.
Soravit Changpinyo, Piyush Sharma, Nan Ding, and Radu Soricut. Conceptual 12M: Pushing web-
  scale image-text pre-training to recognize long-tail visual concepts. In CVPR, 2021.
Romain Beaumont Christoph Schuhmann. Aesthetic predictor.            https://github.com/
  LAION-AI/aesthetic-predictor, 2022.
Katherine Crowson, Stella Biderman, Daniel Kornis, Dashiell Stander, Eric Hallahan, Louis Cas-
  tricato, and Edward Raff. Vqgan-clip: Open domain image generation and editing with natural
  language guidance. arXiv preprint arXiv:2204.08583, 2022.
Karan Desai, Gaurav Kaul, Zubin Aysola, and Justin Johnson. RedCaps: Web-curated image-text
  data created by the people, for the people. In NeurIPS Datasets and Benchmarks, 2021.
Jacob Devlin, Ming-Wei Chang, Kenton Lee, and Kristina Toutanova. Bert: Pre-training of deep
  bidirectional transformers for language understanding. arXiv preprint arXiv:1810.04805, 2018.
Prafulla Dhariwal and Alex Nichol. Diffusion models beat gans on image synthesis. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2105.05233, 2021.
Ming Ding, Zhuoyi Yang, Wenyi Hong, Wendi Zheng, Chang Zhou, Da Yin, Junyang Lin, Xu Zou,
 Zhou Shao, Hongxia Yang, et al. Cogview: Mastering text-to-image generation via transformers.
 Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 34, 2021.
Patrick Esser, Robin Rombach, and Bjorn Ommer. Taming transformers for high-resolution image
  synthesis. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recog-
  nition, pp. 12873–12883, 2021.
Georgios D Evangelidis and Emmanouil Z Psarakis. Parametric image alignment using enhanced
  correlation coefficient maximization. IEEE transactions on pattern analysis and machine intelli-
  gence, 30(10):1858–1865, 2008.



                                               10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Oran Gafni, Adam Polyak, Oron Ashual, Shelly Sheynin, Devi Parikh, and Yaniv Taigman.
  Make-a-scene: Scene-based text-to-image generation with human priors. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2203.13131, 2022.
Rinon Gal, Yuval Alaluf, Yuval Atzmon, Or Patashnik, Amit H Bermano, Gal Chechik, and Daniel
  Cohen-Or. An image is worth one word: Personalizing text-to-image generation using textual
  inversion. arXiv preprint arXiv:2208.01618, 2022.
Tiezheng Ge, Kaiming He, Qifa Ke, and Jian Sun. Optimized product quantization for approximate
  nearest neighbor search. In Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
  Recognition (CVPR), June 2013.
Jiatao Gu, Yong Wang, Kyunghyun Cho, and Victor OK Li. Search engine guided neural machine
   translation. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, volume 32, 2018.
Shuyang Gu, Dong Chen, Jianmin Bao, Fang Wen, Bo Zhang, Dongdong Chen, Lu Yuan, and Bain-
  ing Guo. Vector quantized diffusion model for text-to-image synthesis. ArXiv, abs/2111.14822,
  2021.
Amir Hertz, Ron Mokady, Jay Tenenbaum, Kfir Aberman, Yael Pritch, and Daniel Cohen-Or.
 Prompt-to-prompt image editing with cross attention control. arXiv preprint arXiv:2208.01626,
 2022.
Martin Heusel, Hubert Ramsauer, Thomas Unterthiner, Bernhard Nessler, and Sepp Hochreiter.
 Gans trained by a two time-scale update rule converge to a local nash equilibrium. Advances in
 neural information processing systems, 30, 2017.
Jonathan Ho and Tim Salimans. Classifier-free diffusion guidance. In NeurIPS 2021 Workshop on
  Deep Generative Models and Downstream Applications, 2021.
Jonathan Ho, Ajay Jain, and Pieter Abbeel. Denoising diffusion probabilistic models. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2006.11239, 2020.
David Hume. An enquiry concerning human understanding, 1748.
Karim Iskakov. Semi-parametric image inpainting. arXiv preprint arXiv:1807.02855, 2018.
Herve Jegou, Matthijs Douze, and Cordelia Schmid. Product quantization for nearest neighbor
  search. IEEE transactions on pattern analysis and machine intelligence, 33(1):117–128, 2010.
Jeff Johnson, Matthijs Douze, and Hervé Jégou. Billion-scale similarity search with GPUs. IEEE
   Transactions on Big Data, 7(3):535–547, 2019.
Gwanghyun Kim, Taesung Kwon, and Jong Chul Ye. Diffusionclip: Text-guided diffusion models
 for robust image manipulation. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision
 and Pattern Recognition, pp. 2426–2435, 2022.
Ivan Krasin, Tom Duerig, Neil Alldrin, Andreas Veit, Sami Abu-El-Haija, Serge Belongie, David
  Cai, Zheyun Feng, Vittorio Ferrari, and Victor Gomes. Openimages: A public dataset for large-
  scale multi-label and multi-class image classification., 01 2016.
Ranjay Krishna, Yuke Zhu, Oliver Groth, Justin Johnson, Kenji Hata, Joshua Kravitz, Stephanie
  Chen, Yannis Kalantidis, Li-Jia Li, David A Shamma, Michael Bernstein, and Li Fei-Fei. Visual
  genome: Connecting language and vision using crowdsourced dense image annotations. 2016.
  URL https://arxiv.org/abs/1602.07332.
Kenton Lee, Ming-Wei Chang, and Kristina Toutanova. Latent retrieval for weakly supervised open
  domain question answering. arXiv preprint arXiv:1906.00300, 2019.
Junnan Li, Dongxu Li, Caiming Xiong, and Steven Hoi. Blip: Bootstrapping language-
  image pre-training for unified vision-language understanding and generation. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2201.12086, 2022.


                                                11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Tsung-Yi Lin, Michael Maire, Serge Belongie, James Hays, Pietro Perona, Deva Ramanan, Piotr
  Dollár, and C Lawrence Zitnick. Microsoft coco: Common objects in context. In European
  conference on computer vision, pp. 740–755. Springer, 2014.
Xingchao Liu, Chengyue Gong, Lemeng Wu, Shujian Zhang, Hao Su, and Qiang Liu. Fuse-
  dream: Training-free text-to-image generation with improved clip+ gan space optimization. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2112.01573, 2021.
Ron Mokady, Amir Hertz, and Amit H Bermano. Clipcap: Clip prefix for image captioning. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2111.09734, 2021.
Norman Mu, Alexander Kirillov, David Wagner, and Saining Xie. Slip: Self-supervision meets
  language-image pre-training. arXiv preprint arXiv:2112.12750, 2021.
Alex Nichol, Prafulla Dhariwal, Aditya Ramesh, Pranav Shyam, Pamela Mishkin, Bob McGrew,
  Ilya Sutskever, and Mark Chen. Glide: Towards photorealistic image generation and editing with
  text-guided diffusion models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2112.10741, 2021.
Vicente Ordonez, Girish Kulkarni, and Tamara Berg. Im2text: Describing images using 1 mil-
  lion captioned photographs. In J. Shawe-Taylor, R. Zemel, P. Bartlett, F. Pereira, and K. Q.
  Weinberger (eds.), Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 24. Curran As-
  sociates, Inc., 2011. URL https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper/2011/file/
  5dd9db5e033da9c6fb5ba83c7a7ebea9-Paper.pdf.
Or Patashnik, Zongze Wu, Eli Shechtman, Daniel Cohen-Or, and Dani Lischinski. Styleclip: Text-
  driven manipulation of stylegan imagery. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Confer-
  ence on Computer Vision, pp. 2085–2094, 2021.
Jordi Pont-Tuset, Jasper Uijlings, Soravit Changpinyo, Radu Soricut, and Vittorio Ferrari. Connect-
  ing vision and language with localized narratives. In European Conference on Computer Vision,
  pp. 647–664. Springer, 2020.
Xiaojuan Qi, Qifeng Chen, Jiaya Jia, and Vladlen Koltun. Semi-parametric image synthesis. In
  Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 8808–
  8816, 2018.
Alec Radford, Jong Wook Kim, Chris Hallacy, Aditya Ramesh, Gabriel Goh, Sandhini Agar-
  wal, Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, Pamela Mishkin, Jack Clark, Gretchen Krueger, and Ilya
  Sutskever. Learning transferable visual models from natural language supervision. CoRR,
  abs/2103.00020, 2021. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2103.00020.
Aditya Ramesh, Mikhail Pavlov, Gabriel Goh, Scott Gray, Chelsea Voss, Alec Radford, Mark Chen,
  and Ilya Sutskever. Zero-shot text-to-image generation. In International Conference on Machine
  Learning, pp. 8821–8831. PMLR, 2021.
Aditya Ramesh, Prafulla Dhariwal, Alex Nichol, Casey Chu, and Mark Chen. Hierarchical text-
  conditional image generation with clip latents. arXiv preprint arXiv:2204.06125, 2022.
Robin Rombach, Andreas Blattmann, Dominik Lorenz, Patrick Esser, and Björn Ommer. High-
  resolution image synthesis with latent diffusion models. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Con-
  ference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 10684–10695, 2022.
Chitwan Saharia, William Chan, Saurabh Saxena, Lala Li, Jay Whang, Emily Denton, Seyed Kam-
  yar Seyed Ghasemipour, Burcu Karagol Ayan, S Sara Mahdavi, Rapha Gontijo Lopes, et al.
  Photorealistic text-to-image diffusion models with deep language understanding. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2205.11487, 2022.
Piyush Sharma, Nan Ding, Sebastian Goodman, and Radu Soricut. Conceptual captions: A cleaned,
  hypernymed, image alt-text dataset for automatic image captioning. In Proceedings of the 56th
  Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers), pp.
  2556–2565, 2018.


                                                12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Yawar Siddiqui, Justus Thies, Fangchang Ma, Qi Shan, Matthias Nießner, and Angela Dai. Re-
  trievalfuse: Neural 3d scene reconstruction with a database. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF
  International Conference on Computer Vision, pp. 12568–12577, 2021.
Amanpreet Singh, Ronghang Hu, Vedanuj Goswami, Guillaume Couairon, Wojciech Galuba, Mar-
 cus Rohrbach, and Douwe Kiela. Flava: A foundational language and vision alignment model.
 arXiv preprint arXiv:2112.04482, 2021.
Jascha Sohl-Dickstein, Eric Weiss, Niru Maheswaranathan, and Surya Ganguli. Deep unsupervised
  learning using nonequilibrium thermodynamics. In International Conference on Machine Learn-
  ing, pp. 2256–2265. PMLR, 2015.
Krishna Srinivasan, Karthik Raman, Jiecao Chen, Michael Bendersky, and Marc Najork. Wit:
  Wikipedia-based image text dataset for multimodal multilingual machine learning. In Proceed-
  ings of the 44th International ACM SIGIR Conference on Research and Development in Informa-
  tion Retrieval, pp. 2443–2449, 2021.
Bart Thomee, David A. Shamma, Gerald Friedland, Benjamin Elizalde, Karl Ni, Douglas Poland,
  Damian Borth, and Li-Jia Li. The new data and new challenges in multimedia research. CoRR,
  abs/1503.01817, 2015. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/1503.01817.
Hung-Yu Tseng, Hsin-Ying Lee, Lu Jiang, Ming-Hsuan Yang, and Weilong Yang. Retrievegan:
  Image synthesis via differentiable patch retrieval. In European Conference on Computer Vision,
  pp. 242–257. Springer, 2020.
Aaron Van Den Oord, Oriol Vinyals, et al. Neural discrete representation learning. Advances in
  neural information processing systems, 30, 2017.
Ashish Vaswani, Noam Shazeer, Niki Parmar, Jakob Uszkoreit, Llion Jones, Aidan N Gomez,
  Łukasz Kaiser, and Illia Polosukhin. Attention is all you need. Advances in neural informa-
  tion processing systems, 30, 2017.
Catherine Wah, Steve Branson, Peter Welinder, Pietro Perona, and Serge Belongie. The caltech-ucsd
  birds-200-2011 dataset. 2011.
Xintao Wang, Liangbin Xie, Chao Dong, and Ying Shan. Real-esrgan: Training real-world blind
  super-resolution with pure synthetic data. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Confer-
  ence on Computer Vision, pp. 1905–1914, 2021.
Zihao Wang, Wei Liu, Qian He, Xinglong Wu, and Zili Yi. Clip-gen: Language-free training of a
  text-to-image generator with clip. arXiv preprint arXiv:2203.00386, 2022.
Yuhuai Wu, Markus N Rabe, DeLesley Hutchins, and Christian Szegedy. Memorizing transformers.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2203.08913, 2022.
Tao Xu, Pengchuan Zhang, Qiuyuan Huang, Han Zhang, Zhe Gan, Xiaolei Huang, and Xiaodong
  He. Attngan: Fine-grained text to image generation with attentional generative adversarial net-
  works. In Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition, pp.
  1316–1324, 2018.
Jiahui Yu, Yuanzhong Xu, Jing Yu Koh, Thang Luong, Gunjan Baid, Zirui Wang, Vijay Vasudevan,
   Alexander Ku, Yinfei Yang, Burcu Karagol Ayan, et al. Scaling autoregressive models for content-
   rich text-to-image generation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2206.10789, 2022.
Han Zhang, Jing Yu Koh, Jason Baldridge, Honglak Lee, and Yinfei Yang. Cross-modal contrastive
  learning for text-to-image generation. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer
  vision and pattern recognition, pp. 833–842, 2021.
Yufan Zhou, Ruiyi Zhang, Changyou Chen, Chunyuan Li, Chris Tensmeyer, Tong Yu, Jiuxiang Gu,
  Jinhui Xu, and Tong Sun. LAFITE: towards language-free training for text-to-image generation.
  CoRR, abs/2111.13792, 2021. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2111.13792.
Minfeng Zhu, Pingbo Pan, Wei Chen, and Yi Yang. Dm-gan: Dynamic memory generative ad-
 versarial networks for text-to-image synthesis. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on
 computer vision and pattern recognition, pp. 5802–5810, 2019.


                                                13
                     Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                     6   A PPENDIX

 A black cat
with a beanie
on it’s head


 A bike is on
the street with
 a lot of snow


   This is a
living room in
  a log cabin


  A neat and
clean bathroom
  in blue and
     white


A knife and fork
   on a plate
of pizza topped
 with arugula


     A lovely
appointed kitchen
  area with oval
  shaped island


     Rusty fire
  hydrant is close
   to the edge of
    the curb and
   painted green.


    One cake
  doughnut and
  one doughnut
   topped with
      icing


 Tiered wedding
 cake decorated
   with ribbon
   and daisies


                                                                       VQ
                     Ours        FuseDream        CogView                             Lafite   NN   GT
                                                                    Diffusion

                                               Figure 11: Samples from COCO validation set.


                                                                    14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


         Figure 12: A selection of stickers generated using the continuous kNN-Diffusion model.


                                                  15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


   Figure 13: Additional samples generated from challenging text inputs using the photo-realistic model


                                                   16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


          Figure 14: A selection of stickers generated using the discrete kNN-Diffusion model.


                                                  17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


6.1   BACKGROUND

Continuous diffusion process Diffusion models are latent variable models that aim to model a
distribution pθ (x0 ) that approximates the data distribution q(x0 ). Specifically, they model a forward
process in the space of x0 from data to noise. Given a sample from the data distribution x0 ∼
q(x0 ), this process produces a Markov chain of latent variables x1 , . . . , xT by progressively adding
Gaussion noise to the sample:
                                                      p
                               q(xt |xt−1 ) := N (xt ; 1 − βt xt−1 , βt I)                           (1)
where βt is a variance schedule. As presented previously by (Ho et al., 2020), the latent variable xt
can be expressed directly as a linear combination of noise and x0 :
                                   √          √
                             xt = αt x0 + ϵ 1 − αt , ϵ ∼ N (0, I)                                 (2)
where αt := Πti=1 (1−βi ). In order to sample from the data distribution q(x0 ), we define the "reverse
process" p(xt−1 |xt ) which samples first from q(xT ) and then samples reverse steps q(xt−1 |xt ) until
x0 .
Since the data distribution is unknown, we need to train a model to approximate it. Note that when T
is large enough, the noise vector xT nearly follows an isotropic Gaussian distribution. This suggests
learning a model pθ (xt−1 |xt ) to predict mean µθ and covariance matrix Σθ :
                             pθ (xt−1 |xt ) := N (xt−1 ; µθ (xt , t), Σθ (xt , t))                  (3)
To train this model, we can replace µθ (xt , t) by predicting the noise ϵθ (xt , t) added to x0 using
equation 2 and we get this objective function:
                         L := Et∼[1,T ],x0 ∼q(x0 ),ϵ∼N (0,I) [||ϵ − ϵθ (xt , t, y||2 ]              (4)
where y is an optional conditioning signal (such as text/image embedding or a low resolution image).

Discrete diffusion process Let xn ∈ {1, . . . , V }h×w be the indices of the allocated codebook
vectors extracted by a pre-trained VQGAN (Esser et al., 2021) encoder. The forward process of a
diffusion model q(xn |xn−1 ) is a Markov chain that adds noise at each step. Moreover, the reverse
process q(xn−1 |xn , x0 ), is a denoising process that removes noise from an initialized noise state.As
presented by (Gu et al., 2021), the forward diffusion process is given by:

                                 q(xn |xn−1 ) = v T (xn )Qn v(xn−1 )                                (5)
where v(xn ) is a one-hot vector with entry 1 at xn , and Qn is the probability transition matrix from
state xn−1 to xn .
The reverse process is given by the posterior distribution:
                                        (v T (xn )Qn v(xn−1 ))(v T (xn−1 )Q̄n−1 v(x0 ))
                  q(xn−1 |xn , x0 ) =                                                               (6)
                                                       v T (xn )Q̄n v(x0 )
where Q̄n = Qn · · · Q1 .
Inspired from mask language modeling (Devlin et al., 2018), they proposes corrupting the tokens
by stochastically masking some of them. Specifically, an additional special token [M ASK] is pro-
posed, so for each token there are (V+1) discrete states. The transition matrix is formulated as, By
adding a small amount of unifrom noise to the categorial distribution, the transition matrix can be
formulated as,

                                  αn + βn         βn            βn         ···    0
                                                                                    
                                  βn           αn + βn         βn         ···    0
                                  β
                            Qn =      n          βn          αn + βn      ···    0               (7)
                                    .
                                     ..            ..            ..        ..     .. 
                                                   .             .           .    .
                                        γn          γn           γn        ···    1

where αn ∈ [0, 1], βn = (1 − αn − γn )/V and γn the probability of a token to be replaced with a
[M ASK] token. Each token has a probability of γn to be replaced by the [M ASK] token, V βn to
be resampled uniformly and αn = (1 − V βn − γn ) to be unchanged.


                                                      18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


6.2   A DDITIONAL S AMPLES

In Fig. 16 and 15 we present a visual comparison of our discrete model, trained on the stickers
dataset with (1) the kNN extracted during inference, (2) the same model without using kNN in infer-
ence. As can be seen, the images generated by our model are better aligned to the corresponding text
compared to the baselines. While the baselines fail with challenging prompts, our model produces
high-quality images that align with the text, and composes multiple concepts correctly.

COCO Validation Set Comparison Fig. 11 presents a qualitative comparison with Fuse-
Dream (Liu et al., 2021), CogView (Ding et al., 2021) and VQ-Diffusion (Gu et al., 2021) on the
COCO validation set. Note that both CogView and VQ-Diffusion have been trained on an Image-
Text paired dataset, whereas our model was not trained on the COCO dataset, nor used it in the
retrieval model.
Additional samples generated from challenging text inputs are provided in Figs. 13, 14 and Fig. 12.


Figure 15: Comparison of our model, trained on PMD with (1) kNN extracted in inference, (2) the same model
without using kNN in inference. While the kNN lack information regarding text semantics, our model considers
both text semantics and the kNN, thus proving the advantage of using both the text and the kNN embeddings.


Figure 16: Qualitative comparison of stickers generated using the discrete kNN-Diffusion model, 10 Nearest
Neighbors to the text in the CLIP embedding and a discrete model that does not use kNN.


                                                    19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


6.3   H UMAN E VALUATION P ROTOCOL

For all of our human evaluation experiments, we used Amazon Mechanical Turk. For each ex-
periment, we used 600 samples, each scored by five different people. The preferred sample was
determined according to majority opinion. For each baseline comparison, we asked two questions
(in different experiments): "Which image is of a higher quality?" and "Which image best matches
the text?".

6.4   DATASETS

The modified PMD dataset is composed of the following set of publicly available text-image
datasets: SBU Captions (Ordonez et al., 2011), Localized Narratives (Pont-Tuset et al., 2020), Con-
ceptual Captions (Sharma et al., 2018), Visual Genome (Krishna et al., 2016), Wikipedia Image
Text (Srinivasan et al., 2021), Conceptual Captions 12M (Changpinyo et al., 2021), Red Caps (De-
sai et al., 2021), and a filtered version of YFCC100M (Thomee et al., 2015). In total, the dataset
contains 69 million text-image pairs.

6.5   A BLATION STUDY

Index size As one can expect, increasing the index size at inference time improves performance. To
demonstrate this hypothesis, we evaluated our model with an index containing 10%, 30%, 50% and
70% images of PMD dataset, and obtained FID scores of 13.92, 13.85, 13.72, and 13.65 respectively.
kNN conditioning We examined several different approaches to kNN input conditioning: (i) for-
warding the kNN embeddings and the single image embedding through a self-attention layer before
feeding the contextualized K + 1 embeddings to the model, (ii) feeding the model with one embed-
ding, computed using cross-attention between the image embedding and the kNN embeddings, and,
(iii) feeding the model with the image embedding concatenated with a learned linear projection of
the kNN embeddings. These variants received FID scores of 18.3, 22.4, 34.1 respectively.

6.6   R ETRIEVAL M ODEL

The retrieval model is implemented using FAISS (Johnson et al., 2019). FAISS is an efficient
database, capable of storing billions of elements and finding their nearest neighbors in millisec-
onds. In the pre-processing phase, for each image in the dataset, we store the image index and its
corresponding CLIP image embedding. During training, given a training image, we extract its CLIP
image embedding and search for its 10 (see Fig. 9) nearest neighbors in the dataset based on the
cosine similarity distance.
For an efficient search during training and inference, we use a non-exhaustive search: For this, we
use an inverted file index. As in Babenko & Lempitsky (2014), we define Voronoi cells in the d-
dimensional space (where d = 512 is the CLIP embedding dimensional space), s.t each database
vector falls in one of the cells. During search time, only the embeddings contained in the cell the
query falls in and a few neighboring ones are compared against the query vector. In addition, to
fit the index of our large-scale datasets on a 128GB RAM server, we compress the code size from
512 × 32/8 = 2048 Bytes to 256 Bytes using optimized product quantization (Ge et al., 2013;
Jegou et al., 2010). In Algorithm 1 we include pseudocode of the core of the implementation of the
retrieval database.

6.7   D ISCRETE K NN MODEL

We provide additional implementation details for the discrete diffusion model. Additional training
details can be found in Tab. 3.

Vector Quantization For token quantization, we use VQ-VAE and adapt the publicly available
VQGAN(Esser et al., 2021) model, trained on the OpenImages(Krasin et al., 2016) dataset. The
encoder downsamples images to 32×32 tokens and uses a codebook vocabulary with 2887 elements.


                                                20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Image Tokenization In our discrete generative model we model images as a sequence of dis-
crete tokens. To this end, we utilize a vector-quantized variational auto-encoder (VQ-VAE) (Van
Den Oord et al., 2017) as image tokenizer. VQ-VAE consists of three components: (i) an encoder,
(ii) a learned codebook, and, (iii) a decoder. Given an image, the encoder extracts a latent representa-
tion. The codebook then maps each latent vector representation to its nearest vector in the codebook.
Finally, the decoder reconstructs the image from the codebook representation. VQ-VAE is trained
with the objectives of reconstruction and codebook learning. VQ-GAN (Esser et al., 2021) adds an
adversarial loss term that tries to determine whether the generated image is fake or real. This added
term was shown to improve reconstruction quality.

Transformer We follow Gu et al. (2021) and train a decoder-only Transformer. The decoder
module contains 24 transformer blocks, each containing full attention, cross-attention for the con-
catenated conditioner, and a feed-forward network. The timestamp n is injected using Adaptive
Layer Normalization (Ba et al., 2016). The decoder contains 400 million parameters.

Classifier-free guidance We sample our diffusion models using classifier-free guid-
ance (CFG) (Ho & Salimans, 2021; Nichol et al., 2021; Ramesh et al., 2022). CFG is performed by
extrapolating an unconditional sample in the direction of a conditional sample. To support uncondi-
tional sampling, previous work had to fine-tune (Nichol et al., 2021) their models with 20% of the
conditional features nullified. This enabled them to sample unconditional images from the model
                                 →
                                 −
using the null condition, y ′ = 0 , the null vector. We found that we can generate unconditional
samples from our model using null conditioning without fine-tuning it. We hypothesize that by
conditioning the model on a null vector, the cross-attention component is also nullified, resulting
in no contribution to the diffusion process. During inference, in each step of the diffusion process
we generate two images: conditional image logits, pθ (xn−1 |xn , y), conditioned on the desired
multi-modal embedding y, and the unconditional image logits, pθ (xn−1 |xn , y ′ ), conditioned on the
null embedding. Then, the final image for a diffusion step n is sampled from
                      pθ (xn−1 |xn , y) =pθ (xn−1 |xn , y ′ )+
                                         λ(pθ (xn−1 |xn , y) − pθ (xn−1 |xn , y ′ ))
where λ is a scale coefficient. In all of our experiments, we set λ = 8, which was found to yield
the highest FID scores on the validation set. Note that the above extrapolation occurs directly on the
logits output by pθ , in contrast to GLIDE (Nichol et al., 2021), which extrapolates the pixel values.

Training Objective For completeness we are adding the training objective of the discrete model.
The network is trained to minimize the variational lower bound (VLB):
               Lvlb = L0 + L1 + · · · + LN −1 + LN ,
                L0 = − log pθ (x0 |x1 , fimg (I), knnimg (I, k)),
                                                                                                    (8)
              Ln−1 = DKL (q(xn−1 |xn , x0 ) || pθ (xn−1 |xn , fimg (I), knnimg (I, k))),
                LN = DKL (q(xN |x0 ) || p(xN ))
Where p(xN ) is the prior distribution of timestep N = 100, fimg (I) is the CLIP image embedding,
knnimg (I, k) is the k nearest neighbors in the feature space of the image embedding. The full details
can be found in Gu et al. (2021).

6.8   C ONTINUOUS K NN MODEL

We provide additional implementation details for the continuous diffusion model. Additional train-
ing details can be found in Tab. 3.

Decoder. We followed (Nichol et al., 2021; Ho et al., 2020; Ramesh et al., 2022) and
re-implemented a diffusion U-net model. Specifically, we modify the architecture described
in (Ramesh et al., 2022) by allowing multiple CLIP embeddings as the condition to the model.
Since we do not have a paired text-image dataset, we removed the text transformer, and thus the text
embedding. In particular, we use 512 convolution channels, 3 residual blocks, 64 heads channels
and attention resolution of 32, 16 and 8. Similarly to our discrete model, we trained two models (1)


                                                   21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                          𝑓!"# (𝐼)                       𝑓$%$ (𝑡)
                               𝑓$%$ (𝑡)                       𝑓!"# (𝐼)
                                              𝐾𝑁𝑁                            𝐾𝑁𝑁

                                           𝑎 b                            𝑎 b


                                   (a) Training                  (b) Inference
Figure 17: During training, only the image I is given (red), whereas during inference only the text t is given
(blue). In order to bridge the gap between the two distributions during training, we leverage the K nearest
neighbors that should have a large enough distribution (dashed cone) to cover the potential text embedding (i.e.
cos(b) < cos(a)). During inference, the opposite is applied.

a no-kNN conditioned only on CLIP image embedding during training, (2) a kNN conditioned on
CLIP image embedding and its kNN. Finally, we enable classifier-free guidance by randomly set-
ting the CLIP embeddings to zero 10% of the time. As demonstrated in Tab. 2, we find that humans
prefer our model over no-kNN 66.8% of the time for image quality and 69.4% of the time for text
alignment.

Super-Resolution. As the decoder generates images with 64 × 64 resolution, we up-sampled the
images to 256 × 256 using the open-source super resolution of (Nichol et al., 2021). To further up-
sample the images to 512 × 512 and 1024 × 1024 we used the open-source super resolution provided
by (Wang et al., 2021).

Training Objectives For completeness we are addding the training objective of our continuous
model. Following Ho et al. (2020); Nichol et al. (2021) we are using mean-squared error loss to
predict the noise:
                    L := En∼[1,N ],x0 ∼q(x0 ),ϵ∼N (0,I) [||ϵ − ϵθ (xn , n, y)||2 ]
where ϵθ is a U − net model and y = (fimg (x0 ), knnimg (x0 , k)).

                                                             Discrete               Continuous
                         Number of nearest neighbors            10                       10
                         Diffusion steps                       100                     1000
                         Noise schedule                          -                    cosine
                         Sampling steps                        100                      250
                         Model size                           400M                      1B
                         Sampling variance method                -                   analytic
                         Dropout                                 -                      0.1
                         Weight decay                         4.5e-2                      -
                         Batch size                            512                     1600
                         Iterations                           150K                    500K
                         Learning rate                        4.05-4                  1.4e-4
                         optimizer                           AdamW                   AdamW
                         Adam β2                               0.96                  0.9999
                         Adam ϵ                               1.0e-8                  1.0e-8
                         EMA decay                             0.99                  0.9999
                         warmup                                5000                   25000
                         #GPUs                              128 A100                200 A100

                                     Table 3: Training details of our models


                                                       22
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Algorithm 1 Pseudo-code implementation for the construction of the retrieval model, training and
sampling using conditioning kNN.

                             Retrieval model construction
def training(dataset: train image dataset):                              1
    //inverted index of 50k centroids,                                   2
    //with optimized product quantization to 256B                        3
    idx_cfg = "OPQ256_IVF50000_PQ256x8"                                  4
    index = faiss.index_factory(d, idx_cfg, faiss.METRIC_INNER_PRODUCT) 5
    ivf = faiss.extract_index_ivf(index)                                 6
    clustering_index = faiss.index_cpu_to_all_gpus(faiss.IndexFlatIP(d)) 7
    ivf.clustering_index = clustering_index                              8
    train_dataset = []                                                   9
    for image in random.sample(dataset, 1000000):                        10
        train_dataset.append(CLIP_image_embedding(image))                11
    index.train(train_dataset)                                           12
    for image in dataset:                                                13
        index.add(CLIP_image_encoder(image))                             14
    return index                                                         15

                                          Training
def training(I:FAISS index, image, k:Number of NN, t:timestamp [0, T-1]):
                                                                        1
    image_encoding = CLIP_image_encoder(image)                          2
    kNN = I.search(image_encoding, k)                                   3
    condition = concatenate([image_encoding, kNN])                      4
    image_T = add_noise(image, t)                                       5
    image_0 = diffusion_model(image_T, t, condition)                    6
    loss = criterion(image0, image)                                     7
    return loss                                                         8
                                                                                              9

                                          Sampling
def sampling(I: FAISS index, text, k : Number of NN):                                         1
    text_encoding = CLIP_text_encoder(text)                                                   2
    kNN = I.search(text_encoding, k)                                                          3
    condition = concatenate([text_encoding, kNN])                                             4
    image = sample_noise(T)                                                                   5
    for t in [T-1, T-2, ..., 0]:                                                              6
        image = diffusion_model(image, t, condition)                                          7
    return image                                                                              8


                                               23
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


6.9    T EXT- ONLY IMAGE MANIPULATION

Our approach is illustrated in Fig. 18. Additional manipulation examples are provided in Figs. 20.
The full comparison with the baselines is provided in Fig. 21 and 22. We also provide in Fig. 19
several examples for the process of the manipulated images construction.


Figure 18: An illustration of our manipulation approach. During training: Given a training image (1), the
model extracts its first nearest neighbor (2). Next, a random local area in the training image is selected (3), and
the manipulated image is constructed by replacing the area with the corresponding nearest neighbor (4). The
model then receives as input the manipulated image and the clip embedding of the local area that needs to be
restored (5). During inference: Given an input image and a text query "A face of a male child", the model
receives as input the image (4) and the clip embedding of the modifying text (5).


                                                        24
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Figure 19: Illustration of the manipulated image construction process during training. Given an original im-
age, we select a random local area, and extract the first nearest neighbor (1-NN). Using ECC alignment, we
align the nearest neighbor with the original image and replace the random local area with it’s corresponding
nearest neighbor local area. The model then receives as input the manipulated image, together with the CLIP
embedding of the local area, and tries to predict the original image.


                                                    25
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


               Figure 20: Additional manipulation examples, generated using our model.


                                                 26
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Figure 21: comparison to Text2LIVE (Bar-Tal et al., 2022). For each input image, the bottom row corresponds
to images generated by our model, and the top row corresponds to images generated by the Text2LIVE model.


                                                    27
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Figure 22: comparison to Textual Inversion (Gal et al., 2022). For each input image, the bottom row corre-
sponds to images generated by our model, and the top row corresponds to images generated by the Textual
Inversion model.


                                                   28
