Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


F LOW A NNEALED I MPORTANCE S AMPLING
B OOTSTRAP
 Laurence I. Midgley∗                                     Vincent Stimper∗
 University of Cambridge                                  Max Planck Institute for Intelligent Systems
 InstaDeep                                                University of Cambridge
 laurencemidgley@gmail.com                                vs488@cam.ac.uk

 Gregor N. C. Simm                  Bernhard Schölkopf           José Miguel Hernández-Lobato
 University of Cambridge            Max Planck Institute          University of Cambridge
 gncs2@cam.ac.uk                    for Intelligent Systems       jmh233@cam.ac.uk
                                    bs@tue.mpg.de


                                               A BSTRACT
             Normalizing flows are tractable density models that can approximate complicated
             target distributions, e.g. Boltzmann distributions of physical systems. However,
             current methods for training flows either suffer from mode-seeking behavior, use
             samples from the target generated beforehand by expensive MCMC methods, or
             use stochastic losses that have high variance. To avoid these problems, we aug-
             ment flows with annealed importance sampling (AIS) and minimize the mass-
             covering α-divergence with α = 2, which minimizes importance weight variance.
             Our method, Flow AIS Bootstrap (FAB), uses AIS to generate samples in regions
             where the flow is a poor approximation of the target, facilitating the discovery of
             new modes. We apply FAB to multimodal targets and show that we can approxi-
             mate them very accurately where previous methods fail. To the best of our knowl-
             edge, we are the first to learn the Boltzmann distribution of the alanine dipeptide
             molecule using only the unnormalized target density, without access to samples
             generated via Molecular Dynamics (MD) simulations: FAB produces better re-
             sults than training via maximum likelihood on MD samples while using 100 times
             fewer target evaluations. After reweighting the samples, we obtain unbiased his-
             tograms of dihedral angles that are almost identical to the ground truth.


1       I NTRODUCTION
Approximating intractable distributions is a challenging task whose solution has relevance in many
real-world applications. A prominent example involves approximating the Boltzmann distribution of
a given molecule. In this case, the unnormalized density can be obtained by physical modeling and is
given by e−u(x) , where x are the 3D atomic coordinates and u(·) returns the dimensionless energy of
the system. Drawing independent samples from this distribution is difficult (Lelièvre et al., 2010).
It is typically done by running expensive Molecular Dynamics (MD) simulations (Leimkuhler &
Matthews, 2015), which yield highly correlated samples and require long simulation times.
An alternative is given by normalizing flows. These are tractable density models parameterized by
neural networks. They can generate a batch of independent samples with a single forward pass
and any bias in the samples can be eliminated by reweighting via importance sampling. Flows are
called Boltzmann generators when they approximate Boltzmann distributions (Noé et al., 2019).
Recently, there has been a growing interest in these methods (Dibak et al., 2022; Köhler et al.,
2021; Liu et al., 2022) as they have the potential to avoid the limitations of MD simulations. Most
current approaches to train Boltzmann generators rely on MD samples since these are required for
the estimation of the flow parameters by maximum likelihood (ML) (Wu et al., 2020). Alternatively,
flows can be trained without MD samples by minimizing the Kullback–Leibler (KL) divergence with
respect to the target distribution. Wirnsberger et al. (2022) followed this approach to approximate the
    ∗
        Equal contribution


                                                     1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Boltzmann distribution of atomic solids with up to 512 atoms. However, the KL divergence suffers
from mode-seeking behavior, which severely deteriorates the performance of this approach with
multimodal target distributions (Stimper et al., 2022). On the other hand, mass-covering objective
such as the forward KL divergence suffer from the high variance of the samples from the flow.
To address these challenges, we present a new method for training flows: Flow AIS Bootstrap1
(FAB). Our main contributions are as follows:

1. We propose to use the α-divergence with α = 2 as our training objective, which is mass-covering
   and minimizes importance weight variance. At test time an importance sampling distribution with
   low α-divergence (with α = 2) may be used to approximate expectations with respect to the target
   with low variance. This objective is challenging to estimate during training. To approximate this
   objective we use annealed importance sampling (AIS) with the flow as the initial distribution and
   the target set to the minimum variance distribution for the estimation of the α-divergence. AIS
   returns samples that provide a higher quality training signal than samples from the flow, as it
   focuses on the regions that contribute the most to the α-divergence loss.
2. We reduce the computational cost of our method by introducing a scheme to re-use samples via
   a prioritized replay buffer.
3. We apply FAB to a toy 2D Gaussian mixture distribution, the 32 dimensional “Many Well” prob-
   lem, and the Boltzmann distribution of alanine dipeptide. In these experiments, we outperform
   competing approaches and, to the best of our knowledge, we are the first to successfully train a
   Boltzmann generator on alanine dipeptide using only the unnormalized target density. In particu-
   lar, we use over 100 times fewer target evaluations than a Boltzmann generator trained with MD
   samples while producing a better approximation to the target.

2    BACKGROUND
Normalizing flows Given a random variable z with distribution q(z), a normalizing flow (Tabak
& Vanden-Eijnden, 2010; Rezende & Mohamed, 2015; Papamakarios et al., 2021) uses an invertible
map F : Rd → Rd to transform z yielding the random variable x = F (z) with distribution
                                                                 −1
                                     q(x) = q(z) |det(JF (z))|        ,                                (1)
where JF (z) = ∂F/∂z is the Jacobian of F . If we parameterize F , we can use the resulting model
to approximate a target distribution p. To simplify our notation, we will assume the target density
p(x) is normalized, i.e., it integrates to 1, but the methods described here are equally applicable
when this is not the case. If samples from the target distribution are available, the flow can be
trained via ML. If only the target density p(x) is given, the flow
                                                                 R can then be trained by minimizing
the reverse KL divergence2 between q and p, i.e., KL(q∥p) = x q(x) log{q(x)/p(x)}dx, which is
estimated via Monte Carlo using samples from q.
Alpha divergence     An alternative to the KL divergence is the α-divergence (Zhu & Rohwer,
1995; Minka, 2005; Müller et al., 2019; Bauer & Mnih, 2021; Campbell et al., 2021) defined by
                                                p(x)α q(x)1−α dx
                                              R
                               Dα (p∥q) = − x                    .                             (2)
                                                  α(1 − α)
The α-divergence is mode-seeking for α ≤ 0 and mass-covering for α ≥ 1 (Minka, 2005), as shown
in Figure 1. When α = 2, minimizing the α-divergence is equivalent to minimizing the variance of
the importance sampling weights wIS (x) = p(x)/q(x), which is desirable if importance sampling
will be used to eliminate bias in the samples from q at test time.
Annealed importance sampling AIS begins by sampling from an initial distribution x1 ∼ p0 =
q, given by the flow in our case, and then transitioning via MCMC through a sequence of interme-
diate distributions, p1 to pM −1 , to produce a sample xM closer to the target distribution g = pM
(Neal, 2001). Each transition generates an intermediate sample xj by running a few steps of a
Markov chain initialized with the previous intermediate sample xj−1 that leaves the intermediate
   1
     FAB uses the flow in combination with AIS to estimate a loss in order to improve the flow. Thus we use
bootstrap in the name of our method to mean “using one’s existing resources to improve oneself”.
   2
     We refer to reverse KL divergence as just “KL divergence”, following standard practice in literature.


                                                    2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Figure 1: Illustration of unnormalized Gaussian approximating distributions q, shown in red, that
minimize the α-divergence for different values of α with respect to a bimodal target distribution p,
shown in blue. The solutions q are mode-seeking for values of α ≤ 0 and they are mass-covering for
values of α ≥ 1. The cases α → 0 and α → 1 correspond to KL(q∥p) and KL(q∥p), respectively.
Figure reproduced from (Minka, 2005).


distribution pj−1 invariant. Each pj is defined by interpolating between the initial and target log
densities: log pi (x) = βi log p0 (x) + (1 − βi ) log pM (x), where 1 = β0 > β1 > ... > βN = 0.
AIS provides an importance weight for the final resulting sample xM given by
                                  p1 (x1 ) p2 (x2 )     pM −1 (xM −1 ) pM (xM )
                    wAIS (xM ) =                    ···                            .            (3)
                                  p0 (x1 ) p1 (x2 )     pM −2 (xM −1 ) pM −1 (xM )
These weights exhibit variance reduction compared to their importance sampling counterparts
wIS (x) = p(x)/q(x) (Neal, 2001). The AIS samples and importance weights may then be used
to estimate expectations over the target g(x) using Eg(x) [h(x)] = EAIS [wAIS (x)h(x)], where h(x)
is some function of interest. Hamiltonian Monte Carlo (HMC) is a suitable transition operator for
implementing AIS in challenging problems (Neal, 1995; Sohl-Dickstein & Culpepper, 2012).

3     M ETHOD
3.1   F LOW ANNEALED IMPORTANCE SAMPLING BOOTSTRAP

FAB trains a flow q to approximate a target p by minimizing Dα=2 (p∥q), which is estimated with
AIS using q as initial distribution and p2 /q as target. The latter is the minimum variance importance
sampling distribution for estimating the Dα=2 (p∥q) loss. FAB performs a form of bootstrapping
since it fits the flow q using the samples generated by q after these have been improved with AIS to
fit p2 /q. Thereby, we train a mass-covering flow without access to samples from the target. Below
we provide a brief derivation of our loss function and refer to Appendix B for the full derivation.
We consider q to be specified by some parameters θ and write qθ to make this explicit. We aim to
tune qθ by minimizing the loss function L(θ) ∝ Dα=2 (p∥qθ ) where L(θ). We can write our loss as
an expectation over some distribution g(x) by using importance sampling:
                                              p(x)2                  p(x)2
                                           Z
                  Dα=2 (p∥qθ ) ∝ L(θ) =              dx = Eg(x)                .             (4)
                                              qθ (x)              qθ (x)g(x)
We consider setting g ∝ p2 /qθ which minimizes3 the variance in the estimation of L(θ). Sampling
directly from g ∝ p2 /qθ is intractable. Instead, we train the flow using an estimate of the loss based
on samples generated by AIS when targeting g ∝ p2 /qθ and using qθ as the initial distribution.
These AIS samples have higher quality than those returned by the flow as they occur in regions
where the integrand in Equation (4) takes high values. These are regions where p and q have high
and low density, respectively. Another advantage of the AIS samples is that we can use the weights
returned by AIS to obtain an unbiased estimate of L(θ).
                                                                                  2
                              R (4) with respect to θ, let us denote fθ (x) = p(x) /qθ (x). Without
To obtain the gradient of Equation
                  4
loss of generality we assume fθ (x)dx = 1 and then set g(x) = fθ (x). First, we write the gradient
    3
R     The importance sampling distribution g that minimizes the variance in the estimation of µ =
  |f (x)|p(x)dx is given by g(x) ∝ |f (x)|p(x) (Kahn & Marshall, 1953; Owen, 2013). We note this is differ-
ent from the distribution that minimizes variance for self-normalized importance sampling, which is given by
g(x) ∝ |f (x) − µ|p(x) (Hesterberg, 1988; Owen, 2013).
    4
      See Appendix B for the full derivation where we keep track of the normalizing constant.


                                                     3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


as an expectation over g:

                                ∇θ fθ (x)
         ∇θ L(θ) = Eg(x)                    = Eg(x) [∇θ log fθ (x)] = − Eg(x) [∇θ log qθ (x)] .    (5)
                                 fθ (x)
We can then write this as an expectation over the AIS forward pass:
                            ∇θ L(θ) = − EAIS [wAIS ∇θ log qθ (x̄AIS )] ,                           (6)
where x̄AIS and wAIS are the samples and respective importance weights generated by AIS when
targeting g. The bar superscript denotes stopped gradients in the AIS samples, x̄AIS , with re-
spect to θ. If we stop the gradients of wAIS as well, we can then use the surrogate loss function
S(θ) = − EAIS [w̄AIS log qθ (x̄AIS )], which can be estimated by Monte Carlo and differentiated to
obtain unbiased estimates of the gradient. In practice, we found that using the self-normalized
importance weights greatly improved training stability. We refer to the surrogate loss with self-
normalized importance weights as S ′ (θ). Its estimate used for training is given by:
                                               N       (i)
                                               X    w̄AIS           (i)
                                 S ′ (θ) ≈ −       PN (i) log qθ (x̄AIS ) ,                        (7)
                                               i    i w̄AIS
        (i)       (i)
where w̄AIS and x̄AIS are N samples and weights generated by AIS using g = p2 /qθ as target distri-
bution. When evaluating the gradient of Equation (7) with respect to θ, gradients must be stopped
during the computation of the AIS samples and weights. In practice, we obtain good performance
with a relatively low number of intermediate AIS distributions, e.g., 1 for the Gaussian mixture
model problem and 8 for the dipeptide problem, see the following section. Moreover, we can use
AIS after training with target p to further reduce variance when approximating expectations over p.
Here we have focused on the minimization of Dα=2 (p∥q) using an AIS bootstrapping approach with
p2 /q as target distribution. However, our approach is general and could be used to minimize other
objectives (Midgley et al., 2021) and to train other models, such as those that combine flows with
stochastic sampling steps (Wu et al., 2020; Arbel et al., 2021; Matthews et al., 2022; Jing et al.,
2022). We provide further discussion and examples related to this in Appendix C. This includes a
derivation of a version of FAB that works for α divergence minimization with arbitrary values of α.
In Appendix D we provide an analysis of the quality of the estimates of the gradient of Dα=2 (p∥q)
produced by FAB and by importance sampling with samples from q or p. We focus on the FAB
gradient in the form from Equation (6), as it is easy to analyze. First, we show that in a simple
scenario where both q and p are 1D Gaussians, the signal-to-noise ratio of FAB with a small number
of AIS distributions is far superior to that of estimating Dα=2 (p∥q) using samples from q or p.
We also study in Appendix D the performance of FAB as the dimensionality of the problem grows.
Similar to the analysis of AIS with increasing dimensionality by Neal (2001), we consider a simple
scenario where p and q are factorized and the AIS MCMC transitions are perfect (output independent
samples that follow the corresponding intermediate distributions). We then show the following: 1)
Estimating Dα=2 with importance sampling using samples from q or p results in a variance of the
gradient estimate that grows exponentially with respect to the dimensionality of the problem. 2)
This variance remains constant in FAB when the number of AIS distributions increases by the same
factor as the dimensionality. We provide an empirical analysis of the gradient variance in FAB under
the aforementioned assumptions. If we increase the number of AIS distributions by the same factor
by which the dimensionality increases, the SNR of the gradient estimate remains roughly constant.
This suggests that FAB should scale well to higher dimensional problems, relative to training via
estimation of the Dα=2 loss by importance sampling with samples from q or p. We acknowledge
that our simplifying assumptions are strong and we leave a more general analysis to future work.

3.2   R E - USING SAMPLES THROUGH A REPLAY BUFFER

Although AIS is relatively cheap, it is still significantly more expensive than directly sampling from
the flow as it requires additional flow and target evaluations. To speed up computations, we re-use
AIS samples during the flow updates by making use of a prioritized replay buffer analogous to the
one in (Mnih et al., 2015; Schaul et al., 2016).
Consider a replay buffer with a set of samples and corresponding AIS weights generated during a
single run of AIS with target g(x) = p(x)2 /qθ (x), where qθ (x) is the flow at a point in training


                                                      4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Algorithm 1: FAB for the minimization of Dα=2 (p∥q) with a prioritized replay buffer
Initialize flow q parameterized by θ
Initialize replay buffer to a fixed maximum size
for iteration = 1 to K do // Generate AIS samples and add to buffer
                 (1:M )                               (1:M )
     Sample xq          from qθ and evaluate log qθ (xq      )
                (1:M )            (1:M )                             (1:M )              (1:M )
     Obtain xAIS and log wAIS using AIS with target p2 /qθ and seed xq      and log qθ (xq      )
             (1:M )        (1:M )             (1:M )
     Add xAIS , log wAIS and log qθ (xAIS ) to replay buffer

      for iteration = 1 to L do // Sample from buffer and update qθ
                     (1:N )                (1:N )                                                        (1:N )
           Sample xAIS and log qθold (xAIS ) from buffer with probability proportional to wAIS
                            (1:N )                  (1:N )                           (1:N )
           Calculate log wcorrection = log qθold (xAIS ) − stop-grad(log qθ (xAIS ))
                         (1:N )                                            (1:N )         (1:N )
           Update log wAIS and log qθold (x1:N   AIS ) in buffer to log wAIS      + log wcorrection and log qθ (x1:N
                                                                                                                 AIS )
                             ′              PN (i)                     (i)
           Calculate loss S (θ) = −1/N i wcorrection log qθ (xAIS )
           Perform gradient descent on S ′ (θ) to update θ


specified by θ. We can approximate the gradient of Equation (7) using
                                                                   N
                                                               1 X
                                         ∇θ S ′ (θ) ≈ −∇θ            log qθ (xi ),                                       (8)
                                                               N i=1
where x1 , . . . , xN are sampled from the buffer with probability proportional to their AIS weights.
However, if the buffer data points have been generated with a previous value of θ, denoted θold ,
we have to multiply their AIS weights with a correction factor wcorrection = qθold (x)/qθ (x) before
sampling, which requires to additionally store qθold (x) for each data point in the buffer. Note that qθ
is in the denominator of this correction factor because g(x), the distribution we are sampling from,
is inversely proportional to qθ .
The resulting procedure extracts data from the buffer in a prioritized manner: We sample according
to g, which favors points with low qθ and high p. As qθ is updated to fit samples from the buffer, it
will take higher values on those samples and their weights will gradually be decreased to encourage
drawing alternative samples. The buffer allows us to re-use old AIS samples and does not require
re-evaluating p(x), which could be expensive in some cases.
A limitation of the above approach is that it requires updating the AIS weights for all data points
in the buffer before sampling, which is expensive. To significantly speed up computations, we
instead draw a minibatch from the buffer with probability proportional to the old AIS weights and
then reweight each sample with the corresponding wcorrection . Before updating θ, we update the AIS
weights for the sampled points in the buffer and replace the respective qθold (x) values with qθ (x).
The pseudocode for the final procedure is shown in Algorithm 1. In practice, we found that sampling
from the buffer without replacement worked better, at the cost of introducing bias into our gradient
estimates. Lastly, we set a maximum length for the buffer, and once this is reached we discard the
oldest samples each time new samples are added.

4      E XPERIMENTS
This section contains an experimental evaluation of our proposed method. The code is publicly
available at https://github.com/lollcat/fab-torch. It is written in PyTorch and uses
the normflows package to implement the flows (Stimper et al., 2023). The Appendix contains a
detailed description of each experiment to guarantee reproducibility. In Appendix F we include an
additional set of experiments on the 32-dimensional “Many Well” distribution given by the product
of 16 copies of the 2-dimensional Double Well distribution from Noé et al. (2019); Wu et al. (2020).

4.1     M IXTURE OF G AUSSIANS IN 2D

First, we consider a synthetic problem where p is a mixture of bivariate Gaussians with 40 mixture
components. The two-dimensional nature of this problem allows us to easily visualize the results


                                                              5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Figure 2: Contour lines for the target distribution p and samples (blue discs) drawn from the approx-
imation qθ obtained by different methods on the mixture of Gaussians problem. The plot for the
flow trained by Dα=2 , which had the worst performance, is shown in Appendix E.3.


of different methods while the multimodality of p makes the problem relatively challenging. To
increase the problem difficulty, we give the flow a pathological initialization where samples from qθ
concentrate in a small region of the sampling space, as illustrated in the top left plot in Figure 2.
We compare the following methods: 1) FAB with a replay buffer as shown in Algorithm 1; 2) FAB
without a replay buffer, where we directly optimize Equation (7); 3) a flow model that minimizes
KL(qθ ∥p); 4) a flow with a Resampled Base Distribution (RBD) (Stimper et al., 2022) that mini-
mizes KL(qθ ∥p); 5) a Stochastic Normalizing Flow (SNF) model (Wu et al., 2020) that also min-
imizes KL(qθ ∥p); 6) a Continual Repeated Flow Annealed Transport (CRAFT) model (Matthews
et al., 2022) that minimizes a CRAFT specific version of KL divergence specified in Appendix C.2;
7) a flow model that minimizes Dα=2 (p∥qθ ) estimated using samples from qθ (Müller et al., 2019),
and 8) a flow trained by maximum likelihood (ML) using samples from p. In this toy problem, we
have access to ground truth samples from the target, allowing us to train the flow by ML. However,
we are interested in the case where samples from the target are not cheaply available. To denote this,
we single out the results from this latter method in our tables with a horizontal dashed line.
All methods besides CRAFT5 use the same parametric form for qθ given by a Real NVP flow model
with 15 layers (Dinh et al., 2017). For the FAB-based approaches, we run AIS with a single in-
termediate distribution (β = 0.5) and MCMC transitions with 1 Metropolis-Hastings step, being a
Gaussian perturbation and then an accept-reject step. For FAB with prioritized buffer, we perform
L = 4 gradient updates to qθ per AIS sampling step. For the SNF and CRAFT, we do 1 Metropolis-
Hastings step every 3 flow layers. For training the flow by ML, we draw new samples from the target
for each loss estimation. All models are trained for 2 · 107 flow evaluations. Further details on the
hyper-parameters and architectures used in each algorithm are provided in Appendix E.1.
Figure 2 shows that our two FAB-based methods and the flow trained by ML fit all modes in p. By
contrast, the other alternative methods cover only a small subset of the modes. The reason for this
is that such methods are trained only on samples from qθ and the poor initialization of qθ makes it
unlikely that they will ever generate samples from undiscovered modes.
To evaluate the trained models we compute the effective sample size (ESS) obtained when doing
importance sampling with qθ ; the average log-likelihood of qθ on samples from p; the forward
KL divergence with respect to the target; and the mean absolute error (MAE) in the estimation of
Ep(x) [f (x)] by importance sampling with qθ , where f (x) is a toy quadratic function specified in
   5
     CRAFT also uses an affine transform in the flow, but with an autoregressive dependency across dimensions
(Kingma et al., 2016) instead of coupling.


                                                     6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Table 1: Results for the mixture of Gaussians problem. Our methods are marked in italic. Best
results are emphazised in bold. Log-likelihood values for the first two methods are NaN because
they assign zero density to samples from missing modes. Log-likelihood values for SNF and CRAFT
are N/A because this method does not provide density values for the generated samples. The CRAFT
implementation used does not allow for forward-KL to be estimated. Furthermore, the resampling
step from CRAFT prevents the ESS from being estimated. Hence, these fields have N/A.

                    ESS (%)      Ep(x) [log q(x)]       KL(p||q)    MAE (%) MAE w/o RW (%)
Flow w/ ML 54.3 ± 10.4 −7.18 ± 0.05                 0.31 ± 0.05     9.0 ± 0.3        6.1 ± 2.0
Flow w/ Dα=2 0.7 ± 0.3     NaN ± NaN                NaN ± NaN      99.5 ± 0.2       99.6 ± 0.1
Flow w/ KLD 55.0 ± 20.8    NaN ± NaN                NaN ± NaN      26.0 ± 3.1       26.3 ± 1.4
RBD w/ KLD 37.9 ± 16.3     NaN ± NaN                NaN ± NaN      68.3 ± 18.1      92.1 ± 1.9
SNF w/ KLD 43.0 ± 21.3     N/A ± N/A                NaN ± NaN      64.6 ± 20.6      69.3 ± 17.2
CRAFT          N/A ± N/A   N/A ± N/A                 N/A ± N/A     98.8 ± 0.0       99.1 ± 0.0
FAB w/o buffer 31.1 ± 6.8 −7.86 ± 0.19              1.00 ± 0.19     9.4 ± 0.2        4.4 ± 0.7
FAB w/ buffer 61.9 ± 8.0 −7.16 ± 0.07               0.30 ± 0.07     8.9 ± 0.1        8.9 ± 0.5



Appendix E. We express the MAE as a percentage of the true expectation to ease interpretability.
Finally, we also report the MAE that is obtained when we do not reweight samples according to the
importance weights. We provide further details on the evaluation setup in Appendix E.2.
Table 1 shows for each method average results and corresponding standard errors over 3 random
seeds. FAB with the buffer performs similarly to the benchmark of training the flow by ML. Both
of these methods are the best performing ones with the highest ESS, the highest log-likelihood on
samples from p and the lowest forward KL divergence and lowest MAE. FAB without a replay buffer
is the next best method while the other methods perform poorly. This is especially the case regarding
the forward KL divergence and log-likelihood values on samples from p: the non FAB/ML methods
assign zero density to points sampled from undiscovered modes of p, which is represented by writing
NaN in the table. Note that the ESS for the SNF, RBD and the flow trained by minimizing KL(qθ ∥p)
are spurious as these methods are missing modes. Finally, note that the MAE in the estimation of
Ep(x) [f (x)] via importance sampling with 1000 samples from p is 8.6%. Also, the log-likelihood
of p on samples from this same distribution is −6.85. These are close to the values obtained by FAB
with a replay buffer, meaning that the corresponding qθ is close to p.

4.2   A LANINE DIPEPTIDE

We now consider the 22 atom molecule alanine dipeptide, shown in Figure 3a, in an implicit solvent
at a temperature of T = 300 K and aim to approximate its Boltzmann distribution given the 3D
atomic coordinates. This is a popular benchmark when considering Boltzmann generators (Wu et al.,
2020; Campbell et al., 2021; Dibak et al., 2022; Stimper et al., 2022). Previous works have used
a coordinate transformation to map some but not all Cartesian coordinates to internal coordinates,
which are normalized using their mean and standard deviation computed on samples generated by
MD (Noé et al., 2019). Since we aim to train models without using any data, we replace the mean
by the minimum energy configuration, which can be cheaply estimated through gradient descent
within less than 100 steps. Similarly, we replace the standard deviations with values reflecting the
typical order of magnitude of each variable. Furthermore, we represent the molecule with internal
coordinates only, thereby implicitly satisfying the system’s rotational and translational invariance.
We use Neural Spline Flows with 12 rational quadratic spline coupling layers (Durkan et al., 2019).
Dihedral angles of those bonds that can move freely are treated as circular coordinates (Rezende
et al., 2020), while the others are considered as unbound. The models trained with FAB use 8
intermediate distributions. For FAB with the replay buffer, we do L = 8 gradient updates per AIS
forward pass. Alanine dipeptide is a chiral molecule, meaning that it can exist in two distinct forms
(L-form and D-form) that are mirror images of each other, as illustrated in Figure 16. In nature,
we find almost exclusively the L-form which is why only this form is considered in the literature.
During training, we filter the samples generated by our flows and keep only those for the L-form,
whereby the flow models learn to only generate this form. More details are given in Appendix G.1.


                                                    7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


             (a)                                                   (b)

Figure 3: (a) Visualization of alanine dipeptide and the dihedral angles ϕ and ψ for the Ramachan-
dran plot. (b) Marginal distribution of ϕ in log scale as given by the ground truth, the flow trained
with ML on MD samples, and FAB with a replay buffer. RW indicates whether samples have been
reweighted with importance sampling before generating the plot. Figure 17 is the same plot in nor-
mal scale, revealing how small the mode at ϕ ≈ 1 is.


Figure 4: From left to right, Ramachandran plots of the ground truth generated by MD, a flow model
trained by ML on MD samples, and by FAB using a replay buffer before and after reweighting
samples to eliminate bias.


To evaluate our models, we generated samples using parallel tempering MD simulations, which
serve as ground truth. They are split into training and validation sets with 106 samples each and a
test set with 107 samples. We compare FAB to several baseline methods already mentioned in the
previous section, see Table 2 for the full list. The SNF method performs 10 Metropolis-Hastings
steps every two layers, meaning a total of 60 additional sampling steps. All methods are trained for
2.5 × 108 flow evaluations except for the SNF, which uses 6 × 107 as it is more expensive in terms
of target evaluations. Table 8 provides an overview of the number of flow and target evaluations by
each method. We compare methods via the ESS of importance sampling weights and the average
log-likelihood on the test set. Moreover, we generate Ramachandran plots, which are histograms for
the marginal distribution of the dihedral angles ϕ and ψ illustrated in Figure 3a. We compute their
KL divergence to the ground truth with and without reweighting using the importance weights. Our
experiments are repeated over 3 random seeds and average values and standard errors are given.
Table 2 shows our results. The flow trained by minimizing Dα=2 (p∥qθ ) with samples from qθ had
convergence problems due to the high gradient variance. As a result, it performs very poorly in
practice, especially in terms of ESS. The models trained by minimizing KL(q∥p) have no conver-
gence problems, but they only approximate a subset of the target modes. This results in poor test
log-likelihood and KLD values, and spurious values for the ESS. The flow trained by ML on MD
samples obtains very good results in terms of test log-likelihood and KLD values. However, it strug-
gles to model the dim mode at ϕ ≈ 1 correctly, as shown in Figures 3b and 4. Its ESS is also fairly
low and, hence, reweighting worsens performance. The models trained with FAB have a higher ESS
and test log-likelihood than the other methods. FAB with a buffer obtains lower KLD values than
the flow trained by ML. When reweighting is applied to the samples generated by this version of
FAB, the resulting distribution is nearly the same as the ground truth, as illustrated in Figures 3b
and 4. These results show that FAB with a replay buffer outperforms the flow trained by ML on MD
samples while using 100 times fewer evaluations of the target density, as shown in Table 8.


                                                 8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Table 2: ESS, log-likelihood on the test set, and KL divergence (KLD) of Ramachandran plots with
and without reweighting (RW) for each method. Our methods are marked in italic and best results
are emphasized in bold.


                    ESS (%)       Ep(x) [log q(x)]               KLD               KLD w/ RW
                                                                           −3
 Flow w/ ML      2.8 ± 0.6  209.22 ± 0.28                (7.57 ± 3.80) × 10    (2.58 ± 0.80) × 10−2
 Flow w/ Dα=2 0.011 ± 0.000   73.5 ± 1.3                   2.96 ± 0.13          17.5 ± 0.2
 Flow w/ KLD      54 ± 12      100 ± 32                    3.17 ± 0.20          3.15 ± 0.19
 RBD w/ KLD       44 ± 18      143 ± 22                    3.00 ± 0.05          3.00 ± 0.04
 SNF w/ KLD     0.16 ± 0.11   N/A ± N/A                    8.71 ± 3.36          9.58 ± 2.68
 FAB w/o buffer 52.2 ± 1.3  211.13 ± 0.03                 (6.28 ± 0.33) × 10−2 (2.66 ± 0.90) × 10−2
 FAB w/ buffer 92.8 ± 0.1 211.54 ± 0.00                  (3.42 ± 0.45) × 10−3 (2.51 ± 0.39) × 10−3



5   D ISCUSSION AND R ELATED W ORK
SNFs combine flows with MCMC methods by introducing sampling layers between flow layers to
improve model expressiveness (Wu et al., 2020; Nielsen et al., 2020). SNFs have been extended
to CRAFT (Matthews et al., 2022; Arbel et al., 2021), where flows are combined with Sequential
Monte Carlo (SMC). In CRAFT, flows are used to transport SMC samples between consecutive in-
termediate distributions, with each flow being trained by minimizing a KL divergence with respect
to the next intermediate distribution. CRAFT improves the issue of mode seeking relative to SNFs,
which can be seen in the Many Well problem in Appendix F where it performs well. However,
CRAFT fails catastrophically on the GMM problem, as the CRAFT loss can still favour mode seek-
ing and uses samples directly from the flow for its estimation which can provide a poor training
signal. In Appendix C.2 we describe a new FAB-flavored version of CRAFT using the Dα=2 (p∥qθ )
as objective, estimating it with the MCMC samples ahead of the flow in the SMC process.
Within the MCMC/AIS literature, significant work has focused on improving transition kernels
(Levy et al., 2018; Gabrié et al., 2022), intermediate distributions (Brekelmans et al., 2020), and
the extended target distribution (Doucet et al., 2022a;b) of AIS. These techniques are applicable the
AIS procedure used in FAB. FAB does not differentiate through AIS to obtain the gradient with re-
spect to the flow. Combining FAB with methods that allow for differentiation through AIS (Geffner
& Domke, 2021; Zhang et al., 2021; Doucet et al., 2022a) may allow for a lower variance gradient
estimate. Works on differentiation through iterated systems would be relevant for this, notably (Metz
et al., 2021). FAB does not use gradients of the target distribution when optimizing its loss function,
although such gradients are used in the sampling process by HMC. This is in contrast with the alter-
native approach of training the flow by minimizing KL(qθ ∥p), which does use these gradients. Such
gradient information could be included in FAB through force matching (Wang et al., 2019; Köhler
et al., 2021; Köhler et al., 2022) or the addition of a KL divergence loss term.

6   C ONCLUSION
We have proposed FAB, a method for training flows to approximate complicated multimodal target
distributions. FAB combines α-divergence minimization with α = 2 with an AIS bootstrapping
mechanism for improving the samples used for the loss estimate. By focusing on this divergence, we
favor mass-covering of multimodal distributions and minimize importance weight variance. Using
AIS, FAB targets the ratio between the squared target density and the flow density, which provides
a high-quality training signal by focusing on the regions where the flow is a poor approximation of
the target. We have also proposed to use a prioritized replay buffer, which reduces the cost of FAB
and improves performance. Our experiments show that FAB can produce accurate approximations
of complex multimodal targets without using samples from such distributions. By contrast, other
alternative approaches fail in this challenging setting. Remarkably, for the alanine dipeptide, FAB
produces better results than training the flow by ML on samples generated via MD simulations while
still using 100 fewer evaluations of the target than the MD simulations. In future work, we hope
to scale up our approach to more challenging problems, such as the modelling of the Boltzmann
distribution of large proteins.


                                                     9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We thank Emile Mathieu, Kristopher Miltiadou, Alexandre Laterre, Clément Bonnet, and Alexander
Matthews for the helpful discussions. José Miguel Hernández-Lobato acknowledges support from a
Turing AI Fellowship under grant EP/V023756/1. This work was supported by the German Federal
Ministry of Education and Research (BMBF): Tübingen AI Center, FKZ: 01IS18039B; and by the
Machine Learning Cluster of Excellence, EXC number 2064/1 - Project number 390727645.

R EFERENCES
Michael Arbel, Alex Matthews, and Arnaud Doucet. Annealed flow transport Monte Carlo. In
 Proceedings of the 38th International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 318–330. PMLR,
 2021.
Matthias Bauer and Andriy Mnih. Generalized doubly reparameterized gradient estimators. In Ma-
 rina Meila and Tong Zhang (eds.), Proceedings of the 38th International Conference on Machine
 Learning, volume 139, pp. 738–747. PMLR, 2021.
Rob Brekelmans, Vaden Masrani, Thang Bui, Frank Wood, Aram Galstyan, Greg Ver Steeg, and
  Frank Nielsen. Annealed importance sampling with q-paths. arXiv preprint arXiv:2012.07823,
  2020.
Andrew Campbell, Wenlong Chen, Vincent Stimper, Jose Miguel Hernandez-Lobato, and Yichuan
  Zhang. A gradient based strategy for Hamiltonian Monte Carlo hyperparameter optimization. In
  Proceedings of the 38th International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 1238–1248. PMLR,
  2021.
Manuel Dibak, Leon Klein, Andreas Krämer, and Frank Noé. Temperature steerable flows and
 Boltzmann generators. Phys. Rev. Research, 4, 2022.
Laurent Dinh, Jascha Sohl-Dickstein, and Samy Bengio. Density estimation using Real NVP. In-
  ternational Conference on Learning Representations, 2017.
Arnaud Doucet, Will Grathwohl, Alexander G. D. G. Matthews, and Heiko Strathmann. Score-based
  diffusion meets annealed importance sampling. arXiv preprint arXiv:2208.07698, 2022a.
Arnaud Doucet, Will Sussman Grathwohl, Alexander G de G Matthews, and Heiko Strathmann.
  Annealed importance sampling meets score matching. In ICLR Workshop on Deep Generative
  Models for Highly Structured Data, 2022b.
Conor Durkan, Artur Bekasov, Iain Murray, and George Papamakarios. Neural spline flows. Ad-
  vances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 32:7511–7522, 2019.
David J. Earl and Michael W. Deem. Parallel tempering: Theory, applications, and new perspectives.
  Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 7:3910–3916, 2005.
Marylou Gabrié, Grant M Rotskoff, and Eric Vanden-Eijnden. Adaptive Monte Carlo augmented
 with normalizing flows. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 119(10):e2109420119,
 2022.
Tomas Geffner and Justin Domke. MCMC variational inference via uncorrected Hamiltonian an-
  nealing. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 34:639–651, 2021.
Timothy Classen Hesterberg. Advances in importance sampling. Stanford University, 1988.
Bowen Jing, Gabriele Corso, Jeffrey Chang, Regina Barzilay, and Tommi Jaakkola. Torsional diffu-
  sion for molecular conformer generation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2206.01729, 2022.
Herman Kahn and Andy W. Marshall. Methods of reducing sample size in Monte Carlo computa-
  tions. Journal of the Operations Research Society of America, 1(5):263–278, 1953.
Diederik P. Kingma and Jimmy Ba. Adam: A Method for Stochastic Optimization. In 3rd Interna-
  tional Conference on Learning Representations, 2015.


                                               10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Durk P Kingma, Tim Salimans, Rafal Jozefowicz, Xi Chen, Ilya Sutskever, and Max Welling. Im-
  proved variational inference with inverse autoregressive flow. Advances in neural information
  processing systems, 29:4743–4751, 2016.

Eugenia Koblents and Joaquı́n Mı́guez. A population Monte Carlo scheme with transformed weights
  and its application to stochastic kinetic models. Statistics and Computing, 25:407–425, 2015.

Jonas Köhler, Andreas Krämer, and Frank Noé. Smooth normalizing flows. In Advances in Neural
  Information Processing Systems 34, 2021.

Jonas Köhler, Yaoyi Chen, Andreas Krämer, Cecilia Clementi, and Frank Noé. Force-matching
  coarse-graining without forces. arXiv preprint arXiv:2203.11167, 2022.

Ben Leimkuhler and Carles Matthews. Molecular Dynamics With Deterministic and Stochastic
  Numerical Methods. Number 39 in Interdisciplinary Applied Methematics. Springer, 2015.

Tony Lelièvre, Mathias Rousset, and Gabriel Stoltz. Free Energy Computations: A Mathematical
  Perspective. Imperial College Press, 2010.

Daniel Levy, Matthew D Hoffman, and Jascha Sohl-Dickstein. Generalizing Hamiltonian Monte
  Carlo with neural networks. In 6th International Conference on Learning Representations, 2018.

Tianyi Liu, Weihao Gao, Zhirui Wang, and Chong Wang. PathFlow: A normalizing flow generator
  that finds transition paths. In The 38th Conference on Uncertainty in Artificial Intelligence, 2022.

Alex Matthews, Michael Arbel, Danilo Jimenez Rezende, and Arnaud Doucet. Continual repeated
  annealed flow transport Monte Carlo. In Proceedings of the 39th International Conference on
  Machine Learning, pp. 15196–15219. PMLR, 2022.

Luke Metz, C Daniel Freeman, Samuel S Schoenholz, and Tal Kachman. Gradients are not all you
  need. arXiv preprint arXiv:2111.05803, 2021.

L. I. Midgley, V. Stimper, G. N. C. Simm, and J. M. Hernández-Lobato. Bootstrap your flow. In
  1st ELLIS Machine Learning for Molecule Discovery Workshop, December 2021. URL https:
  //arxiv.org/abs/2111.11510.

Tom Minka. Divergence measures and message passing. Technical report, Microsoft Research,
  2005.

Volodymyr Mnih, Koray Kavukcuoglu, David Silver, Andrei A Rusu, Joel Veness, Marc G Belle-
  mare, Alex Graves, Martin Riedmiller, Andreas K Fidjeland, Georg Ostrovski, et al. Human-level
  control through deep reinforcement learning. nature, 518(7540):529–533, 2015.

Yoshiharu Mori and Yuko Okamoto. Replica-exchange molecular dynamics simulations for various
  constant temperature algorithms. Journal of the Physical Society of Japan, 79(7):074001, 2010.

Thomas Müller, Brian McWilliams, Fabrice Rousselle, Markus Gross, and Jan Novák. Neural im-
  portance sampling. ACM Transactions on Graphics (TOG), 38(5):1–19, 2019.

Radford M. Neal. Bayesian learning for neural networks. PhD thesis, Department of Computer
  Science, University of Toronto, 1995.

Radford M. Neal. Annealed importance sampling. Statistics and computing, 11(2):125–139, 2001.

Didrik Nielsen, Priyank Jaini, Emiel Hoogeboom, Ole Winther, and Max Welling. SurVAE flows:
  Surjections to bridge the gap between VAEs and flows. Advances in Neural Information Process-
  ing Systems 33, 2020.

Frank Noé, Simon Olsson, Jonas Köhler, and Hao Wu. Boltzmann generators: Sampling equilibrium
  states of many-body systems with deep learning. Science, 365(6457), 2019.

Art B. Owen. Monte Carlo theory, methods and examples. 2013.


                                                 11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


George Papamakarios, Eric Nalisnick, Danilo Jimenez Rezende, Shakir Mohamed, and Balaji Lak-
  shminarayanan. Normalizing flows for probabilistic modeling and inference. Journal of Machine
  Learning Research, 22(57):1–64, 2021.
Danilo Rezende and Shakir Mohamed. Variational inference with normalizing flows. In Proceedings
  of the 32nd International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 1530–1538. PMLR, 2015.
Danilo Jimenez Rezende, George Papamakarios, Sébastien Racanière, Michael S. Albergo, Gurtej
  Kanwar, Phiala E. Shanahan, and Kyle Cranmer. Normalizing flows on tori and spheres. In
  Proceedings of the 37th International Conference on Machine Learning, volume 119, pp. 8083–
  8092. PMLR, 2020.
Tom Schaul, John Quan, Ioannis Antonoglou, and David Silver. Prioritized experience replay. In
  4th International Conference on Learning Representations, 2016.
Jascha Sohl-Dickstein and Benjamin J Culpepper. Hamiltonian annealed importance sampling for
  partition function estimation. arXiv preprint arXiv:1205.1925, 2012.
Vincent Stimper, Bernhard Schölkopf, and José Miguel Hernández-Lobato. Resampling Base Distri-
  butions of Normalizing Flows. In Proceedings of The 25th International Conference on Artificial
  Intelligence and Statistics, volume 151, pp. 4915–4936, 2022.
Vincent Stimper, David Liu, Andrew Campbell, Vincent Berenz, Lukas Ryll, Bernhard Schölkopf,
  and José Miguel Hernández-Lobato. normflows: A PyTorch Package for Normalizing Flows.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2302.12014, 2023.
Esteban G. Tabak and Eric Vanden-Eijnden. Density estimation by dual ascent of the log-likelihood.
  Communications in Mathematical Sciences, 8(1):217 – 233, 2010.
Jiang Wang, Simon Olsson, Christoph Wehmeyer, Adrià Pérez, Nicholas E Charron, Gianni De Fab-
   ritiis, Frank Noé, and Cecilia Clementi. Machine learning of coarse-grained molecular dynamics
   force fields. ACS central science, 5(5):755–767, 2019.
Ronald J Williams. Simple statistical gradient-following algorithms for connectionist reinforcement
  learning. Machine learning, 8(3):229–256, 1992.
Peter Wirnsberger, George Papamakarios, Borja Ibarz, Sébastien Racanière, Andrew J Ballard,
  Alexander Pritzel, and Charles Blundell. Normalizing flows for atomic solids. Machine Learning:
  Science and Technology, 3(2):025009, 2022.
Hao Wu, Jonas Köhler, and Frank Noe. Stochastic normalizing flows. In Advances in Neural
  Information Processing Systems, volume 33, pp. 5933–5944, 2020.
Guodong Zhang, Kyle Hsu, Jianing Li, Chelsea Finn, and Roger Baker Grosse. Differentiable
  annealed importance sampling and the perils of gradient noise. In Advances in Neural Information
  Processing Systems, pp. 19398–19410, 2021.
Huaiyu Zhu and Richard Rohwer. Information geometric measurements of generalisation. Technical
  report, Aston University, 1995.


                                                12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


A    E XTENDED D ISCUSSION

Gabrié et al. (2022) use normalizing flows to learn the transition kernels for MCMC. These transition
kernels are used to perform large MCMC steps between meta-stable states, improving the notorious
issue of mixing in MCMC. In FAB, the flow has a similar function, although it is used as the base
distribution for AIS rather than for a transition kernel. Namely, in FAB, the flow learns to balance
mass between meta-stable states. This is done by using AIS and its importance weights to reweight
inaccuracies in the mass allocated across different meta-stable states. In (Gabrié et al., 2022), a
priori knowledge of the meta-stable states is required to obtain good performance. For example,
they show that their approach fails on a 2D bimodal mixture of Gaussians problem if a mode state
is missing in the model’s initialization. FAB contrasts this, as the flow is able to incorporate modes
discovered by AIS into the flow that were not present during initialization (see Figure 2). Notably,
if a single sample from the AIS bootstrap process comes from a new mode, the flow will be updated
strongly towards it immediately.
In our experiments, we have used a relatively low number of intermediate AIS distributions and
minimal hyperparameter search. However, the performance of FAB could be improved by further
tuning. For example, by trading off the reduction in variance from more intermediate distributions
with the corresponding increase in compute cost. Furthermore, since the loss variance decreases
throughout training, it may be beneficial to reduce the number of AIS distributions in an online
fashion.
Wirnsberger et al. (2022) train flows to accurately approximate the Boltzmann distribution of same-
atom atomic solids with up to 512 atoms just using the target distribution’s density. Similarly to our
approach on the alanine dipeptide molecule, they incorporated physical knowledge about the system
into their base distribution and flow architecture. In their case, this corresponds to permutation
and translation invariance, periodic boundary conditions and meta-stable states. FAB could help
to scale their approach to larger systems with different atom species and more complex potentials.
Moreover, incorporating the chiral structure of a molecule into the model architecture might simplify
training and aid in applying FAB to larger proteins. In general, including prior knowledge of the
system into the model is important for FAB, as it increases the effective sample size initially during
training, which decreases the computational burden of AIS in reducing loss variance. Incorporating
symmetries into the model has two key benefits. First, it often lets us operate in a lower dimensional
space, alleviating the curse of dimensionality. Second, it often greatly reduces the number of modes
in the distribution, as not incorporating symmetries causes multiple repeats of “the same” mode.
This work has focused on the application of normalizing flows. However, diffusion models have also
shown great promise for learning Boltzmann generators. Jing et al. (2022) are able to train a single
diffusion model to learn the Boltzmann distribution over the torsional angles of multiple molecules,
while using cheminformatics methods for the bond lengths and angles. They perform energy-based
training via estimation of a score matching loss using samples from the model. As with flows, this
will exhibit high variance for complex target distributions, especially during initialization when the
model is a poor match for the target. Thus, incorporating an AIS bootstrap process similar to FAB
may improve training in these methods.


B    D ERIVATION OF THE LOSS

                      R case of training a parameterized probability distribution qθ to minimize a
We consider the general
loss function L(θ) = f (x, θ)dx, where f (x, θ) ≥ 0. Later, we will focus on the specific case of
Dα=2 (p∥qθ ) minimization, where f (x, θ) = p(x)2 /qθ (x), however, the general case is interesting
as well and simplifies notation. Let us consider the gradient of L(θ) written as an expectation over
some distribution g(x):

                                                                ∇θ f (x, θ)
                                   Z
                        ∇θ L(θ) = ∇θ f (x, θ)dx = Eg(x)                       .                  (9)
                                                                  g(x)

We select g(x) to be the Rminimum variance importance sampling distribution given by g(x) =
f (x, θ)/Zf where Zf = f (x, θ)dx is the normalizing constant. Then, plugging in the identity
∇θ log f (x, θ) = ∇θ f (x, θ)/f (x, θ), i.e., applying the log-derivative trick similar to REINFORCE


                                                 13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


(Williams, 1992), we obtain

                   ∇θ f (x, θ)                ∇θ f (x, θ)
           Eg(x)                 = Zf Eg(x)                 = Zf Eg(x) [∇θ log f (x, θ)] .        (10)
                     g(x)                      f (x, θ)
We may not generally be able to sample directly from g(x), but we can use AIS to estimate the
right part of Equation (10). To do this, we consider running AIS with p2 /qθ as the target and qθ as
the initial distribution. We note that, when the target density is unnormalized, the AIS weights are
scaled by the target normalizing constant:
                          p̃1 (x1 ) p̃2 (x2 )     p̃M −1 (xM −1 ) p̃M (xM )
          wAIS (xM ) =                        ···
                          p0 (x1 ) p̃1 (x2 )      p̃M −2 (xM −1 ) p̃M −1 (xM )
                          Z1 p1 (x1 ) Z2 p2 (x2 )       ZM −1 pM −1 (xM −1 ) ZM pM (xM )
                        =                           ···                                           (11)
                            p0 (x1 ) Z1 p1 (x2 )        ZM −2 pM −2 (xM −1 ) ZM −1 pM −1 (xM )
                               p1 (x1 ) p2 (x2 )      pM −1 (xM −1 ) pM (xM )
                        = ZM                      ···                            ,
                               p0 (x1 ) p1 (x2 )      pM −2 (xM −1 ) pM −1 (xN )
where p̃i denotes the unnormalized density for the i-th intermediate AIS distribution and Zi is the
corresponding normalizing constant such that pi = p̃i /Zi .
Given that we have set pM = g, p̃M = f and ZM = Zf , expectations over the
                                                                       h AIS forward
                                                                                 i pass
                                                                                    wAIS (x)
hold the following relationship to expectations over g: Eg(x) [h(x)] = EAIS           Zf h(x)    where
h(x) is a function of interest.
Using this we can then write Equation (10) as an expectation over the AIS forward pass

                                                         wAIS
                  Zf Eg(x) [∇θ log f (x, θ)] = Zf EAIS        ∇θ log f (x̄AIS , θ)
                                                          Zf                                      (12)
                                             = EAIS [wAIS ∇θ log f (x̄AIS , θ)] ,
where x̄AIS and wAIS are the samples and corresponding importance weights generated by AIS when
targeting f . We use the bar superscript to denote stopped gradients of the samples generated by
AIS, x̄AIS , with respect to the parameters θ. Now, returning to the case where we minimize L(θ) =
Dα=2 (p∥qθ ), we set f (x, θ) = p(x)2 /qθ (x) to obtain
                                                 p(x)2

           ∇θ Dα=2 (p∥qθ ) = Zf Eg(x) ∇θ log              = −Zf Eg(x) [∇θ log qθ (x)]
                                                 qθ (x)
                                                                   N                            (13)
                                                               1 X (i)                  (i)
                                                          ≈−          wAIS ∇θ log qθ (x̄AIS ) ,
                                                               N i
         (i)      (i)
where wAIS and xAIS are samples and weights generated by AIS with p2 /qθ as target. Equation (13)
provides an unbiased estimate of ∇θ L(θ). If we also stop the gradients of wAIS , we can then use the
surrogate loss function
                               S(θ) = − EAIS [w̄AIS log qθ (x̄AIS )] ,                           (14)
where ∇θ L(θ) = ∇θ S(θ). The surrogate loss function may then be estimated using Monte Carlo.
In practice, we found that replacing the unnormalized weights in Equation (14) with the normalized
weights greatly improved training stability. We refer to the surrogate loss with normalized impor-
tanceR weights as S ′ (θ). To normalize the weights we divide them by Z¯f = L̄(θ) = EAIS [w̄AIS ] such
that w̄AIS dx = 1, where the bar superscripts denotes stopped gradients. The relationship between
S(θ) and S ′ (θ) is therefore S ′ (θ) = S(θ)/L̄(θ). The gradient of S ′ (θ) has the same direction as
the gradient of the original surrogate loss, S(θ), but a has different magnitude. Using S ′ (θ) instead
of S(θ) improves training stability by removing the effect of large fluctuations in the magnitude of
L(θ) = Dα=2 (p∥qθ ) without changing the direction of the gradient as training proceeds.
Thus, we use the following estimate of the surrogate loss function for training:
                                                N       (i)
                                                X    w̄AIS           (i)
                                  S ′ (θ) = −       PN (i) log qθ (x̄AIS ) ,                      (15)
                                                i    i  w̄ AIS


                                                      14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


         (i)       (i)
where w̄AIS and x̄AIS are the samples and importance weights generated by AIS but evaluated in
practice using stopped gradients when computing the gradient of Equation (15). The use of self-
normalization in the loss function introduces bias for finite N for the estimation of S ′ (θ). We use
qθ as the initial distribution for AIS, and a relatively small number of intermediate distributions to
prevent the AIS forward pass from becoming too computationally expensive.
It is possible for Dα=2 (p∥qθ ) to have a very large value, and it can even be infinite. For example if
q assigns zero density to regions in p, then Dα=2 (p∥qθ ) is infinite. In practice we drop any points
that have infinite/NaN density under q during training. Sometimes early in training when q is a poor
approximation to the target, importance weights with NaN values arose, and thus were dropped.
However, towards the end of training, when q is a relatively accurate sampler, the importance weights
were stable and infinite/NaN did not typically occur. This issue therefore did not result in any
practical problems during training. Another example of when Dα=2 (p∥qθ ) can be very large, or
even infinite is if target distribution is heavy tailed, and the tails of q are light. Using the normalized
importance weights (for FAB without the buffer), or sampling points from the buffer in proportion
to their importance weights means that FAB is only effected by the direction of the gradient of
Dα=2 (p∥qθ ) with respect to the parameters of the flow. This helps improve the robustness of FAB
in situations where the magnitude of Dα=2 (p∥qθ ) is very large or has very high variance in its
estimates. Using an architecture for q that includes a defensive mixture component distribution with
heavy tails would help address this issue, and this could be a way of improving the stability of FAB
further (Owen, 2013).


C     VARIATIONS OF FAB

As mentioned above, in this paper we focus on the minimization of Dα=2 (p∥qθ ) as estimated with
our AIS bootstrap approach targeting p2 /qθ . However, the general approach of improving gradient
estimation through the addition of the AIS bootstrap process may be applied in other settings. For
example, in previous version of this work, we used a bound on Dα=2 (p∥qθ ) as objective, which we
estimated with AIS targeting p (Midgley et al., 2021).
In Appendix B above, the loss function in Equation (12) is written in a general manner and could
therefore be used for any f (x, θ) ≥ 0 Rand not only Dα=2 (p∥qθ ). We could simply plug other
divergence measures of the form L(θ) = f (x, θ)dx and satisfying f (x, θ) ≥ 0 into Equation (12).
In the below section we show how we can apply the FAB approach for α-divergence minimization
with other values of α.
We can also apply the proposed approach to other types of models. For example in Appendix C.2 we
show how we can obtain a FAB flavored version of Continual Repeated Annealed Flow Transport
Monte Carlo (CRAFT) (Matthews et al., 2022).

C.1   FAB FOR GENERIC α- DIVERGENCE MINIMISATION

Below we provide a derivation of how the FAB may be generalized to α-divergence minimization
with arbitrary values of α. We restate the definition of α-divergence:
                                                   p(x)α q(x)1−α dx
                                               R
                                Dα (p∥q) = − x                       .                  (16)
                                                      α(1 − α)

We can write the gradient of the above expression as an expectation over an importance sampling
distribution following the same approach as in Appendix B.
                                                                          "                      #
                       ∇θ x p(x)α qθ (x)1−α dx
                           R
                                                              1             ∇θ p(x)α qθ (x)1−α
   ∇θ Dα (p∥qθ ) = −                                =−              Eg(x)                           .
                                 α(1 − α)                α(1 − α)                  g(x)
                                                                                                    (17)
                         α         1−α
Setting
R        f (x, θ) = p(x)   q θ (x)     , we note that the integral in the above equation is in the form
  f (x, θ)dx satisfying f (x, θ) ≥ 0. Thus, we consider setting g(x) to the minimum variance
importance sampling    distribution for estimating Dα (p∥qθ ) given by g(x) = p(x)α qθ (x)1−α /Zf
where Zf = x p(x) qθ (x)1−α dx. Using the result from Equation 12 we can then estimate the
                      α
                R


                                                    15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


gradient of ∇θ Dα (p∥qθ ) with AIS targeting f ,
                                           1
                                                 EAIS wAIS ∇θ log p(x)α qθ (x)1−α

                   ∇θ Dα (p∥qθ ) = −
                                        α(1 − α)
                                                                                                                         (18)
                                        1
                                     = − EAIS [wAIS ∇θ log qθ (x)] .
                                        α
We see that plugging in α = 2 to the above equation gives a gradient proportional to the original
FAB gradient from Equation 13. Furthermore, if we plug in α = 1, which is equivalent to minimiz-
ing forward KL divergence, we see that this results in maximizing the log probability of samples
generated by AIS with g = p as the target, multiplied by the AIS importance weight correction
factor. This gradient is exactly equal to the gradient of the forward KL estimated with AIS,
                 ∇θ KL (p||qθ ) = ∇θ Ep [log p(x) − log qθ (x)] = − Ep [∇θ log qθ (x)]
                                                                                                                         (19)
                                = − EAIS [wAIS ∇θ log qθ (x)] .

We note that this method does not hold for Dα→0 (p∥qθ ) = KL (q||p).
We can combine the generalised FAB loss from Equation 18 with the prioritised buffer train-
ing procedure from Algorithm 1 by instead simply setting the AIS target to p(x)α qθ (x)1−α and
log wcorrection = (1 − α)(log qθ − log qθold ). We provide the pseudo code for this in Algorithm 2
below.
Using this algorithm, in Appendix E.3 and G.2 we analyse the performance of FAB with varying
values of α. We find that α = 2 does best, which provides empirical support for this choice.

Algorithm 2: FAB for the minimization of Dα (p∥q) with a prioritized replay buffer
Set target p
Initialize flow q parameterized by θ
Initialize replay buffer to a fixed maximum size
for iteration = 1 to K do // Generate AIS samples and add to buffer
                 (1:M )                               (1:M )
     Sample xq          from qθ and evaluate log qθ (xq      )
                (1:M )            (1:M )                               (1:M )              (1:M )
     Obtain xAIS and log wAIS using AIS with target pα qθ1−α and seed xq      and log qθ (xq      )
             (1:M )        (1:M )             (1:M )
     Add xAIS , log wAIS and log qθ (xAIS ) to replay buffer

    for iteration = 1 to L do // Sample from buffer and update qθ
                   (1:N )                (1:N )                                                          (1:N )
         Sample xAIS and log qθold (xAIS ) from buffer with probability proportional to wAIS
                          (1:N )                                         (1:N )                   (1:N )
         Calculate log wcorrection = (1 − α)(stop-grad(log qθ (xAIS )) − log qθold (xAIS ))
                       (1:N )                                              (1:N )        (1:N )
         Update log wAIS and log qθold (x1:N AIS ) in buffer to log wAIS          + log wcorrection and log qθ (x1:N
                                                                                                                 AIS )
                                                  (i)                  (i)
         Calculate loss S ′ (θ) = −1/N N
                                          P
                                             i  w correction log qθ (x AIS )
         Perform gradient descent on S ′ (θ) to update θ



C.2    FAB APPLIED TO CRAFT

Continual Repeated Annealed Flow Transport Monte Carlo (CRAFT) is an extension of SNFs (Wu
et al., 2020; Nielsen et al., 2020) proposed by Matthews et al. (2022) which combines normalizing
flows with sequential Monte Carlo (SMC). Specifically, flows are used to transport samples between
consecutive annealing distributions in combination with SMC. CRAFT trains each of the flows by
minimizing the reverse KL divergence with respect to the next annealing distribution and gradients
are estimated using the samples generated by the flow transport step.
FAB could be combined with the CRAFT model. For example, the reverse KL divergence could be
replaced with a mass-covering divergence such as the α-divergence with α = 2. Furthermore, we
could improve the estimation of gradients by targeting with AIS the minimum variance distribution
for importance sampling instead of just the next annealing distribution.
A FAB style version of the CRAFT algorithm is described in algorithms 3 and 4. Each flow transport
step is now trained by minimizing the α-divergence with α = 2 and using samples generated by the


                                                            16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


next immediate MCMC step ahead of the flow in the SMC process. Below, we briefly introduce
CRAFT with an emphasis on the loss function used. Next, we describe how FAB may be used to
improve training of the flow transport steps. We follow the notation from the CRAFT paper exactly
and use their pseudo code as a basis for our proposed algorithm indicating changes clearly. We refer
to (Matthews et al., 2022) for further details on the CRAFT algorithm.

C.2.1    C ONTINUAL R EPEATED A NNEALED F LOW T RANSPORT M ONTE C ARLO
As in FAB, the aim of CRAFT is to approximate an intractable target distribution that we cannot
sample from and whose density can only be evaluated up to a normalizing constant. This target
distribution is denoted πK (x) (equivalent to p(x) in our notation). In CRAFT, SMC is run with
                                                                                      K
interleaved flow transport steps through a sequence of annealed distributions (πk (x))k=0 , each with
normalization constant Zk . The base distribution π0 is a tractable distribution (e.g., a Gaussian)
                                                         K−1
from which we can sample. Similarly to AIS, (πk (x))k=1 are defined by interpolating between
base and target log-densities, where the target density may be unnormalized. The SMC process in
CRAFT begins by sampling from the base distribution X0i ∼π0 . Then, for each distribution from
k = 1 to k = K, a flow Tk is trained to transport samples from πk−1 (x) to πk (x). Additionally,
at each step from k = 1 to k = K, CRAFT utilises resampling and MCMC to bring the samples
closer to πk (x).
Similarly to AIS, the CRAFT algorithm returns a set of points and normalized importance weights
    i      i N
(XK   , WK  )i=1 , which may be used for approximating expectations with respect to the target. Each
         i                                                     i
point Xk has an associated normalized importance weight WK       for importance sampling with respect
to the intermediate target distribution πk (x). We refer back to the CRAFT paper, and to the pseudo
code in Algorithm 3 for how these importance weights are calculated.
CRAFT minimizes the following training objective:
                                           K
                                           X
                                     H=          KL[Tk# πk−1 ||πk ] ,                                (20)
                                           k=1

where # denotes the push forward between distributions. The above objective trains each flow
transport step Tk to minimize the KL divergence between Tk# πk−1 , i.e., the distribution of outputs
of the flow when given as input samples from πk−1 , and the next intermediate distribution πk . The
gradient estimate used to train each flow transport step Tk is given by
                        X
                                i                        i                     i

               ∇θ k H ≈      Wk−1  ∇θk − log γk (Tk (Xk−1    )) − log |∇x Tk (Xk−1 )] ,         (21)
                           i

where γk (x) ∝ πk (x). The flow is trained by passing it samples Xk−1 from the previous SMC step,
computing the corresponding output samples from the flow Tk (Xk−1 ) and using these to estimate
the gradient of KL[Tk# πk−1 ||πk ]. The normalized importance weight in the loss Wk−1
                                                                                   i
                                                                                       account for
                           i
the fact that the samples Xk−1  passed from the previous step in the SMC forward pass come from
an approximation to πk−1 .

C.2.2    FAB-CRAFT
We now propose a FAB flavored version of CRAFT. First, we re-introduce some notation from our
paper: We use q to denote the initial distribution used in AIS and p to denote the target distribution
that we wish to approximate. Recall that q is trained to fit p. All other notation in this section follows
the CRAFT paper’s notation.
In our FAB-CRAFT method, we use the MCMC samples following each flow transport step in
CRAFT to update the flow to minimize Dα=2 (p∥q), where q = Tk# πk−1 and p = πk . To do this
with minimal changes to the original CRAFT algorithm, we make the observation that sampling
from the initial distribution q and then running MCMC targeting p is equivalent to running AIS
targeting p2 /q with 1 intermediate distribution at β = 0.5. Thus, the samples generated by the
MCMC steps following each flow transport step in CRAFT can be repurposed for an AIS bootstrap
estimate of the flow training loss. For training, the only adjustment to the SMC forward pass of
CRAFT is then to move the resampling step to occur after each MCMC step, where previously it


                                                    17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


occurred after each flow transport step. At inference time the original CRAFT algorithm can be run
with the flows trained with our method in its exact original form. We describe this in more detail
below and provide pseudo code in Algorithm 3 and 4.
We begin by deriving the AIS importance weights when targeting p2 /q with 1 intermediate distri-
bution and setting β = 0.5. For only 1 intermediate distribution, the AIS weights are given by
                                                  p1 (x1 ) p2 (x2 )
                                   wAIS (x2 ) =                      .                          (22)
                                                  p0 (x1 ) p1 (x2 )
As before, we set the intermediate distributions as interpolations between the base and the target:
log pi (x) = βi log p0 (x) + (1 − βi ) log pN (x). Now, if we set β1 = 0.5, then plugging in p0 = q,
p1 = q 0.5 (p2 /q)0.5 = p and p2 = p2 /q, we obtain the following AIS weights:
                                                   p (x1 ) p (x2 )
                                     wAIS (x2 ) =                  .                            (23)
                                                   q (x1 ) q (x2 )
Recall that in CRAFT we set q = Tk# πk−1 and p = πk . AIS is then run by first sampling x1 from
q, which is done in practice by setting Yki ← Tk (Xk−1
                                                   i             i
                                                       ) where Xk−1  ∼ πk−1 and then generating
x2 from x1 by MCMC, which is done in practice by setting Xk ∼ Kk (Yki ), where Kk is an MCMC
                                                             i

transition kernel that leaves πk invariant. The importance weights of Xki with respect to the AIS
target p2 /q are then given by
                             i
                            wAIS,k = p(Yki )/q(Yki ) × p(Xki )/q(Xki ) .                     (24)
                                              i          i
                                                                P N      j
Using the normalized importance weights WAIS,k      = wAIS,k  / j=1 wAIS,k , we can calculate the
FAB gradient estimate given by
                         N
                         X
                                i
               ĥk = −         WAIS,k ∇θk log qθk (Xki )
                           i
                                                                                                  (25)
                         N
                         X
                                i
                                              log γk−1 (Tθ−1 (Xki )) + log |∇x Tθ−1 (Xki )| .

                   =−          WAIS,k ∇θ k                k                      k
                           i
This assumes that the samples passed to the flow are from the distribution πk−1 . However, in
practice, these samples are passed from the previous SMC step which is an approximation to πk−1 .
Similarly as in the original CRAFT loss, see Equation 21, we can correct for this by instead using
                       N
                       X
                            i    i
                                       ∇θk log γk−1 (Tθ−1 (Xki )) + log |∇x Tθ−1 (Xki )

             ĥk = −       Wk−1 WAIS,k                 k                      k
                                                                                                  (26)
                       i
       i                 i
where Wk−1 accounts for Xk−1 coming from an approximation to πk−1 .
Calculating the normalized AIS weights requires all the samples from the flow to be passed to the
MCMC step. Because of this, we move the SMC resampling step to take place after the MCMC step
instead of just after the flow transport step, see Algorithm 3. Note that the weights Wk for resampling
Xk are equal to the weights for resampling the corresponding flow outputs Yk that generate such
samples. This result is due to the MCMC kernel Kk leaving πk invariant. The resulting FAB flavor
of CRAFT is shown in algorithms 3 and 4.
Some final remarks: our goal has been to create a FAB flavored version of CRAFT while keeping
the algorithm as similar to the original version as possible. However, in practice, it would be better
to make further changes. For example, using a prioritized replay buffer would significantly decrease
the computational requirements of the algorithm. Furthermore, for updating each flow, it may also
be beneficial to consider samples across the whole chain of intermediate distributions, instead of
using only samples from the local MCMC step immediately following the flow.

D     A NALYSIS OF FAB
D.1   G RADIENT ESTIMATION PERFORMANCE

We first analyze the quality of the noisy gradients provided by the proposed AIS bootstrap method.
For this, we consider a toy problem in which qθ and p are unit variance 1D Gaussians with means 0.5


                                                      18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Algorithm 3: SMC-NF-step for FAB-CRAFT: Additions are in green and removals in red
.
                                  N      N
  1: Input: Approximations (πk−1     , Zk−1  ) to (πk−1 , Zk−1 ), normalizing flows Tk , unnormalized
     annealed targets γk−1 and γk and resampling threshold A ∈ [1/N, 1).
  2: Output: Gradient ĥk of FAB loss w.r.t θk , particles at iteration k: πkN = (Xki , Wki )N
                                                                                             i=1 ,
     approximation ZkN to Zk .
  3: Transport particles: Yki = Tk (Xk−1
                                       i
                                           ).
  4: Compute IS weights:
     wki ← Wk−1
              i
                  Gk (X i ) // unnormalized
                 PN k−1
     Wk ← wk / j=1 wkj // normalized
        i     i

  5: Estimate normalizing
                   P        constant
                                      Zk :
       N      N        N      i
     Zk ← Zk−1         i=1 wk .
 6: Compute effective sample size ESSNk .
 7: if ESSN
          k ≤ N A  then
 8:    Resample N particles denoted abusively also Yki according to the weights Wki , then set
        Wki = N1 .
 9: end if
10: Generate samples and IS weights via AIS targetting p2 /qθk with 1 intermediate distribution,
    where p = πk and q = Tk# πk−1 . By setting β = 0.5 we simply run the original CRAFT
    MCMC transition kernel with p as a target.
    Sample Xki ∼ Kk (Yki , ·). // MCMC
       i
    wAIS,k   ← p(Yki )/q(Yki ) × p(Xki )/q(Xki )
         i         i
                        PN        j
    WAIS,k   ← wAIS,k  / j=1 wAIS,k
11: Estimate gradient of FAB objective
              PN i
                                 ∇θk log γk−1 (Tθ−1 (Xki )) + log |∇x Tθ−1
                            i

    ĥk = − i Wk−1       WAIS,k                  k                      k
                                                                           (Xki )
12: if ESSN k ≤ N A then
13:     Resample N particles denoted abusively also Xki according to the weights Wki , then set
        Wki = N1 .
14: end if
15: Return πkN , ZkN , ĥk .



Algorithm 4: CRAFT-training: Additions are shown in green and removals in red
 1: Input: Initial NFs {Tk }1:N , number of particles N , unnormalized annealed targets {γk }K
                                                                                             k=0
      with γ0 =π0 and γK =γ, resampling threshold A ∈ [1/N, 1).
                                                                       N    N
 2: Output: Learned flows Tk and length J sequence of approximations (πK , ZK ) to (πK , ZK ).
 3: for j = 1, . . . , J do
 4:   Sample X0i ∼π0 and set W0i = N1 and Z0N =1.
 5:   for k = 1, . . . , K do
                                  N
 6:      ĥk ← flow-grad Tk , πk−1       using eqn (21).

 7:           πkN , ZkN , ĥk ← SMC-NF-step πk−1
                                             N      N
                                                 , Zk−1 , Tk
 8:      Update the flow Tk using gradient ĥk .
 9:   end for
               N    N
10:   Yield (πK  , ZK ) and continue for loop.
11: end for
12: Return learned flows {Tk }K
                              k=1 .


and −0.5, respectively, as shown in Figure 5a. We estimate the gradient of Dα=2 (p∥qθ ) with respect
to the mean of qθ and compare different methods: first, importance sampling (IS) with samples from
qθ ; second, IS with samples from p; third, AIS with p as target and qθ as initial distribution; and
fourth, our proposed method using AIS with p2 /qθ as target and qθ as initial distribution. For AIS


                                                   19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


we use 3 intermediate distributions and, as transition operator, HMC with 5 leapfrog steps and
resampling of momentum variables once per intermediate AIS distribution.
Figure 5b shows the Signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) for the different gradient estimators as a function
of the number of samples used. AIS bootstrap is clearly the best method. IS with qθ performs very
poorly and it is outperformed by both IS with p and AIS targeting p, with these two latter techniques
performing similarly but way worse than AIS bootstrap. Figure 5c shows that the quality of the
proposed method increases fast as the number of intermediate AIS distributions grows, with IS with
samples from p being outperformed quite early in the plot while still using a rather small number of
distributions. It is important to note, however, that in more challenging problems, it is unlikely that
our AIS bootstrap method will outperform IS with samples from p, especially early in training when
qθ is a poor approximation to p.


               (a)                                (b)                                (c)

Figure 5: (a) Target and approximating densities p and q, respectively. (b) Signal-to-noise ratio
(SNR) of various gradient estimators as a function of the number of samples used. (c) SNR as a
function of the number of intermediate AIS distributions when using 100 samples. Legend as in (b).



D.2     S CALING FAB TO HIGHER DIMENSIONS

Now we consider how the performance of FAB is affected by an increasing problem dimensionality.
To investigate this, we analyse a simple scenario where we assume p and q to be factorised, with
each marginal of q having its own separate parameters (no parameter sharing between dimensions).
We acknowledge that these are strong simplifying assumptions and leave a more general analysis to
future work. Given these assumptions, we show the following: 1) The variance in the estimates of
the gradient of Dα=2 by importance sampling with samples from q and p increases exponentially
with respect to the dimensionality of the problem. 2) The variance in the corresponding estimates
obtained with FAB can remain constant if the number of AIS intermediate distributions increases
linearly with the dimensionality of the problem.


D.2.1    T HEORETICAL ANALYSIS ON FACTORIZED p AND q

We consider the problem of estimating the gradient of Dα=2 where both p and q are factorized
distributions: they are equal to the product of their marginals. To further simplify the analysis, we
consider the gradient with respect to the parameters of the j-th dimension of q and assume that there
is no parameter sharing across dimensions of q. In this case, Dα=2 is given by

                                                    D Z
                                      p(x)2               pd (xd )2
                                  Z              Y
                             µ=             dx =                    dxd ,                         (27)
                                      q(x)                 qd (xd )
                                                    d


                                                  20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


where pd and qd are the marginal distributions for dimension d. The gradient of this quantity with
respect to the parameters θj of the j-th marginal of q is given by,
                                                             D
                                            pj (xj )2                  pd (xd )2
                                        Z                   Y      Z
                       ∇θ j µ = ∇θ j                  dxj ×                      dxd .            (28)
                                             qj (xj )                   qd (xd )
                                                            d̸=j

We are interested in studying how the variance in our estimate of ∇θj µ Rscales with D. Equation (28)
shows that each additional dimension d ̸= j adds an extra factor µd = pd (xd )2 /qd (xd ) dxd in the
gradient expression. To eliminate the effect of this change in the gradient as D increases, we focus
                             QD                                           QD
our analysis on Var[∇θj µ̄/ d̸=j µd ], where µ̄ is an estimate of µ and d̸=j µd is a normalization
factor that cancels the effect of the additional dimensions.
Importance Sampling with q: We consider first how increasing D affects the variance in the
estimation of the gradient of Dα=2 by importance sampling with samples from q. The importance
sampling estimate of Dα=2 with N samples from q is given by
                                                       N
                                                    1 X
                                            µ̄q =         w(xn )2 ,                               (29)
                                                    N n=1

where w(xn ) = p(xn )/q(xn ) and xn ∼ q. Now, let us define wd (xn,d ) = pd (xn,d )/qd (xn,d ),
where xn,d is the d-th entry in xn . We then obtain
                                    D
                       1      XY               1 X                 Y
           ∇θj µ̄q =     ∇θ j    wd (xn,d )2 =     ∇θj wj (xn,j )2   wd (xn,d )2 .                (30)
                       N      n
                                               N n
                                    d                                              d̸=j

The variance of this estimate, after dividing by the aforementioned normalization factor, is given by
           "            #                                 D
              ∇θj µ̄q            h                  2
                                                      i Y    Eqd wd (xd,n )4
    N Var QD              = Eqj ∇θj wj (xn,j )2        ×             2         − (∇θj µj )2 .    (31)
                d̸=j µd
                                                                   µ d
                                                             d̸=j

Since Varqd wd (xd,n )2 = Eqd wd (xd,n )4 − µ2d > 0, we have that Eqd wd (xd,n )4 /µ2d ≥ 1.
Thus, the first factor in Equation (31) is multiplied in this equation by D − 1 factors all larger than
1, which implies that the variance of this estimator increases exponentially as a function of D. This
is a well-known problem of importance sampling.
Importance Sampling with p: Interestingly, we get a similar result when estimating Dα=2 by
importance sampling with samples from p. The estimate for the gradient of Dα=2 with respect to
the j-th dimension of q is now
                                      1 X                Y
                            ∇θj µ̄p =     ∇θj wj (xn,j )   wd (xn,d ) ,                  (32)
                                      N n
                                                                   d̸=j

where xn,d ∼ pd . The variance of this gradient estimate, after dividing by the normalization factor,
is given by
            "           #                               D
              ∇θj µ̄p          h
                                                  2
                                                    i Y     Epd wd (xn,d )2
      N Var QD            = Epj ∇θj wj (xn,j )       ×               2        − (∇θj µj )2 .    (33)
               d̸=j µ d                                             µd
                                                             d̸=j

Since Varpd [wd (xd,n )] = Epd wd (xd,n ) −µ2d > 0, we have that Epd wd (xd,n )2 /µ2d ≥ 1. Thus,
                                              2

the first factor in Equation (33) is again multiplied by D − 1 factors all larger than 1, which implies
that the variance of this estimator increases exponentially as a function of D, albeit at a lower rate
than in the case of importance sampling with q. This implies that, even with access to ground truth
samples from p, the number N of samples required to keep the variance of the gradient estimates of
Dα=2 constant grows exponentially as a function of the problem dimensionality D.
FAB: We now apply the same type of analysis to the estimates of the gradient given by FAB. We
consider the FAB gradient estimate from Equation (13), which is equal in expectation to ∇θ µ. This
estimate relies on the raw importance weights from AIS rather than the self-normalized importance


                                                       21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


weights, which makes it easier to analyze. The FAB estimate of the gradient of Dα=2 with respect
to the parameters of the j-th marginal of q is given by
                                1      X
                  ∇θj µ̄FAB = ∇θj          log q(xn )w̄(xn )
                               N        n
                                1 X                                    Y                    (34)
                             =         ∇θj log qj (xn,j )w̄j (xn,j ) ×   w̄d (xn,d ) ,
                               N n
                                                                           d̸=j

where w̄ are the importance weights from AIS with stopped gradients and         Q we have decomposed
the AIS weights into the contributions from each dimension: w̄(xn ) = d w̄d (xn,d ). Note that,
since p and q are factorized, we have that all the intermediate AIS distributions are factorized as
well. If we assume that the MCMC transition kernels in AIS produce independent samples from the
ground truth intermediate target distributions, we have that xn,1 , . . . , xn,D are independent random
variables. The variance of ∇θj µ̄FAB after dividing by the normalization factor is then given by
         "         #                                                  D
                                                                        EAISd w̄d (xn,d )2

       ∇θj µ̄FAB                 h
                                                                 2
                                                                   i Y
 N Var QD              = EAISj     ∇θj log qj (xj,n )w̄j (xn,j )    ×                        − (∇θj µj )2 , (35)
        d̸=j µd
                                                                               µ2d
                                                                    d̸=j

where EAIS denotes the expectation with respect to the AIS forward pass. The first expectation
in the equation above is constant as D increases. Therefore, we focus on the contributions of the
other expectations for the importance weights of dimensions d ̸= j. As in the previous cases where
we used importance sampling with samples from q and p, the variance in Equation (35) will again
increase exponentially with D. However, under the assumption that the MCMC transitions produce
independent samples from the intermediate AIS distributions, Neal (2001) shows that the variance
in the log importance weights of AIS is proportional to D/K where K is the number of intermediate
                                       QD
AIS distributions. This implies that d̸=j EAISd [w̄d (xn,d )2 ]/µ2d will remain roughly constant if we
increase the number K of AIS distributions by the same factor as the dimensionality of the problem.
In this case, the variance of ∇θj µ̄FAB will remain constant as we increase D and the cost of the FAB
gradient estimator will only increase linearly as D increases.

D.2.2     E MPIRICAL ANALYSIS ON TOY PROBLEM
We now run an empirical analysis to assess the performance of the FAB gradient estimator as D
increases. We consider the case where q and p are both factorized Gaussians with unit marginal
variances and with mean vectors equal to 0.5×1D and −0.5×1D , where 1D is a vector of dimension
D with all of its entries equal to one. For the FAB gradient estimate, we increase the number of AIS
distributions by the same factor as the dimensionality of the problem. We analyze the SNR in the
estimates of the gradient of the mean for the first marginal of q as the dimensionality of the problem
increases. The AIS transition operators are performed by running a single iteration of HMC, with
5 leapfrog steps, with a step size of 0.5. We found our results to be sensitive to the choice of step
size. In practice, we selected this value by trial and error, assessing the quality of the AIS samples
by looking at their empirical histogram, as shown in Figure 7.
Figure 6a shows that, when using importance sampling with samples from p, the log-weight variance
increases linearly as the number of dimensions increases. By contrast, this variance remains constant
with FAB. This is achieved by fixing the number of AIS intermediate distributions to be equal to the
number of dimensions. This result is consistent with the analysis from the previous section and with
the results of Neal (2001). Furthermore, in Figure 6b we see that the SNR remains roughly flat for
FAB (stays within a single order of magnitude), while it quickly decreases for importance sampling
with samples from p. If the same results were to hold in more complex problems, this would imply
that we could safely apply FAB in those settings by linearly increasing the number of intermediate
AIS distributions as the dimensionality of the problem grows.

E     M IXTURE OF G AUSSIANS EXPERIMENTS
E.1     T RAINING S ETUP

All flow models have 15 RealNVP layers (Dinh et al., 2017), with a 2 layer (80 unit layer width)
MLP for the conditioner. The flow is initialized to the identity transformation, so qθ is initially a


                                                       22
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                      (a)                                                  (b)

Figure 6: Analysis of efficiency of AIS bootstrap with increasing dimensionality. For AIS, we set the
number of AIS distributions to be equal to the number of dimensions of the problem—which results
in a linearly increasing compute cost as the dimension scales. (a) Variance in the log importance
weights, for the AIS bootstrap vs importance sampling with p. (b) Signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) for
gradient estimation with the AIS bootstrap vs importance sampling with p. Legend as in (a).


Figure 7: Histogram of samples from AIS targetting p and p2 /q compared to the PDF of p, q and
(normalized) p2 /q. The AIS samples are generated with the tuned HMC step size of 0.5. This tuning
was performed by trial and error using the displayed histogram. AIS is run with 4 intermediate
distributions, and the transition to each intermediate distribution is performed by running a single
iteration of HMC with 5 leapfrog steps.


standard Gaussian distribution. Training is performed with a batch size of 128, using the Adam
optimizer (Kingma & Ba, 2015) with a learning rate of 1 × 10−4 and we clip the gradient norm to a
maximum value of 100. For the model that uses a RBD, we use an acceptance function composed of
a residual network with three blocks containing 512 hidden units per layer. The truncation parameter
is set to the common value T = 100. For the SNF and CRAFT methods, we do 1 Metropolis-
Hastings step every three flow layers. We used a fixed step size of σ = 5.0 for the Gaussian
perturbation of the Metropolis-Hastings step, which is the same as what is used within AIS for
FAB. This means that the SNF and CRAFT models has 5 stochastic Metropolis-Hastings steps in
total. The CRAFT model uses 6 annealing temperatures with geometric spacing, and a resampling
threshold of 0.3. We use the code provided by (Matthews et al., 2022) at https://github.
com/deepmind/annealed_flow_transport for training the CRAFT model. We train all


                                                 23
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


models for 2 × 107 flow evaluations. For each method, we train 3 models, each with a different
random seed, and results are reported as averages over these seeds.
FAB specific details: The batch size for both the AIS forward pass (M ) and sampling from the
buffer (N ) is equal to 128. We run AIS with a single intermediate distribution (β = 0.5) and
MCMC transitions are given by a single Metropolis-Hastings step: a Gaussian perturbation and
then an accept-reject step. We used a fixed step size of σ = 5.0 for the Gaussian perturbation.
We initialize the buffer with 1280 samples from the initialized flow-AIS combination and use a
maximum buffer length of 12800. We do not use any clipping when computing wcorrection . The log
density of the flow occasionally gave NaN values to points sampled from the buffer, resulting in
NaN values for wcorrection . As this resulted in NaN loss values, the parameter update was skipped in
iterations where this occurred. Furthermore, since the wcorrection adjustment for these points in the
buffer is invalid, the weights and qθold (x) values in the buffer were left as their previous values.

Table 3: Number of flow and target evaluations during training for each method on the mixture of
Gaussians problem. For SNF and CRAFT we report the number of model forward passes - each of
which contains multiple flow transport and MCMC steps.

                          Number of flow/model evaluations      Number of target evaluations
                               7
       Flow w/ ML         2 · 10                                2 · 107
       Flow w/ Dα=2       2 · 107                               2 · 107
       Flow w/ KLD        2 · 107                               2 · 107
       RBD w/ KLD         2 · 107                               2 · 107
       SNF w/ KLD         2 · 107                               108
       CRAFT              2 · 107                               108
       FAB w/o buffer     2 · 107                               2 · 107
       FAB w/ buffer      2 · 107                               6.6 · ×106


E.2   E VALUATION S ETUP

For each method, we compute after training the effective sample size (ESS) obtained when doing
importance sampling with qθ ; the average log-likelihood of qθ on samples from p; the forward
KL divergence with respect to the target; and the mean absolute error (MAE) in the estimation of
Ep(x) [f (x)] by importance sampling with 1000 samples from qθ , where f (x) = aT (x − 2b) +
           T
2 (x − 2b) C (x − 2b), with the entries in vectors a and b and matrix C randomly initialized by
sampling from a standard Gaussian then kept fixed to such values during all the experiments. We
express the MAE as a percentage of the true expectation to make it easier to interpret. We also report
the MAE that is obtained when we do not reweight samples according to the importance weights.
The ESS is calculated using 5 × 104 samples from qθ . The MAE is calculated by averaging over
100 repetitions.

E.3   F URTHER R ESULTS

Figure 8 shows a plot of samples from each trained model on the mixture of Gaussians problem, with
the target contours in the background. We see that the FAB based methods and the flow trained with
ML cover all the modes in the target distribution. All the other methods fit a subset of the modes.
The flow trained with Dα=2 minimization exhibited highly unstable behavior during training and,
thus, is the worst performing model.
FAB with varying values of α        In Appendix C.1, we derived a variant of FAB that works with
an arbitrary value for the α parameter of the α-divergence. Here, we want to investigate how the
performance of models trained with FAB changes as we vary α. Therefore, we leave the setup the
same as used in Section 4.1 and only changed the α parameter of FAB. The results when using FAB
without the replay buffer are given in Table 4 and Figure 9. The results when using FAB with the
replay buffer are reported in Table 5 and Figure 10. For FAB without the replay buffer, α = 2 is
slightly superior in performance to FAB with other values of α. For FAB with the replay buffer, we
see that all of the methods with α ≥ 1 are able to obtain a good fit for the target, with α = 2 and


                                                 24
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Figure 8: Contour lines for the target distribution p and samples (blue discs) drawn from the approx-
imation qθ obtained by different methods on the mixture of Gaussians problem.



α = 3 achieving the best performance. For these runs, the limits of the expressiveness of the flow is
most likely the limiting factor to improving performance even further. The same style of analysis for
FAB with varying values of α is performed with the Alanine Dipeptide problem in Appendix G.2,
which finds α = 2 is best, with a larger differences in performance between different values of α.


Figure 9: Contour lines for the target distribution p and samples (blue discs) drawn from the ap-
proximation qθ obtained by FAB without the replay buffer for varying values of α on the mixture
of Gaussians problem.



                                                 25
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Figure 10: Contour lines for the target distribution p and samples (blue discs) drawn from the ap-
proximation qθ obtained by FAB with the replay buffer for varying values of α on the mixture of
Gaussians problem.

Table 4: Results for the mixture of Gaussians problem for FAB without the replay buffer for varying
values of α. Log-likelihood values for the first two methods are NaN because they assign zero
density to samples from missing modes. Best results are emphazised in bold.

       α       ESS (%)       Ep(x) [log q(x)]     KL(p||q)      MAE (%) MAE w/o RW (%)
      0.25 52.4 ± 10.0  NaN ± NaN               NaN ± NaN       44.2 ± 19.9      48.8 ± 18.2
      0.5 14.7 ± 5.7    NaN ± NaN               NaN ± NaN       14.6 ± 3.6       15.9 ± 6.0
      1.0 30.8 ± 2.2 −7.59 ± 0.08               0.73 ± 0.08      4.8 ± 0.4        4.3 ± 1.3
      1.5 19.0 ± 10.1 −7.97 ± 0.22              1.10 ± 0.22      6.2 ± 1.2       13.4 ± 7.5
      2.0 38.4 ± 3.2 −7.59 ± 0.06               0.73 ± 0.06      3.7 ± 0.2        7.6 ± 1.3
      3.0 21.6 ± 7.9   −8.09 ± 0.23             1.23 ± 0.23      5.8 ± 0.9       19.3 ± 11.4



F     M ANY W ELL EXPERIMENTS
F.1   D ESCRIPTION AND R ESULTS

We consider another synthetic problem that is significantly more difficult than the GMM problem:
approximating the 32-dimensional “Many Well” distribution given by the product of 16 copies of
the 2-dimensional Double Well distribution6 from Wu et al. (2020); Noé et al. (2019):
                     log p(x1 , x2 ) = −x41 + 6x21 + 1/2x1 − 1/2x22 + constant ,                   (36)
where each copy of the Double Well is evaluated on a different pair of the 32 inputs to the Many
Well. The original Double Well has two modes as shown in the top-right contour plot in Figure 11.
Therefore, our 32-dimensional Many Well has 216 = 65536 modes, one for each possible choice of
   6
     We use the Double Well distribution from the code provided in Wu et al. (2020), which has different
coefficients to the Noé et al. (2019).


                                                   26
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Table 5: Results for the mixture of Gaussians problem for FAB with the replay buffer for varying
values of α. Log-likelihood values for the first two methods are NaN because they assign zero
density to samples from missing modes. Best results are emphazised in bold.

       α       ESS (%)      Ep(x) [log q(x)]     KL(p||q)       MAE (%) MAE w/o RW (%)
      0.25 44.4 ± 18.2  NaN ± NaN              NaN ± NaN       91.7 ± 3.4       91.5 ± 3.5
      0.5 23.6 ± 4.0    NaN ± NaN              NaN ± NaN       35.8 ± 6.8       37.1 ± 7.6
      1.0 59.1 ± 3.4   −7.19 ± 0.00            0.33 ± 0.00     10.1 ± 2.7       11.4 ± 3.7
      1.5 48.2 ± 10.8 −7.16 ± 0.02             0.30 ± 0.02      3.6 ± 0.1        2.8 ± 0.2
      2.0 63.1 ± 3.4 −7.14 ± 0.02              0.28 ± 0.01      3.0 ± 0.1        3.0 ± 0.5
      3.0 65.6 ± 1.7 −7.15 ± 0.03              0.30 ± 0.03      3.2 ± 0.1        2.8 ± 0.1



mode in each of the 16 copies of the Double Well. We obtain exact samples from the Many Well
by sampling from each independent copy of the Double Well. Exact samples from the Double Well
are obtained by sampling from each independent marginal distribution. The first marginal p(x1 ) can
be sampled from exactly using rejection sampling (see Appendix F.2), while the second marginal
distribution p(x2 ) can be sampled from directly as it is a (unnormalized) standard Gaussian. These
samples are cheap to produce. We use them for training a flow by maximum likelihood as well as for
the evaluation of the different methods. Additionally, we created an artificial test set for evaluation
purposes by manually placing a point on each of the 216 modes. By computing log-likelihoods on
this test set, we can then check if a method is covering the entire target distribution, as any missing
mode will result in very low log-likelihood values. We can calculate the normalizing constant for
each marginal of the Double Well problem via numerical integration (for p(x1 )) and analytical
integration (for p(x2 )), and use this to obtain the normalizing constant of the Many Well distribution
(see Appendix F.2). This may then be used to obtain the normalized probability density function
of the Many Well distribution, which is useful for model evaluation. We can also compare models
on how accurately they estimate the normalizing constant as the average unnormalized importance
weights. For each model, we report the MAE in the estimation of the Many Well’s normalizing
constant using 1000 samples, averaged over 50 runs. We express this as a percentage of the true
value of the normalizing constant.

Table 6: Results on the 32 dimensional Many Well Problem. Our methods are marked in italic. Best
results are emphasized in bold. CRAFT (config 1) refers to the CRAFT model trained with a similar
flow and MCMC config to FAB. CRAFT (config 2) uses the configuration provided in the CRAFT
repository, that uses more expressive neural spline flows, and a larger number of intermediate distri-
butions within SMC.


                       ESS (%)      Ep(x) [log q(x)] Mean log q(xmodes )     KL[p||q]        MAE (%)
Flow w/ ML       80.6 ± 2.1 −27.6 ± 0.01               −21.3 ± 0.0           0.1 ± 0.0   1.2 ± 0.0
Flow w/ Dα=2      0.0 ± 0.0    NaN ± NaN                 NaN ± NaN          NaN ± NaN NaN ± NaN
Flow w/ KLD      27.7 ± 6.0 −176.9 ± 18.08             −536.6 ± 41.2       149.4 ± 18.1 89.2 ± 1.2
RBD w/ KLD       51.9 ± 16.8 −183.8 ± 21.8             −533.7 ± 73.2       156.2 ± 21.8 88.9 ± 2.2
SNF w/ KLD       15.1 ± 9.7    N/A ± N/A                 N/A ± N/A         167.9 ± 12.8 88.9 ± 0.0
CRAFT (config 1) N/A ± N/A     N/A ± N/A                 N/A ± N/A          N/A ± N/A 116.3 ± 1.8
CRAFT (config 2) N/A ± N/A     N/A ± N/A                 N/A ± N/A          N/A ± N/A    3.0 ± 1.7
FAB w/o buffer    4.7 ± 0.9 −29.8 ± 0.23                −28.0 ± 43.0         2.3 ± 0.2  12.7 ± 1.9
FAB w/ buffer    78.9 ± 1.6 −27.6 ± 0.01               −21.3 ± 0.0           0.1 ± 0.0   1.4 ± 0.1


We compare FAB to the same alternative approaches as in the mixture of Gaussians problem and
use also the Real NVP flow architecture but with 10 layers. The MLP used for the conditioner is
composed of 2 layers each with 320 units. For the the model that uses a RBD, we use the same ar-
chitecture as before, with an acceptance function composed of a residual network with three blocks
containing 512 hidden units per layer. The truncation parameter is set to the common value T = 100.
For FAB based methods, we use AIS with 4 intermediate distributions (linearly spaced) and with


                                                  27
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


a HMC transition operator containing a single iteration with 5 leapfrog steps. For FAB with pri-
oritized buffer we use L = 8. The SNF model uses 1 step of HMC with 5 inner leapfrog steps
every 2 layers. As before, when training the flow by maximum likelihood, we draw new samples
from the target for each loss estimation. All models except CRAFT are trained for 1010 flow evalu-
ations with the number of target evaluations by each method being reported in Table 7. For CRAFT
we run our experiments with two different setups, which we simply refer to as CRAFT (config 1)
and CRAFT (config 2). The first uses a configuration that is similar to the that of FAB in terms
of the flow architecture, and MCMC. This CRAFT model uses 5 temperatures, and uses an auto-
regressive affine flow. The second setup uses the configuration provided in the CRAFT implemen-
tation at https://github.com/deepmind/annealed_flow_transport, which uses
neural spline flows, with 11 temperatures (10 flow/MCMC steps) and HMC containing 10 leap-
frog steps. This model is significantly more expensive both in terms of the flow, and in terms of the
MCMC performed in each forward pass. For CRAFT we train for 1010 target evaluation budget -
this is the same number used in FAB without the buffer, and slightly more than FAB with the buffer.
Further details on the hyper-parameters and architectures used by each algorithm are provided in
Appendix F.3.
Figure 11 shows contour plots for several two-dimensional marginals of the Many Well target. Each
plot is obtained by scanning two variables that are inputs to different Double Well factors in the
Many Well distribution while the other variables are kept fixed to zero. We also show in this figure
samples generated by FAB with a replay buffer (left) and by the method that tunes qθ by minimizing
KL(q∥p) (right). We see that FAB generates samples on each of the contour modes while this is not
the case for the alternative baseline, which misses several modes. Figure 12 shows the same contour
plot as above for the two CRAFT models, both of which successfully sample from all the modes.
Additional plots for all other methods can be found in Appendix F.4.
Table 6 shows for each method 1) the ESS when doing importance sampling with qθ ; the average
log-likelihoods for qθ 2) on samples from the target and 3) on test points placed on the modes of
the Many Well distribution; 4) the forward KL divergence with respect to the target; and 5) the
MAE in the estimation of the May Well normalizing constant. Average log-likelihoods and ESS are
calculated with 5 × 104 samples. All the results in the table are averages across 3 random seeds.
We see similar results as in the previous experiment: FAB with a buffer performs similarly to the
benchmark of training the flow by maximum likelihood. These are the two best performing methods,
obtaining the highest ESS and average log-likelihoods and the lowest forward KL divergence and
MAE values. The next best method is the CRAFT (config 2) model, and then FAB without buffer,
while the other methods perform very poorly. The method that minimizes Dα=2 (p∥qθ ) as estimated
by sampling from qθ diverged early in training and always returned NaN values. The ESS for the
flow trained by minimizing KL(qθ ∥p), RBD and the SNF are spurious, as they are missing modes
(see Figure 11 and 14). After training, we may combine the trained flows with AIS to further
improve the ESS. If we run AIS as during training but targeting p instead of p2 /q, the ESS is 89.9%
and 13.6% for the FAB flows trained with and without a buffer, respectively. The log-likelihood of
p on samples from p and on the test set with points at the modes are -27.4 and -20.9, respectively.
These values are very close to the ones obtained by FAB with buffer, showing that this method
produces highly accurate approximations to the target distribution.
Table 6 shows that the CRAFT (config 2) model, which uses the more expressive spline flow ar-
chitecture, and a larger number of intermediate distributions in SMC, performs well and is able to
provide accurate estimates of the normalizing constant for the Many Well. However, the flow trained
with FAB provides more accurate estimates, even though the CRAFT model runs a large amount of
HMC at evaluation time. This comparison could be made more fair by taking the flow trained with
FAB, and then at inference time combining it with AIS targetting p.

F.2   O BTAINING THE NORMALIZING CONSTANT AND EXACT SAMPLES

In this section, we describe how to obtain the exact normalizing constant and exact samples from
the Double Well distribution. These allow us to obtain the normalizing constant and exact samples
from the Many Well distribution.
The Double Well log-density is given by
                    log p(x1 , x2 ) = −x41 + 6x21 + 1/2x1 − 1/2x22 + constant .                 (37)


                                                 28
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Figure 11: Samples from qθ and target contours for marginal distributions over the first four elements
of x in the 32 dimensional Many Well Problem. The flow trained with FAB with buffer (left)
captures the target far better than the flow trained by minimizing KL(q∥p) (right), which misses
several modes.


By noting that x1 and x2 are independent, we see that their distribution factorises as p(x1 , x2 ) =
p(x1 )p(x2 ). Thus, the normalizing constant of p(x1 , x2 ) is given by the product of the normalizing
constants of each marginal distribution. Furthermore, samples from p(x1 , x2 ) may be obtained
by sampling independently from each marginal. By inspection,     √ we see that the marginal p(x2 ) is
standard Gaussian. Thus, its normalizing constant is given by 2π, and samples from this marginal
may be obtained trivially. The normalizing constant of the second marginal distribution may be
calculated via numerical integration Z1 = 11784.51. We obtain exact samples from p(x1 ) by
using rejection sampling, a visual summary of this is provided in Figure 13. For the rejection
sampling proposal distribution, denoted q, we use a two-component Gaussian mixture distribution
with mixture weights (0.2, 0.8), means (−1.7, 1.7) and standard deviations equal to 0.5. For the
comparison function kq(x1 ), we set k = 3Z1 to ensure that kq(x1 ) > p(x1 ) .

F.3   S ETUP

All flow models besides CRAFT have 10 RealNVP layers (Dinh et al., 2017), with a 2 layer (320
unit layer width) MLP for the conditioner. The flow is initialized to the identity transformation
and, consequently, qθ is initially a standard Gaussian distribution. Training is performed with a
batch size of 2048 and using the Adam optimizer (Kingma & Ba, 2015) with a learning rate of
3 × 10−4 . We clip the gradient norm to a maximum value of 100. For the SNF method, we do 10
Metropolis-Hastings steps every two flow layers. We train all models for 1010 flow evaluations. For
each method, we train 3 models using different random seeds. Results are reported as averages over
these three models.
FAB specific details: In FAB, the batch sizes for the AIS forward pass (M ) and sampling from
the buffer (N ) are both equal to 2048. We run AIS using four intermediate distributions with linear
spacing. Each MCMC transition is given by a single Hamiltonian Monte Carlo step consisting of
5 leapfrog steps. The momentum variable for HMC is sampled from a standard Gaussian and it is
not tuned throughout training. However, an important parameter to tune in HMC is the step size
parameter for the leapfrog integrator. We do tune this parameter for each intermediate distribution.
This is done by using a parametrization of step sizes that includes coefficients that are specific and


                                                 29
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Figure 12: Target contours and model samples for 2D marginals over the first four elements of x
in the 32 dimensional Many Well Problem for the CRAFT models. CRAFT (config 1) refers to the
CRAFT model trained with a similar flow and MCMC config to FAB. CRAFT (config 2) uses the
configuration provided in the CRAFT repository, that uses more expressive neural spline flows, and
a larger number of intermediate distributions within SMC. Both CRAFT models sample well from
the modes in the pairwise marginal distributions.


Figure 13: Using rejection sampling to obtain exact samples from the first marginal of the Double
Well distribution. (LHS) We see that kq(x1 ) > p(x1 ). (RHS) Sample density (normalized histogram
using 10000 samples) vs. the normalized probability density of p. We see that rejection sampling
provides exact samples from p(x1 ).


shared across intermediate distributions. In more detail, we define the HMC step size for the n-
th intermediate AIS distribution as ϵn = ϵshared + ϵ̂n , where we define ϵshared and ϵ̂n as follows:
ϵshared is a shared parameter across all AIS transitions, and is updated at the transition for every
intermediate distribution. This allows for faster adaption of the step size if the step sizes for all
transition kernels are “too big” or “too small”, which is common at the start of training. ϵ̂n is a


                                                 30
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


parameter specific to each n-th intermediate distribution, and is only updated during its specific
transition. This allows for ϵn to be tailored to the specific n-th intermediate distribution transition.
We found this parameter sharing to improve performance in practice. The HMC transition kernel
for each intermediate distribution is initialized with a step size of 1.0, where we set ϵshared = 0.1
and ϵ̂1:N −1 = 0.9. The step size is then tuned to target a Metropolis acceptance probability of
0.65. For the transition corresponding to each intermediate distribution, if the average acceptance
probability across the batch is greater than 0.65, we set ϵ̂n = 1.05ϵ̂n , and ϵshared = 1.02ϵshared . If
the average acceptance probability across a batch is lower than 0.65, we set ϵ̂n = ϵ̂n /1.05, and
ϵshared = ϵshared /1.02. Adapting shared parameters across the AIS forward pass violates Markov
property, as the transitions late in the MCMC chain will have a weak dependency on the earlier
transitions. However, the effect of this is minor as the step size changes are relatively small for each
run. For evaluation the AIS parameters are frozen, so it respects the Markov property.
In FAB with prioritized buffer, we use a total of L = 8 gradient update steps per AIS sampling step.
We initialise the buffer with 65, 536 samples from the initialized flow-AIS combination and use a
maximum buffer length of 512, 000. We do not use any clipping for wcorrection .
CRAFT specific details: For CRAFT we run our experiments with two different setups, which we
simply refer to as CRAFT (config 1) and CRAFT (config 2). The first uses a configuration that is
similar to the that of FAB in terms of the flow architecture, and MCMC. This CRAFT model uses
5 temperatures, and uses an auto-regressive affine flow. The second setup uses the configuration
provided in the CRAFT implementation at https://github.com/deepmind/annealed_
flow_transport, which uses neural spline flows, with 11 temperatures (10 flow/MCMC steps)
and HMC containing 10 leap-frog steps. We use the default HMC implementation and configuration
for CRAFT, which uses a fixed step sizes of 0.3 for the first half of the intermediate distributions
and 0.2 for the rest. Both models use 3 flow layers per temperature.

Table 7: Number of flow and target evaluations during training for each method on the Many Well
Problem. For SNF and CRAFT we report the number of model forward passes - each of which
contains multiple flow transport and MCMC steps.

                            Number of flow/model evaluations       Number of target evaluations
                              10
      Flow w/ ML            10                                     107
      Flow w/ Dα=2          1010                                   1010
      Flow w/ KLD           1010                                   1010
      Flow w/ RBD           1010                                   1010
      SNF w/ KLD            1010                                   2.5 × 1011
      CRAFT (config 1)      2.5 × 109                              1010
      CRAFT (config 2)      109                                    1010
      FAB w/o buffer        1010                                   1010
      FAB w/ buffer         1010                                   7.2 × 109


F.4   F URTHER R ESULTS

Figure 14 and Figure 15 show contour plots of 2D marginals from the 32 dimensional Many Well
target. The contours are for pairs of variables in the first four elements of x belonging to different
copies of the Double Well distribution. Each plot is obtained by scanning two variables while the
other ones are kept fixed to zero. These figures also shows samples from each analyzed method. FAB
based methods and the flow trained by maximum likelihood place samples at each of the modes in
the contour plots, while the other methods fail to do so.


                                                  31
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Figure 14: Target contours and model samples for 2D marginals over the first four elements of x in
the 32 dimensional Many Well Problem. The plots are for pairs of variables belonging to different
copies of the Double Well distribution. For Dα=2 (p∥qθ ) minimization with samples from the flow,
we plot results at iteration 56 of training as the final model samples were outside of the plotting
regions due to training instabilities.



                                                32
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Figure 15: Target contours and model samples for 2D marginals over the first four elements of x in
the 32 dimensional Many Well Problem for the Resampling Base Distribution (RBD) flow model
trained with the KL divergence.


                                               33
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


G     A LANINE DIPEPTIDE EXPERIMENTS


G.1    S ETUP


Coordinate transformation           Boltzmann generators usually do not operate on Cartesian coordi-
nates. In particular, Noé et al. (2019) introduced a coordinate transformation whereby a subset of
the coordinates are mapped to internal coordinates, i.e., bond lengths, bond angles, and dihedral
angles, see also Appendix G.1 and Figure 11 in (Stimper et al., 2022). The internal coordinates are
normalized and the respective means and standard deviations for these coordinates are computed on
samples from the target distribution generated with MD. For the remaining Cartesian coordinates,
principal component analysis is applied to the samples and the six coordinates with the lowest vari-
ance are eliminated. The rationale behind this is that the Boltzmann distribution is invariant in six
degrees of freedom, i.e., three of translation and three of rotation, and consequently, the correspond-
ing unnecessary coordinates should be removed. However, the mapping of vectors onto a fixed set
of principal components is generally neither invariant to translations nor to rotations, and, therefore,
the transformed coordinates do not satisfy these invariances. When training Boltzmann generators
with samples, this is not a problem since the flow will learn to generate molecular configurations
for a specific rotation or translation, but when only using the target distribution to train the flow, the
model will spend some of its capacity to sample different translational and rotational states, which
is unnecessary since they can easily be sampled independently. This will harm performance.
Instead, we transform all Cartesian coordinates to internal coordinates, which is a representation
invariant to translations and rotations. Since we do not want to use MD samples for our model,
we use the position with the minimum energy instead as shift and fix values for the scale when
normalizing the coordinates. The former can be easily estimated with gradient descent using less
than 100 steps. As scale parameters, we used 0.005 nm for the bond lengths, 0.15 rad for the bond
angles, and 0.2 rad for the dihedral angles. Coordinates which are treated as circular are not scaled.
Model architecture         We use Neural Spline Flows with rational quadratic splines having 8 bins
each. The parameter mapping is done through coupling (Durkan et al., 2019). Dihedral angles which
can freely rotate, e.g., because it is not a double bond, are treated as periodic coordinates (Rezende
et al., 2020). For these coordinates, we use a uniform base distribution, while we pick a Gaussian
for the other ones. The flow has 12 layers and the parameter maps are residual networks with one
residual block, while the two linear layers in each block have 256 hidden units. The flow layers were
initialized in a way that they correspond to the identity map.
One model uses a RBD, which has a residual network with two blocks having 512 hidden units per
layer as acceptance function. The truncation parameter is set to the common value T = 100.
The models trained with FAB do AIS with 8 intermediate distributions, which are linear interpola-
tions between the flow and target log-densities (Neal, 2001), where the latter one is unnormalized.
We use HMC with 4 Leapfrog steps as the MCMC operator in AIS. The same procedure is used
when we use AIS in the other baseline models, see Table 10, Figure 20, Figure 21, and Figure 24.
The HMC parameters are initialized and tuned using the same procedure as the Many Well problem,
see Appendix F.3. The SNF model does additionally 10 Metropolis-Hastings steps every two flow
layers. Since this renders sampling from this model already expensive, we do not do AIS with this
model.
Dataset Since the energy surface of alanine dipeptide in an implicit solvent has several modes of
different sizes with large energy barriers between them, see Figure 19, a very long MD simulation
would be required to obtain samples that represent the target distribution well. To get around this
problem, which is well known in computational physics and chemistry, we do a replica exchange
MD simulation (Mori & Okamoto, 2010), which is a parallel tempering technique (Earl & Deem,
2005). We use 21 replicas starting at a temperature of 300 K and increasing the temperature by
an increment of 50 K. The replicas are exchanged every 200 iterations and use the state at each
multiple of 1000 time steps as samples. To reduce the time it takes to generate the data, we run
many of these simulations in parallel with different seeds. Since the initial condition is always the
same, i.e., the position with minimum energy as it is usually done, we let the system equilibrate for
2 × 105 iterations and run the simulation subsequently for 2 × 106 iterations.

                                                   34
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Figure 16: Visualization of alanine dipeptide in its two chiral forms. In nature, we see almost
exclusively the L-form and, likewise, we aim to only generate samples of this form.


We split the data into 1) a training set, which consists of 106 samples and is only used to train the
baseline flow model with ML; 2) a validation set consisting of 106 samples as well, which is used to
find a suitable set of hyperparameters for our experiments; and 3) a test set with 107 samples, which
is used to evaluate all models.
To generate the training data alone we had to evaluate the target distribution and its gradients
2.3 × 1010 times, which is what we report as cost in terms of target evaluations in Table 8.
Filtering chiral forms      As mentioned in Section 4.2, alanine dipeptide is a chiral molecule, i.e.,
it can occur in two different forms that are mirror images of each other, see Figure 16. They cannot
be easily converted into each other as this would involve breaking existing and forming new bonds.
In nature, we find almost exclusively, while the D-form typically only exists in synthetically created
compounds. Hence, whenever alanine dipeptide is considered in the literature, it is almost always
as the L-form (Wu et al., 2020; Campbell et al., 2021; Stimper et al., 2022; Dibak et al., 2022;
Köhler et al., 2022). Therefore, we aim to train our model on only this form as well. However, since
the energy of the molecule does not change when creating a mirror image of it, models trained to
approximate its Boltzmann distribution will a priori learn to generate both forms.
The two forms can be separated by using the following procedure. The two chiral forms differ by
the positioning of the neighboring atoms at a chiral center, i.e., the center carbon atom. Hence, the
difference of the dihedral angles of those atoms with respect to a fixed reference will differ relative to
each other, i.e., their difference will change. Hence, we compute this difference and check whether
it is close to a reference configuration for which we know that it corresponds to the L-form. As
reference configuration, we use the position with minimum energy, which we already determined
for the coordinate transformation.
We use this procedure to filter the configurations generated by the flow model during training and
included only the samples that correspond to the L-form when computing the loss. Thereby, the
model learns to only generate this chiral form.
In Appendix G.2 we will investigate a model trained on both chiral forms and compare it to one that
was only trained on the L-form.
Training      All models were trained using the Adam optimizer (Kingma & Ba, 2015) with a batch
size of 1024. A learning rate of 5 × 10−4 is initially linearly warmed up over 1000 iterations and
decayed with a cosine annealing schedule over the course of training. We use a weight decay of
10−5 and clip gradients at a value of 103 . When training the models with the prioritized replay
buffer, we ensured a minimum buffer length of 64 batches and started replacing the oldest samples
once its length reached 512 batches.
Evaluation      To evaluate the models, we draw 107 samples from the models with and without
the use of AIS. Since there were some outliers of the importance weights due to flow numerics, we
took the 103 highest weights and clipped them to the lowest value in this set to compute the ESS


                                                   35
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


(Koblents & Mı́guez, 2015; Dibak et al., 2022). This corresponds to a fraction of 10−4 , or 0.01%,
of the weights. For the flow trained with the α-divergence with α = 2, the resulting ESS is close
to 10−4 , or 0.01%, indicating that the true ESS is even lower. We estimated the Ramachandran
plots, i.e., made a histogram of the dihedral angles ϕ and ψ, see Figure 3a, with 100 × 100 bins,
and used them to compute the KL divergence between the test samples and the samples from the
model. We repeated this with the reweighted samples, whereby we also used the clipped weights.
We computed the log-likelihood on the test set with the models, but we did not do so for the SNF, as
it only computes importance weights and does not directly estimate the density.
Computational cost The two main contributors to the computational expenses necessary to train
flows approximating Boltzmann distributions are the number of evaluations of the flow and the
target. Typically, we need both the value and the gradient and, hence, we regard obtaining them
as one operation. Moreover, the flows that we use take the same time for sampling and for pure
likelihood computation, which is why we regard them as the same operation as well. The flow with
RBD is an exception, as sampling from it is more expensive due to learned rejection sampling being
used in the base distribution. The number of flow and target evaluations for each model and training
procedure are listed in Table 8.
In general, we trained all models using an equal number of flow evaluations, with the exception of
SNF. SNF requires a large number of target evaluations due to the sampling layers. Because of this,
we reduced the number of flow evaluations done in total by this method.

Table 8: Number of flow and target evaluations needed to train the models. For the flow being trained
with ML on MD samples, we report the number of target evaluations that are needed to generate the
training dataset with MD. Our methods are marked in italic.

                             Number of flow evaluations     Number of target evaluations
                                      8
          Flow w/ ML         2.5 × 10                       2.3 × 1010
          Flow w/ Dα=2       2.5 × 108                      2.5 × 108
          Flow w/ KLD        2.5 × 108                      2.5 × 108
          RBD w/ KLD         2.5 × 108                      2.5 × 108
          SNF w/ KLD         6.0 × 107                      3.6 × 109
          FAB w/o buffer     2.5 × 108                      2.5 × 108
          FAB w/ buffer      2.5 × 108                      2.0 × 108

Computational resources and runtime To generate the MD dataset, we ran the replica exchange
MD simulations on servers with an Intel Xeon IceLake-SP 8360Y processors having 72 cores and
256 GB RAM. We used a total of 100 nodes which needed roughly 15.7h each adding up to about
113 kCPUh.
The flow models were trained on servers with an NVIDIA A100 GPU and an Intel Xeon IceLake-
SP 8360Y processor with 18 cores and 128 GB RAM. The training time for each model is listed in
Table 9. In total, we invested around 1.02 kGPUh in the experiments. Although training the flow
with ML is faster than training with FAB, note that generating the data for ML training with MD
requires an additional 9.4 kCPUh, which would take 131h when executed on one server.

Table 9: Runtime for training the models on the same server type as specified in the text. Our
methods are marked in italic.

                                                       Runtime
                                    Flow w/ ML         13.8h
                                    Flow w/ Dα=2       20.0h
                                    Flow w/ KLD        20.0h
                                    RBD w/ KLD         82.5h
                                    SNF w/ KLD         170h
                                    FAB w/o buffer     18.8h
                                    FAB w/ buffer      15.7h



                                                 36
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Figure 17: Marginal distribution of the dihedral angle ϕ for selected models. The visualized data is
the same as in Figure 3b, but here a normal scale instead of a log scale is used for the density.


Figure 18: Marginal distribution of the dihedral angles ψ and ϕ of a model which has been trained
on both chiral forms of the alanine dipeptide, i.e., the L- and D-form. We plot the density obtained
with all samples from the model in blue and separate the samples in the two forms, yielding the pink
and green curves. The distributions of the two forms are mirror images of each other.


G.2   F URTHER RESULTS

Model trained on both chiral forms         To demonstrate the importance of filtering for the L-form
during training, we trained a model on both chiral forms using FAB with a replay buffer with the
same setting as in the other experiments. We drew 107 samples from the model and found exactly
50% of them correspond to the L- and 50% to the D-form. As can be seen in Figure 18, the marginal
distributions of the dihedral angles ψ and ϕ for the two forms are mirror images of each other, while
the flow model, generating both forms, is a mixture of the two.
The log-likelihood on the test set is 210.80, which is 0.74 less than the corresponding model only
trained on the L-form. This is close to log(2) ≈ 0.69, i.e. the density is roughly by a factor of two
lower, confirming once more that the flow density is a mixture of the density of the two forms.
Model performance with AIS          As mentioned in the previous section, we do AIS with all our
trained models except the SNF, which already involves sampling layers. We adopt the same AIS
setting used for training the flow models with FAB, i.e., we use 8 intermediate distributions given
by linear interpolations between the flow and the target distributions and sample from them with
HMC performing 4 Leapfrog steps. For comparison, we provide the performance when using the
untrained base distribution of our flow as proposal for AIS. The results are shown in Table 10.
When comparing tables 2 and 10, we observe that AIS improves performance for those models that


                                                 37
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


approximate the target distribution at least fairly well. Again, the flow trained with FAB with a
replay buffer outperforms the baselines.

Table 10: ESS, and the KL divergence of the Ramachandran plots with and without reweighting
(RW) for flow models when sampling from them with AIS. The results are averages over 3 runs and
the standard error is given as uncertainty. Our methods are marked in italic and the highest ESS or
log-likelihood or lowest KL divergence values are emphasized in bold.

                           ESS (%)                     KLD                   KLD w/ RW
    Base untrained     0.013 ± 0.000             1.96 ± 0.00               8.5 ± 0.0
    Flow w/ ML          11.5 ± 0.5             (4.92 ± 2.13) × 10−3      (1.88 ± 0.75) × 10−2
    Flow w/ Dα=2       0.012 ± 0.000             2.52 ± 0.06              11.3 ± 0.2
    Flow w/ KLD           80 ± 8                 2.99 ± 0.19              2.95 ± 0.19
    RBD w/ KLD            61 ± 23                2.84 ± 0.05              2.81 ± 0.04
    FAB w/o buffer      70.6 ± 0.7              (2.65 ± 0.12) × 10−2     (2.45 ± 0.91) × 10−2
    FAB w/ buffer      96.7 ± 0.2              (2.53 ± 0.41) × 10−3     (2.17 ± 0.15) × 10−3

FAB with varying values of α In Appendix C.1, we derived a variant of FAB having an arbitrary
value for the α parameter of the α-divergence. Here, we want to investigate how the performance
of models trained with FAB changes as we vary α. Therefore, we leave the setup the same as used
in Section 4.2 and only changed the α parameter of FAB. The results when using a replay buffer
are given in Table 11 and without it they are reported in Table 12. We see that α = 2 outperforms
the other values in almost all performance metrics, no matter whether a replay buffer is used or not.
This justifies our theoretical arguments for picking α = 2 empirically.

Table 11: ESS, log-likelihood on the test set, and KL divergence (KLD) of Ramachandran plots
with and without reweighting (RW) for each method. Here, all models are trained with FAB using a
replay buffer, but we varied the value of α being used, see Appendix C.1. The results are averaged
over 3 runs and the standard error is given as uncertainty. Best results are emphasized in bold.

      α      ESS (%)        Ep(x) [log q(x)]             KLD                 KLD w/ RW
    0.25 0.021 ± 0.000       −546 ± 14            5.36 ± 0.72          10.9 ± 1.4
    0.5 0.023 ± 0.001        −606 ± 20            4.84 ± 0.95          10.4 ± 1.9
     1 0.027 ± 0.000          60.1 ± 9.0          2.79 ± 0.81          6.73 ± 1.76
    1.5 89.4 ± 0.3          211.49 ± 0.02        (1.44 ± 0.90) × 10−2 (1.52 ± 0.93) × 10−2
     2 92.8 ± 0.1          211.54 ± 0.00        (3.42 ± 0.45) × 10−3 (2.51 ± 0.39) × 10−3
     3 93.9 ± 1.1           211.49 ± 0.03        (2.58 ± 0.96) × 10−2 (2.19 ± 0.82) × 10−2


Table 12: ESS, log-likelihood on the test set, and KL divergence (KLD) of Ramachandran plots with
and without reweighting (RW) for each method. Here, all models are trained with FAB without a
replay buffer, but we varied the value of α being used, see Appendix C.1. The results are averaged
over 3 runs and the standard error is given as uncertainty. Best results are emphasized in bold.

       α     ESS (%)       Ep(x) [log q(x)]             KLD                 KLD w/ RW
     0.25 1.7 ± 0.3        198.71 ± 0.09         3.94 ± 0.40          8.45 ± 0.20
      0.5 9.4 ± 4.4         −192 ± 326           7.70 ± 5.59          7.99 ± 5.49
       1 15.8 ± 4.9        210.16 ± 0.40        (1.09 ± 0.19) × 10−1 (5.60 ± 0.75) × 10−2
      1.5 34.8 ± 3.6       210.87 ± 0.07        (7.72 ± 0.72) × 10−2 (4.04 ± 0.04) × 10−2
       2 52.2 ± 1.3       211.13 ± 0.03        (6.28 ± 0.33) × 10−2 (2.66 ± 0.90) × 10−2
       3 24.8 ± 4.6        210.48 ± 0.14        (1.31 ± 0.05) × 10−1 (3.88 ± 0.03) × 10−2

Ramachandran plots         Figure 19 shows the Ramachandran plot of the test set and Figure 20,
Figure 21, Figure 22, Figure 23, Figure 24, Figure 25, and Figure 26 show the Ramachandran plots
of all the models we trained for the first run, including the samples drawn from them via AIS.


                                                  38
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                         Figure 19: Ramachandran plot of the test data.


                    (a) Flow                                  (b) Flow, reweighted


                     (c) AIS                                  (d) AIS, reweighted

          Figure 20: Ramachandran plots of a flow trained with the α = 2-divergence.


                                               39
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                    (a) Flow                                 (b) Flow, reweighted


                     (c) AIS                                  (d) AIS, reweighted

            Figure 21: Ramachandran plots of a flow trained with the KL divergence.


                                               40
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                    (a) Flow                                (b) Flow, reweighted


                     (c) AIS                                 (d) AIS, reweighted

Figure 22: Ramachandran plots of a flow with a resampled base distribution trained with the KL
divergence.


                    (a) SNF                                  (b) SNF, reweighted

Figure 23: Ramachandran plots of a SNF trained with the KL divergence. Since the SNF already
has layers which do sampling, we did not do AIS with it.



                                               41
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                    (a) Flow                                (b) Flow, reweighted


                     (c) AIS                                (d) AIS, reweighted

                 Figure 24: Ramachandran plots of the flows trained with ML.


                                               42
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                     (a) Flow                                 (b) Flow, reweighted


                     (c) AIS                                   (d) AIS, reweighted

 Figure 25: Ramachandran plots of the flows trained with FAB without the use of a replay buffer.


                                               43
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                    (a) Flow                                  (b) Flow, reweighted


                     (c) AIS                                  (d) AIS, reweighted

  Figure 26: Ramachandran plots of the flows trained with FAB with the use of a replay buffer.


                                               44
