Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


I S ATTENTION A LL T HAT N E RF N EEDS ?
 Mukund Varma T1∗ , Peihao Wang2∗ , Xuxi Chen2 , Tianlong Chen2 ,
 Subhashini Venugopalan3 , Zhangyang Wang2
 1
  Indian Institute of Technology Madras, 2 University of Texas at Austin, 3 Google Research
 mukundvarmat@gmail.com, vsubhashini@google.com
 {peihaowang,xxchen,tianlong.chen,atlaswang}@utexas.edu



                                                A BSTRACT

              We present Generalizable NeRF Transformer (GNT), a transformer-based architec-
              ture that reconstructs Neural Radiance Fields (NeRFs) and learns to render novel
              views on the fly from source views. While prior works on NeRFs optimize a scene
              representation by inverting a handcrafted rendering equation, GNT achieves neural
              representation and rendering that generalizes across scenes using transformers
              at two stages. (1) The view transformer leverages multi-view geometry as an
              inductive bias for attention-based scene representation, and predicts coordinate-
              aligned features by aggregating information from epipolar lines on the neighboring
              views. (2) The ray transformer renders novel views using attention to decode the
              features from the view transformer along the sampled points during ray marching.
              Our experiments demonstrate that when optimized on a single scene, GNT can
              successfully reconstruct NeRF without an explicit rendering formula due to the
              learned ray renderer. When trained on multiple scenes, GNT consistently achieves
              state-of-the-art performance when transferring to unseen scenes and outperform
              all other methods by ~10% on average. Our analysis of the learned attention maps
              to infer depth and occlusion indicate that attention enables learning a physically-
              grounded rendering. Our results show the promise of transformers as a universal
              modeling tool for graphics. Please refer to our project page for video results:
              https://vita-group.github.io/GNT/


1        I NTRODUCTION
Neural Radiance Field (NeRF) (Mildenhall et al., 2020) and its follow-up works (Barron et al., 2021;
Zhang et al., 2020; Chen et al., 2022) have achieved remarkable success on novel view synthesis,
generating photo-realistic, high-resolution, and view-consistent scenes. Two key ingredients in NeRF
are, (1) a coordinate-based neural network that maps each spatial position to its corresponding color
and density, and (2) a differentiable volumetric rendering pipeline that composes the color and density
of points along each ray cast from the image plane to generate the target pixel color. Optimizing a
NeRF can be regarded as an inverse imaging problem that fits a neural network to satisfy the observed
views. Such training leads to a major limitation of NeRF, making it a time-consuming optimization
process for each scene (Chen et al., 2021a; Wang et al., 2021b; Yu et al., 2021).
Recent works Neuray (Liu et al., 2022), IBRNet (Wang et al., 2021b), and PixelNerf (Yu et al., 2021)
go beyond the coordinate-based network and rethink novel view synthesis as a cross-view image-
based interpolation problem. Unlike the vanilla NeRF that tediously fits each scene, these methods
synthesize a generalizable 3D representation by aggregating image features extracted from seen views
according to the camera and geometry priors. However, despite showing large performance gains,
they unexceptionally decode the feature volume to a radiance field, and rely on classical volume
rendering (Max, 1995; Levoy, 1988) to generate images. Note that the volume rendering equation
adopted in NeRF over-simplifies the optical modeling of solid surface (Yariv et al., 2021; Wang et al.,
2021a), reflectance (Chen et al., 2021c; Verbin et al., 2021; Chen et al., 2022), inter-surface scattering
and other effects. This implies that radiance fields along with volume rendering in NeRF are not a
universal imaging model, which may have limited the generalization ability of NeRFs as well.
     ∗
         Equal contribution.


                                                      1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


In this paper, we first consider the problem of transferable novel view synthesis as a two-stage
information aggregation process: the multi-view image feature fusion, followed by the sampling-
based rendering integration. Our key contributions come from using transformers (Vaswani et al.,
2017) for both these stages. Transformers have had resounding success in language modeling (Devlin
et al., 2018) and computer vision (Dosovitskiy et al., 2020) and their “self-attention” mechanism
can be thought of as a universal trainable aggregation function. In our case, for volumetric scene
representation, we train a view transformer, to aggregate pixel-aligned image features (Saito et al.,
2019) from corresponding epipolar lines to predict coordinate-wise features. For rendering a novel
view, we develop a ray transformer that composes the coordinate-wise point features along a traced
ray via the attention mechanism. These two form the Generalizable NeRF Transformer (GNT).
GNT simultaneously learns to represent scenes from source view images and to perform scene-
adaptive ray-based rendering using the learned attention mechanism. Remarkably, GNT predicts
novel views using the captured images without fitting per scene. Our promising results endorse that
transformers are strong, scalable, and versatile learning backbones for graphical rendering (Tewari
et al., 2020). Our key contributions are:

      1. A view transformer to aggregate multi-view image features complying with epipolar geome-
         try and to infer coordinate-aligned features.
      2. A ray transformer for a learned ray-based rendering to predict target color.
      3. Experiments to demonstrate that GNT’s fully transformer-based architecture achieves state-
         of-the-art results on complex scenes and cross-scene generalization.
      4. Analysis of the attention module showing that GNT learns to be depth and occlusion aware.

Overall, our combined Generalizable NeRF Transformer (GNT) demonstrates that many of the
inductive biases that were thought necessary for view synthesis (e.g. persistent 3D model, hard-coded
rendering equation) can be replaced with attention/transformer mechanisms.

2    R ELATED W ORK
Transformers (Vaswani et al., 2017) have emerged as a ubiquitous learning backbone that captures
long-range correlation for sequential data. It has shown remarkable success in language understanding
(Devlin et al., 2018; Dai et al., 2019; Brown et al., 2020), computer vision (Dosovitskiy et al., 2020;
Liu et al., 2021), speech (Gulati et al., 2020) and even protein structure (Jumper et al., 2021) amongst
others. In computer vision, (Dosovitskiy et al., 2020) were successful in demonstrating Vision
Transformers (ViT) for image classification. Subsequent works extended ViT to other vision tasks,
including object detection (Carion et al., 2020), segmentation (Chen et al., 2021b; Wang et al.,
2021c), video processing (Zhou et al., 2018a; Arnab et al., 2021), and 3D instance processing (Guo
et al., 2021; Lin et al., 2021). In this work, we apply transformers for view synthesis by learning to
reconstruct neural radiance fields and render novel views.
Neural Radiance Fields (NeRF) introduced by Mildenhall et al. (2020) synthesizes consistent and
photorealistic novel views by fitting each scene as a continuous 5D radiance field parameterized by an
MLP. Since then, several works have improved NeRFs further. For example, Mip-NeRF Barron et al.
(2021; 2022) efficiently addresses scale of objects in unbounded scenes, Nex (Wizadwongsa et al.,
2021) models large view dependent effects, others (Oechsle et al., 2021; Yariv et al., 2021; Wang
et al., 2021a) improve the surface representation, extend to dynamic scenes (Park et al., 2021a;b;
Pumarola et al., 2021) , introduce lighting and reflection modeling (Chen et al., 2021c; Verbin et al.,
2021), or leverage depth to regress from few views (Xu et al., 2022; Deng et al., 2022). Our work
aims to avoid per-scene training, similar to PixelNeRF (Yu et al., 2021), IBRNet (Wang et al., 2021b),
MVSNeRF (Chen et al., 2021a), and NeuRay (Liu et al., 2022) which train a cross-scene multi-view
aggregator and reconstruct the radiance field with a one-shot forward pass.

Transformer Meets Radiance Fields. Most similar to our work are NeRF methods that apply
transformers for novel view synthesis and generalize across scenes. IBRNet (Wang et al., 2021b)
processes sampled points on the ray using an MLP to predict color values and density features which
are then input to a transformer to predict density. Recently, NeRFormer (Reizenstein et al., 2021) and
Wang et al. (2022) use attention module to aggregate source views to construct feature volume with
epipolar geometry constraints. However, a key difference with our work is that, all of them decode


                                                   2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                      Scene Representation                    Neural Rendering

                                                                                           Photometric Loss
      Epipolar Line


                                                                             Pooling
      Cast Ray                                                     Ray
                         View                                  Transformer
                                                                                                Pred.                       GT     2
                      Transformer


                                                                                       Feature Encoder


                                                                                                                  DECODER
                                                                                                        ENCODER
                                                                                                                                   C


                                                                                       Source            Image
                                                                                                                             Image    Pos.
                                                                                       Views            Encoder
                                                        Target Views                                                         Feature Embed
            Source Views


Figure 1: Overview of Generalizable NeRF Transformer (GNT): 1) Identify source views for a given
target view, 2) Extract features for epipolar points using a trainable U-Net-like model, 3) For each ray
in the target view, sample points and directly predict target pixel’s color by aggregating view-wise
features (View Transformer) and across points along a ray (Ray Transformer).


the latent feature representation to point-wise color and density, and rely on classic volume rendering
to form the image, while our ray transformer learns to render the target pixel directly.
Other works, that use transformers but differ significantly in methodology or application, include
(Lin et al., 2022) which generates novel views from just a single image via a vision transformer
and SRT (Sajjadi et al., 2022b) which treats images and camera parameters in a latent space and
trains a transformer that directly maps camera pose embedding to the corresponding image without
any physical constraints. An alternative route formulates view synthesis as rendering a sparsely
observed 4D light field, rather than following NeRF’s 5D scene representation and volumetric
rendering. The recently proposed NLF (Suhail et al., 2021) uses an attention-based framework to
display light fields with view consistency, where the first transformer summarizes information on
epipolar lines independently and then fuses epipolar features using a second transformer. This differs
from GNT, where we aggregate across views, and are hence able to generalize across scenes which
NLF fails to do. Lately, GPNR (Suhail et al., 2022), which was developed concurrently with our
work, generalizes NLF (Suhail et al., 2021) by also enabling cross-view communication through the
attention mechanism.

3     M ETHOD : M AKE ATTENTION A LL THAT N E RF N EEDS
Overview. Given a set of N input views with known camera parameters {(Ii ∈ RH×W ×3 , Pi ∈
R3×4 )}Ni=1 , our goal is to synthesize novel views from arbitrary angles and also generalize to new
scenes. Our method can be divided into two stages: (1) construct the 3D representation from source
views on the fly in the feature space, (2) re-render the feature field at the specified angle to synthesize
novel views. Unlike PixelNeRF, IBRNet, MVSNeRF and Neuray that borrow classic volume
rendering for view synthesis after the first multi-view aggregation stage, we propose transformers
to model both stages. Our pipeline is depicted in Fig. 1. First, the view transformer aggregates
coordinate-aligned features from source views. To enforce multi-view geometry, we inject the
inductive bias of epipolar constraints into the attention mechanism. After obtaining the feature
representation of each point on the ray, the ray transformer composes point-wise features along the
ray to form the ray color. This pipeline constitutes GNT and it is trained end-to-end.

3.1    E PIPOLAR G EOMETRY C ONSTRAINED S CENE R EPRESENTATION
NeRF represents 3D scene as a radiance field F : (x, θ) 7→ (c, σ), where each spatial coordinate
x ∈ R3 together with the viewing direction θ ∈ [−π, π]2 is mapped to a color c ∈ R3 plus density
σ ∈ R+ tuple. Vanilla NeRF parameterizes the radiance field using an MLP, and recovers the scene
in a backward optimization fashion, inherently limiting NeRF from generalizing to new scenes.
Generalizable NeRFs (Yu et al., 2021; Wang et al., 2021b; Chen et al., 2021a) construct the radiance


                                                    3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


          NORM
                                                            NORM
                                                                         Multi-Layer Perceptrons (MLP)


                                                   FFN
                                      Addition

                                     Subtraction


                                                                                                         FFN
                                    Multiplication


                                                                                   NORM
                                    Concatenate

                                      Residual


                                                         Feed-Forward
                                                         Network (FFN)

                     (a) View Transformer                                      (b) Ray Transformer

Figure 2: Detailed network architectures of view transformer and ray transformer in GNT, where X
represents the epipolar features, X0 represents aggregated ray features, {x, d, ∆d} indicates point
coordinates, viewing direction, and relative directions of source views with respect to the target view.

field in a feed-forward scheme, directly encoding multi-view images into 3D feature space, and
decoding it to a color-density field.
In our work, we adopt the similar feed-forward fashion to convert multi-view images into 3D
representation, but instead of using physical variables (e.g., color and density), we model a 3D scene
as a coordinate-aligned feature field F : (x, θ) 7→ f ∈ Rd , where d is the dimension of the latent
space. We formulate the feed-forward scene representation as follows:
                                  F(x, θ) = V(x, θ; {I1 , · · · , IN }),                                       (1)
where V(·) is a function invariant to the permutation of input images to aggregate different views
{Ii , · · · , IN } into a coordinate-aligned feature field, and extracts features at a specific location. We
use transformers as a set aggregation function (Lee et al., 2019). However, plugging in attention to
globally attend to every pixel in the source images (Sajjadi et al., 2022b;a) is memory prohibitive and
lacks multi-view geometric priors. Hence, we use epipolar geometry as an inductive bias that restricts
each pixel to only attend to pixels that lie on the corresponding epipolar lines of the neighboring views.
Specifically, we first encode each view to be a feature map Fi = ImageEncoder(Ii ) ∈ RH×W ×d .
We expect the image encoder to extract not only shading information, but also material, semantics,
and local/global complex light transport via its multi-scale architecture (Ronneberger et al., 2015).
To obtain the feature representation at a position x, we first project x to every source image, and
interpolate the feature vector on the image plane. We then adopt a transformer (dubbed view
transformer) to combine all the feature vectors. Formally, this process can be written as below:
                 F(x, θ) = View-Transformer(F1 (Π1 (x), θ), · · · , FN (ΠN (x), θ)),                           (2)
where View-Transformer(·) is a transformer encoder (see Appendix A), Πi (x) projects x ∈ R3
onto the i-th image plane by applying extrinsic matrix, and Fi (z, θ) ∈ Rd computes the feature
vector at position z ∈ R2 via bilinear interpolation on the feature grids. We use the transformer’s
positional encoding γ(·) to concatenate the extracted feature vector with point coordinate, viewing
direction, and relative directions of source views with respect to the target view (similar to Wang
et al. (2021b)). The detailed implementation of view transformer is depicted in Fig. 2. We defer our
elaboration on its memory-efficient design to Appendix B. We argue that the view transformer can
detect occlusion through the pixel values like a stereo-matching algorithm and selectively aggregate
visible views (see details in Appendix E).

3.2   ATTENTION D RIVEN VOLUMETRIC R ENDERING
Volume rendering (App. Eq. 7), which simulates outgoing radiance from a volumetric field has been
regarded as a key knob of NeRF’s success. NeRF renders the color of a pixel by integrating the
color and density along the ray cast from that pixel. Existing works, including NeRF (Sec. 2), all use
handcrafted and simplified versions of this integration. However, one can regard volume rendering as
a weighted aggregation of all the point-wise output, in which the weights are globally dependent on
the other points for occlusion modeling. This aggregation can be learned by a transformer such that
point-wise colors can be mapped to token features, and attention scores correspond to transmittance
(the blending weights). This is how we model the ray transformer which is illustrated in Fig. 2b


                                                              4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023



Table 1: Comparison of GNT against SOTA methods for single scene rendering. LLFF Dataset
reports average scores on Orchids, Horns, Trex, Room, Leaves, Fern, Fortress.

      Models      PSNR↑    SSIM↑   LPIPS↓   Avg↓         Models   PSNR↑    SSIM↑    LPIPS↓   Avg↓
      LLFF         24.88   0.911    0.114   0.051        LLFF      23.93    0.798   0.212    0.896
      NeRF         31.01   0.947    0.081   0.025        NeRF      26.36    0.811   0.250    0.964
      MipNeRF      33.09   0.961    0.043   0.016        NeX       27.03    0.890   0.182    0.049
      NLF          33.85   0.981    0.024   0.011        NLF       28.03    0.917   0.129    0.038
      GNT          33.71   0.975    0.025   0.011        GNT       27.97    0.902   0.078    0.034

               (a) NeRF Synthetic Dataset               (b) Local Light Field Fusion (LLFF) Dataset

To render the color of a ray r = (o, d), we can compute a feature representation fi = F(xi , θ) ∈ Rd
for each point xi sampled on r. In addition to this, we also add position encoding of spatial location
and view direction into fi . We obtain the rendered color by feeding the sequence of {f1 , · · · , fM }
into the ray transformer, perform mean pooling over all the predicted tokens, and map the pooled
feature vector to RGB via an MLP:

            C(r) = MLP ◦ Mean ◦ Ray-Transformer(F(o + t1 d, θ), · · · , F(o + tM d, θ)),              (3)

where t1 , · · · , tM are uniformly sampled between near and far planes. Ray-Transformer is a stan-
dard transformer encoder, and its pseudocode implementation is provided in Appendix B. Rendering
on feature space utilizes rich geometric, optical, and semantic information, which are intractable
to be modeled explicitly. We argue that our ray transformer can automatically adjust the attention
distribution to control the sharpness of the reconstructed surface, and bake desirable lighting effects
from the illumination and material features. Moreover, by exerting the expressiveness of the image
encoder, the ray transformer can also overcome the limitation of ray casting and epipolar geometry
to simulate complex light transport (e.g., refraction, reflection, etc.). Interestingly, despite all in
latent space, we can also infer some explicit physical properties (such as depth) from ray transformer.
See Appendix E for depth cueing. We also involve discussion on the extension to auto-regressive
rendering and attention-based coarse-to-fine sampling in Appendix C.

4     E XPERIMENTS
We conduct experiments to compare GNT against state-of-the-art methods for novel view synthesis.
Our experiment settings include both per-scene optimization and cross-scene generalization.

4.1    I MPLEMENTATION D ETAILS
Source and Target View Sampling. Following IBRNet, we construct pairs of source and target
views for training by first selecting a target view, and then identifying a pool of k × N nearby views,
from which N views are randomly sampled as source views. This sampling strategy simulates various
view densities during training and therefore helps the network generalize better. During training, the
values for k and N are uniformly sampled at random from (1, 3) and (8, 12) respectively.

Training / Inference Details. We train both the feature extraction network and GNT end-to-end
on datasets of multi-view posed images using the Adam optimizer to minimize the mean-squared
error between predicted and ground truth RGB pixel values. The base learning rates for the feature
extraction network and GNT are 10−3 and 5 × 10−4 respectively, which decay exponentially over
training steps. For all our experiments, we train for 250,000 steps with 4096 rays sampled in each
iteration. Unlike most NeRF methods, we do not use separate coarse, fine networks and therefore
to bring GNT to a comparable experimental setup, we sample 192 coarse points per ray across all
experiments (unless otherwise specified).

Metrics. We use three widely adopted metrics: Peak Signal-to-Noise Ratio (PSNR), Structural Sim-
ilarity Index Measure (SSIM) (Wang et al., 2004), and the Learned Perceptual Image Patch Similarity
(LPIPS) (Zhang et al., 2018). We report the averages of each metric over different views in each
scene (for single-scene experiments) and across multiple scenes in each dataset
                                                                          √     (for generalization
experiments). We additionally report the geometric mean of 10−P SN R/10 , 1 − SSIM and LPIPS,
which provides a summary of the three metrics for easier comparison (Barron et al., 2021).


                                                    5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                (a) NeRF             (b) NLF              (c) GNT          (d) Ground Truth


                (a) NeRF           (b) MipNeRF            (c) GNT          (d) Ground Truth

Figure 3: Qualitative results for single-scene rendering. In the Orchids scene from LLFF (first row),
GNT recovers the shape of the leaves more accurately. In the Drums scene from Blender (second
row), GNT’s learnable renderer is able to model physical phenomena like specular reflections.

4.2   S INGLE S CENE R ESULTS
Datasets. To evaluate the single scene view generation capacity of GNT, we perform experiments
on datasets containing synthetic rendering of objects and real images of complex scenes. In these
experiments, we use the same resolution and train/test splits as NeRF (Mildenhall et al., 2020).
Local Light Field Fusion (LLFF) dataset: Introduced by Mildenhall et al. (2019), it consists of 8
forward facing captures of real-world scenes using a smartphone. We report average scores across
{Orchids, Horns, Trex, Room, Leaves, Fern, Fortress} and the metrics are summarized in Tab. 1b.
NeRF Synthetic Dataset: The synthetic dataset introduced by (Mildenhall et al., 2020) consists of
8, 360°scenes of objects with complicated geometry and realistic material. Each scene consists of
images rendered from viewpoints randomly sampled on a hemisphere around the object. Similar to
the experiments on the LLFF dataset, we report the average metrics across all eight scenes in Tab. 1a.

Discussion. We compare our GNT with LLFF , NeRF , MipNeRF , NeX , and NLF. Compared
to other methods, we utilize a smaller batch size (specifically GNT samples 4096 rays per batch
while NLF samples as much as 16384 rays per batch) and only sample coarse points fed into the
network in one single forward pass, unlike most methods that use a two-stage coarse-fine sampling
strategy. These hyperparameters have a strong correlation with the rendered image quality, leaving
our method at a disadvantage. Despite these differences, GNT still manages to outperform most
methods and performs on par when compared to SOTA NLF method on both LLFF and Synthetic
datasets. We provide a scene-wise breakdown of results on both these datasets in Appendix D (Tab.
6, 7). In complex scenes like Drums, Ship, and Leaves, GNT manages to outperform other methods
more substantially by 2.49 dB, 0.82 dB and 0.10 dB respectively. This indicates the effectiveness of
our attention-driven volumetric rendering to model complex conditions. Interestingly, even in the
worse performing scenes by PSNR (e.g. T-Rex), GNT achieves best perceptual metric scores across
all scenes in the LLFF dataset (i.e LPIPS ~27% ↓). This could be because PSNR fails to measure
structural distortions, blurring, has high sensitivity towards brightness, and hence does not effectively
measure visual quality. Similar inferences are discussed in Lin et al. (2022) regarding discrepancies in
PSNR scores and their correlation to rendered image quality. Fig. 3 provides qualitative comparisons
on the Orchids, Drums scene respectively and we can clearly see that GNT recovers the edge details
of objects (in the case of Orchids) and models complex lighting effect like specular reflection (in the
case of Drums) more accurately.

4.3   G ENERALIZATION TO U NSEEN S CENES
Datasets. GNT leverages multi-view features complying with epipolar geometry, enabling general-
ization to unseen scenes. We follow the experimental protocol in IBRNetto evaluate the cross-scene
generalization of GNT and use the following datasets for training and evaluation, respectively.


                                                   6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


          Table 2: Comparison of GNT against SOTA methods for cross-scene generalization.

                 Local Light Field Fusion (LLFF)            NeRF Synthetic                                                     Shiny-6 Dataset
    Models                                                                                   Setting          Models
                                                                                                                       PSNR↑   SSIM↑ LPIPS↓      Avg↓
                PSNR↑    SSIM↑    LPIPS↓    Avg↓    PSNR↑   SSIM↑   LPIPS↓       Avg↓
                                                                                                              NeRF     25.60   0.851    0.259    0.065
    PixelNeRF   18.66     0.588    0.463    0.159   22.65   0.808    0.202       0.078       Per-Scene        NeX      26.45   0.890    0.165    0.049
    MVSNeRF     21.18     0.691    0.301    0.108   25.15   0.853    0.159       0.057        Training        IBRNet   26.50   0.863    0.122    0.047
    IBRNet      25.17     0.813    0.200    0.064   26.73   0.908    0.101       0.040                        NLF      27.34   0.907    0.045    0.029
    NeuRay      25.35     0.818    0.198    0.062   28.29   0.927    0.080       0.032                        IBRNet   23.60   0.785    0.180    0.071
    GPNR        25.72     0.880    0.175    0.055   26.48   0.944    0.091       0.036       Generalization   GPNR     24.12   0.860    0.170    0.063
    GNT         25.86     0.867    0.116    0.047   27.29   0.937    0.056       0.029                        GNT      27.10   0.912    0.083    0.036


                    (a) Blender and LLFF Datasets                                                             (b) Shiny Dataset
(a) Training Datasets consists of both real, and synthetic data. For synthetic data, we use object
renderings of 1023 models from Google Scanned Object (Downs et al., 2022). For real data, we make
use of RealEstate10K (Zhou et al., 2018b), 100 scenes from the Spaces dataset (Flynn et al., 2019),
and 102 real scenes from handheld cellphone captures (Mildenhall et al., 2019; Wang et al., 2021b).
(b) Evaluation Datasets include the previously discussed Synthetic (Mildenhall et al., 2020), LLFF
datasets (Mildenhall et al., 2019) and Shiny-9 dataset (Wizadwongsa et al., 2021) with complex
optics. Please note that the LLFF scenes present in the validation set are not included in the handheld
cellphone captures in the training set.
Discussion. We compare our method with PixelNeRF (Yu et al., 2021), MVSNeRF (Chen et al.,
2021a), IBRNet (Wang et al., 2021b), and NeuRay (Liu et al., 2022). As seen from Tab. 2a, our method
outperforms SOTA by ~17% ↓, ~9% ↓ average scores in the LLFF, Synthetic datasets respectively.
This indicates the effectiveness of our proposed view transformer to extract generalizable scene
representations. Similar to the single scene experiments, we observe significantly better perceptual
metric scores 3% ↑ SSIM, 27% ↓ LPIPS in both datasets. We show qualitative results in Fig. 5
where GNT renders novel views with clearly better visual quality when compared to other methods.
Specifically, as seen from the second row in Fig. 5, GNT is able to handle regions that are sparsely
visible in the source views and generates images of comparable visual quality as NeuRay even with
no explicit supervision for occlusion. We also provide an additional comparison against SRT (Sajjadi
et al., 2022b) in Appendix D (Tab. 5), where our GNT significantly generalizes better.
GNT can learn to adapt to refraction and reflection in scenes. Encouraged by the promise
shown by GNT in modeling reflections in the Drums scene via pre-scene training, we further directly
evaluate pre-trained GNT on the Shiny dataset (Wizadwongsa et al., 2021), which contains several
challenging view-dependent effects, such as the rainbow reflections on a CD, and the refraction
through liquid bottles. Technically, the full formulation of volume rendering (radiative transfer
equation, as used in modern volume path tracers) is capable of handling all these effects. However,
standard NeRFs use a simplified formulation which does not simulate all physical effects, and hence
easily fail to capture these effects.
Tab. 2b presents the numerical results of GNT when generalizing to Shiny dataset. Notably, our GNT
outperforms state-of-the-art GPNR (Suhail et al., 2022) by 3dB in PSNR and ~40% in average metric.
Compared with per-scene optimized NeRFs, GNT outperforms many of them and even approaches
to the best performer NLF (Suhail et al., 2021) without any extra training. This further supports
our argument that cross-scene training can help learn a better renderer. Fig. 4 exhibits rendering
results on the two example scenes of Lab and CD. Compared to the baseline (NeX), GNT is able to
reconstruct complex refractions through test tube, and the interference patterns on the disk with higher
quality, indicating the strong flexibility and adaptivity of our learnable renderer. That “serendipity" is
intriguing to us, since the presence of refraction and scattering means that any technique that only
uses samples along a single ray will not be able to properly simulate the full light transport. We
conjecture GNT’s success in modeling those challenging physical scenes to be the full transformer


   (a) NeX              (b) NLF            (c) GNT           (d) GT                (a) NeX             (b) NLF            (a) GNT                (b) GT
Figure 4: Qualitative results of GNT for generalizable rendering on the the complex Shiny dataset,
that contains more refractions and reflection. A pre-trained GNT can naturally adapt to complex
refractions through test tube, and the interference patterns on the disk with higher quality.

                                                                             7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


architectures for not only rays but also views: the view encoder aggregates multi-ray information and
can in turn tune the ray encoding itself.


            (a) IBRNet              (b) NeuRay                (c) GNT            (d) Ground Truth
Figure 5: Qualitative results for the cross-scene rendering. On the unseen Flowers (first row) and
Fern (second row) scenes, GNT recovers the edges of petals and pillars more accurately than IBRNet
and visually comparable to NeuRay.

4.4   A BLATION S TUDIES
We conduct the following ablation studies on the Drums scene to validate our architectural designs.
One-Stage Transformer: We convert the point-wise epipolar features into one single sequence and
pass it through a “one-stage transformer” network with standard dot-product self-attention layers,
without considering our two-stage pipeline: view and ray aggregation.
Epipolar Agg. → View Agg.: Mov- Table 3: Ablation study of several components in GNT on the
ing to a two-stage transformer, we Drums scene from the Blender dataset. The indent indicates
train a network that first aggregates the studied setting is added upon the upper-level ones.
features from the points along the
epipolar lines followed by feature ag-    Model                                      PSNR↑ SSIM↑ LPIPS↓ Avg↓
gregation across epipolar lines on dif-   One-Stage Transformer                       21.80 0.862 0.152 0.072
                                          Two-Stage Transformer
ferent reference views (in contrast to      Epipolar Agg. → View Agg.                 21.57 0.863 0.153 0.073
                                            View Agg. → Ray Agg.
GNT’s first view aggregation then ray         Dot Product-Attention View Transformer  26.98 0.953 0.089 0.034
aggregation). This two-stage aggrega-         Subtraction-Attention View Transformer
                                                w/ Volumetric Rendering               24.24  0.92 0.076 0.043
tion resembles the strategies adopted           Learned Volumetric Rendering (Ours)   29.41 0.931 0.085 0.029
in NLF (Suhail et al., 2021).
Dot Product-Attention View Transformer: Next we train a network that uses the standard dot-
product attention in the view transformer blocks, in contrast to our proposed memory-efficient
subtraction-based attention (see Appendix B).
w/ Volumetric Rendering: Last but not least, we train a network to predict per-point RGB and
density values from the point feature output by the view aggregator, and compose them using the
volumetric rendering equation, instead of our learned attention-driven volumetric renderer.
We report the performance of the above investigation in Tab. 3. We verify that our design of two-stage
transformer is superior to one-stage aggregation or an alternative two-stage pipeline (Suhail et al.,
2021) since our renderer strictly complies with the multi-view geometry. Compared with dot-product
attention, subtraction-based attention achieves slightly higher overall scores. This also indicates
the performance of GNT does not heavily rely on the choice of attention operation. What matters
is bringing in the attention mechanism for cross-point interaction. For practical usage, we also
consider the memory efficiency in our view transformer. Our ray transformer outperforms the classic
volumetric rendering, implying the advantage of adopting a data-driven renderer.


                                                     8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                      (a) Trex                                          (b) Horns
Figure 7: Visualization of ray attention where each color indicates the distance of each pixel relative
to the viewing direction. GNT’s ray transformer computes point-wise aggregation weights from
which the depth can be inferred. Red indicates far while blue indicates near.
4.5   I NTERPRETATION ON ATTENTION M APS
The use of transformers as a core element in
GNT enables interpretation by analyzing the
attention weights. As discussed earlier, view
transformer finds correspondence between the
queried points, and neighboring views which
enables it to pay attention to more “visible”                                    10
views or be occlusion-aware. Similarly, the ray
transformer captures point-to-point interactions
which enable it to model the relative importance
of each point or be depth-aware. We validate
                                                                                      1
our hypothesis by visualization.
                                                            8

View Attention. To visualize the view-wise
attention maps learned by our model, we use
the attention matrix from Eq. 9 and collapse the                        7        4
channel dimension by performing mean pooling.
We then identify the view number which is as- Figure 6: Visualization of view attention where
signed maximum attention with respect to each each color indicates the view number that has max-
point and then compute the most repeating view imum correspondence with a target pixel. GNT’s
number across points along a ray (by computing view transformer learns to map each object region
mode). These “view importance” values denote in the target view to its corresponding regions in
the view which has maximum correspondence the source views which are least occluded.
with the target pixel’s color. Fig. 6 visualizes the source view correspondence with every pixel in the
target view. Given a region in the target view, GNT attempts to pay maximum attention to a source
view that is least occluded in the same region. For example: In Fig. 6, the truck’s bucket is most
visible from view number 8, hence the regions corresponding to the same are orange colored, while
regions towards the front of the lego are most visible from view number 7 (yellow).
Ray Attention. To visualize the attention maps across points in a ray, we use the attention matrix
from Eq. 4 and collapse the head dimension by performing mean pooling. From the derived matrix,
we select a point and extract its relative importance with every other point. We then compute a
depth map from these learned point-wise correspondence values by multiplying it with the marching
distance of each point and sum-pooling along a ray. Fig. 7 plots the depth maps computed from the
learned attention values in the ray transformer block. We can clearly see that the obtained depth maps
have a physical meaning i.e pixels closer to the view directions are blue while the ones farther away
are red. Therefore, with no explicit supervision, GNT learns to physically ground its attention maps.

5     C ONCLUSION
We present Generalizable NeRF Transformer (GNT), a pure transformer-based architecture that
efficiently reconstructs NeRFs on the fly. The view transformer of GNT leverages epipolar geometry
as an inductive bias for scene representation. The ray transformer renders novel views by ray marching
and decoding the sequences of sampled point features using the attention mechanism. Extensive
experiments demonstrate that GNT improves both single-scene and cross-scene training results,
and demonstrates “out of the box” promise for refraction and reflection scenes. We also show by
visualization that depth and occlusion can be inferred from attention maps. This implies that pure
attention can be a “universal modeling tool” for the physically-grounded rendering process. Future
directions include relaxing the epipolar constraints to simulate more complicated light transport.


                                                   9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We thank Pratul Srinivasan for his comments on a draft of this work.

R EFERENCES
Anurag Arnab, Mostafa Dehghani, Georg Heigold, Chen Sun, Mario Lučić, and Cordelia Schmid.
 Vivit: A video vision transformer. In IEEE International Conference on Computer Vision (ICCV),
  2021.
Jonathan T Barron, Ben Mildenhall, Matthew Tancik, Peter Hedman, Ricardo Martin-Brualla, and
  Pratul P Srinivasan. Mip-nerf: A multiscale representation for anti-aliasing neural radiance fields.
  In IEEE International Conference on Computer Vision (ICCV), 2021.
Jonathan T Barron, Ben Mildenhall, Dor Verbin, Pratul P Srinivasan, and Peter Hedman. Mip-nerf
  360: Unbounded anti-aliased neural radiance fields. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference
  on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 5470–5479, 2022.
Tom B Brown, Benjamin Mann, Nick Ryder, Melanie Subbiah, Jared Kaplan, Prafulla Dhariwal,
  Arvind Neelakantan, Pranav Shyam, Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, et al. Language models are
  few-shot learners. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS), 2020.
Nicolas Carion, Francisco Massa, Gabriel Synnaeve, Nicolas Usunier, Alexander Kirillov, and Sergey
  Zagoruyko. End-to-end object detection with transformers. In European Conference on Computer
  Vision (ECCV), 2020.
Anpei Chen, Zexiang Xu, Fuqiang Zhao, Xiaoshuai Zhang, Fanbo Xiang, Jingyi Yu, and Hao
  Su. Mvsnerf: Fast generalizable radiance field reconstruction from multi-view stereo. In IEEE
 International Conference on Computer Vision (ICCV), 2021a.
Hanting Chen, Yunhe Wang, Tianyu Guo, Chang Xu, Yiping Deng, Zhenhua Liu, Siwei Ma, Chunjing
  Xu, Chao Xu, and Wen Gao. Pre-trained image processing transformer. In IEEE Conference on
  Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), 2021b.
Hao Chen, Bo He, Hanyu Wang, Yixuan Ren, Ser Nam Lim, and Abhinav Shrivastava. Nerv: Neural
  representations for videos. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 34, 2021c.
Tianlong Chen, Peihao Wang, Zhiwen Fan, and Zhangyang Wang. Aug-nerf: Training stronger
  neural radiance fields with triple-level physically-grounded augmentations. In IEEE Conference
  on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), 2022.
Zihang Dai, Zhilin Yang, Yiming Yang, Jaime Carbonell, Quoc V Le, and Ruslan Salakhutdinov.
  Transformer-xl: Attentive language models beyond a fixed-length context. In Annual Meeting of
  the Association for Computational Linguistics (ACL), 2019.
Kangle Deng, Andrew Liu, Jun-Yan Zhu, and Deva Ramanan. Depth-supervised nerf: Fewer views
  and faster training for free. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and
  Pattern Recognition, pp. 12882–12891, 2022.
Jacob Devlin, Ming-Wei Chang, Kenton Lee, and Kristina Toutanova. Bert: Pre-training of deep
  bidirectional transformers for language understanding. arXiv:1810.04805, 2018.
Yikang Ding, Wentao Yuan, Qingtian Zhu, Haotian Zhang, Xiangyue Liu, Yuanjiang Wang, and
  Xiao Liu. Transmvsnet: Global context-aware multi-view stereo network with transformers. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2111.14600, 2021.
Alexey Dosovitskiy, Lucas Beyer, Alexander Kolesnikov, Dirk Weissenborn, Xiaohua Zhai, Thomas
  Unterthiner, Mostafa Dehghani, Matthias Minderer, Georg Heigold, Sylvain Gelly, et al. An image
  is worth 16x16 words: Transformers for image recognition at scale. In International Conference
  on Learning Representations (ICLR), 2020.
Laura Downs, Anthony Francis, Nate Koenig, Brandon Kinman, Ryan Hickman, Krista Reymann,
  Thomas B McHugh, and Vincent Vanhoucke. Google scanned objects: A high-quality dataset of
  3d scanned household items. arXiv e-prints, pp. arXiv–2204, 2022.


                                                 10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Zhiwen Fan, Tianlong Chen, Peihao Wang, and Zhangyang Wang. Cadtransformer: Panoptic symbol
  spotting transformer for cad drawings. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer
  Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 10986–10996, 2022.

John Flynn, Michael Broxton, Paul Debevec, Matthew DuVall, Graham Fyffe, Ryan Overbeck,
  Noah Snavely, and Richard Tucker. Deepview: View synthesis with learned gradient descent.
  In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp.
  2367–2376, 2019.

Anmol Gulati, James Qin, Chung-Cheng Chiu, Niki Parmar, Yu Zhang, Jiahui Yu, Wei Han, Shibo
 Wang, Zhengdong Zhang, Yonghui Wu, et al. Conformer: Convolution-augmented transformer for
  speech recognition. arXiv preprint arXiv:2005.08100, 2020.

Meng-Hao Guo, Jun-Xiong Cai, Zheng-Ning Liu, Tai-Jiang Mu, Ralph R Martin, and Shi-Min Hu.
 Pct: Point cloud transformer. Computational Visual Media, 2021.

John Jumper, Richard Evans, Alexander Pritzel, Tim Green, Michael Figurnov, Olaf Ronneberger,
  Kathryn Tunyasuvunakool, Russ Bates, Augustin Žídek, Anna Potapenko, et al. Highly accurate
  protein structure prediction with alphafold. Nature, 2021.

Hiroharu Kato, Yoshitaka Ushiku, and Tatsuya Harada. Neural 3d mesh renderer. In Proceedings of
  the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition, pp. 3907–3916, 2018.

Juho Lee, Yoonho Lee, Jungtaek Kim, Adam Kosiorek, Seungjin Choi, and Yee Whye Teh. Set trans-
  former: A framework for attention-based permutation-invariant neural networks. In International
  conference on machine learning, pp. 3744–3753. PMLR, 2019.

Marc Levoy. Display of surfaces from volume data. IEEE Computer graphics and Applications, 8(3):
 29–37, 1988.

Kai-En Lin, Lin Yen-Chen, Wei-Sheng Lai, Tsung-Yi Lin, Yi-Chang Shih, and Ravi Ramamoorthi.
  Vision transformer for nerf-based view synthesis from a single input image. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2207.05736, 2022.

Kevin Lin, Lijuan Wang, and Zicheng Liu. End-to-end human pose and mesh reconstruction with
  transformers. In IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), 2021.

Yuan Liu, Sida Peng, Lingjie Liu, Qianqian Wang, Peng Wang, Christian Theobalt, Xiaowei Zhou,
  and Wenping Wang. Neural rays for occlusion-aware image-based rendering. In CVPR, 2022.

Ze Liu, Yutong Lin, Yue Cao, Han Hu, Yixuan Wei, Zheng Zhang, Stephen Lin, and Baining Guo.
  Swin transformer: Hierarchical vision transformer using shifted windows. In Proceedings of the
  IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision, pp. 10012–10022, 2021.

Nelson Max. Optical models for direct volume rendering. IEEE Transactions on Visualization and
  Computer Graphics (TVCG), 1995.

Ben Mildenhall, Pratul P Srinivasan, Rodrigo Ortiz-Cayon, Nima Khademi Kalantari, Ravi Ra-
  mamoorthi, Ren Ng, and Abhishek Kar. Local light field fusion: Practical view synthesis with
  prescriptive sampling guidelines. ACM Transactions on Graphics (TOG), 38(4):1–14, 2019.

Ben Mildenhall, Pratul P Srinivasan, Matthew Tancik, Jonathan T Barron, Ravi Ramamoorthi, and
  Ren Ng. Nerf: Representing scenes as neural radiance fields for view synthesis. In European
  conference on computer vision, pp. 405–421. Springer, 2020.

Michael Oechsle, Songyou Peng, and Andreas Geiger. Unisurf: Unifying neural implicit surfaces
 and radiance fields for multi-view reconstruction. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International
 Conference on Computer Vision, pp. 5589–5599, 2021.

Keunhong Park, Utkarsh Sinha, Jonathan T. Barron, Sofien Bouaziz, Dan B Goldman, Steven M.
  Seitz, and Ricardo Martin-Brualla. Nerfies: Deformable neural radiance fields. ICCV, 2021a.


                                               11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Keunhong Park, Utkarsh Sinha, Peter Hedman, Jonathan T Barron, Sofien Bouaziz, Dan B Goldman,
  Ricardo Martin-Brualla, and Steven M Seitz. Hypernerf: A higher-dimensional representation for
  topologically varying neural radiance fields. In ACM Conference and Exhibition on Computer
  Graphics and Interactive Techniques in Asia (SIGGRAPH Asia), 2021b.
Albert Pumarola, Enric Corona, Gerard Pons-Moll, and Francesc Moreno-Noguer. D-nerf: Neural
  radiance fields for dynamic scenes. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer
  Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 10318–10327, 2021.
Jeremy Reizenstein, Roman Shapovalov, Philipp Henzler, Luca Sbordone, Patrick Labatut, and David
   Novotny. Common objects in 3d: Large-scale learning and evaluation of real-life 3d category
   reconstruction. In International Conference on Computer Vision, 2021.
Olaf Ronneberger, Philipp Fischer, and Thomas Brox. U-net: Convolutional networks for biomedical
  image segmentation. In International Conference on Medical image computing and computer-
  assisted intervention, pp. 234–241. Springer, 2015.
Shunsuke Saito, Zeng Huang, Ryota Natsume, Shigeo Morishima, Angjoo Kanazawa, and Hao Li.
  Pifu: Pixel-aligned implicit function for high-resolution clothed human digitization. In Proceedings
  of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision, pp. 2304–2314, 2019.
Mehdi SM Sajjadi, Daniel Duckworth, Aravindh Mahendran, Sjoerd van Steenkiste, Filip Pavetić,
 Mario Lučić, Leonidas J Guibas, Klaus Greff, and Thomas Kipf. Object scene representation
 transformer. arXiv preprint arXiv:2206.06922, 2022a.
Mehdi SM Sajjadi, Henning Meyer, Etienne Pot, Urs Bergmann, Klaus Greff, Noha Radwan, Suhani
 Vora, Mario Lučić, Daniel Duckworth, Alexey Dosovitskiy, et al. Scene representation transformer:
 Geometry-free novel view synthesis through set-latent scene representations. In Proceedings of
 the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 6229–6238, 2022b.
Vincent Sitzmann, Semon Rezchikov, Bill Freeman, Josh Tenenbaum, and Fredo Durand. Light field
  networks: Neural scene representations with single-evaluation rendering. Advances in Neural
  Information Processing Systems, 34, 2021.
Mohammed Suhail, Carlos Esteves, Leonid Sigal, and Ameesh Makadia. Light field neural rendering.
 arXiv preprint arXiv:2112.09687, 2021.
Mohammed Suhail, Carlos Esteves, Leonid Sigal, and Ameesh Makadia. Generalizable patch-based
 neural rendering. arXiv preprint arXiv:2207.10662, 2022.
Ayush Tewari, Ohad Fried, Justus Thies, Vincent Sitzmann, Stephen Lombardi, Kalyan Sunkavalli,
  Ricardo Martin-Brualla, Tomas Simon, Jason Saragih, Matthias Nießner, et al. State of the art on
  neural rendering. In Computer Graphics Forum, volume 39, pp. 701–727. Wiley Online Library,
  2020.
Ashish Vaswani, Noam Shazeer, Niki Parmar, Jakob Uszkoreit, Llion Jones, Aidan N Gomez, Łukasz
  Kaiser, and Illia Polosukhin. Attention is all you need. In Advances in neural information
  processing systems (NeurIPS), 2017.
Dor Verbin, Peter Hedman, Ben Mildenhall, Todd Zickler, Jonathan T Barron, and Pratul P Srini-
 vasan. Ref-nerf: Structured view-dependent appearance for neural radiance fields. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2112.03907, 2021.
Dan Wang, Xinrui Cui, Septimiu Salcudean, and Z Jane Wang. Generalizable neural radiance fields
  for novel view synthesis with transformer. arXiv preprint arXiv:2206.05375, 2022.
Peng Wang, Lingjie Liu, Yuan Liu, Christian Theobalt, Taku Komura, and Wenping Wang. Neus:
  Learning neural implicit surfaces by volume rendering for multi-view reconstruction. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2106.10689, 2021a.
Qianqian Wang, Zhicheng Wang, Kyle Genova, Pratul P Srinivasan, Howard Zhou, Jonathan T Barron,
  Ricardo Martin-Brualla, Noah Snavely, and Thomas Funkhouser. Ibrnet: Learning multi-view
  image-based rendering. In IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR),
  2021b.


                                                 12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Yuqing Wang, Zhaoliang Xu, Xinlong Wang, Chunhua Shen, Baoshan Cheng, Hao Shen, and Huaxia
  Xia. End-to-end video instance segmentation with transformers. In IEEE Conference on Computer
  Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), 2021c.
Zhou Wang, Alan C Bovik, Hamid R Sheikh, and Eero P Simoncelli. Image quality assessment: from
  error visibility to structural similarity. IEEE transactions on image processing, 13(4):600–612,
  2004.
Suttisak Wizadwongsa, Pakkapon Phongthawee, Jiraphon Yenphraphai, and Supasorn Suwajanakorn.
  Nex: Real-time view synthesis with neural basis expansion. In IEEE Conference on Computer
  Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), 2021.
Dejia Xu, Yifan Jiang, Peihao Wang, Zhiwen Fan, Humphrey Shi, and Zhangyang Wang. Sin-
  nerf: Training neural radiance fields on complex scenes from a single image. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2204.00928, 2022.
Zhenpei Yang, Zhile Ren, Qi Shan, and Qixing Huang. Mvs2d: Efficient multi-view stereo via
  attention-driven 2d convolutions. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision
  and Pattern Recognition, pp. 8574–8584, 2022.
Yao Yao, Zixin Luo, Shiwei Li, Tian Fang, and Long Quan. Mvsnet: Depth inference for unstructured
  multi-view stereo. In Proceedings of the European conference on computer vision (ECCV), pp.
  767–783, 2018.
Lior Yariv, Jiatao Gu, Yoni Kasten, and Yaron Lipman. Volume rendering of neural implicit surfaces.
  Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 34, 2021.
Alex Yu, Vickie Ye, Matthew Tancik, and Angjoo Kanazawa. pixelnerf: Neural radiance fields from
  one or few images. In IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR),
  2021.
Kai Zhang, Gernot Riegler, Noah Snavely, and Vladlen Koltun. Nerf++: Analyzing and improving
  neural radiance fields. arXiv preprint arXiv:2010.07492, 2020.
Richard Zhang, Phillip Isola, Alexei A Efros, Eli Shechtman, and Oliver Wang. The unreasonable
  effectiveness of deep features as a perceptual metric. In Proceedings of the IEEE conference on
  computer vision and pattern recognition, pp. 586–595, 2018.
Hengshuang Zhao, Li Jiang, Jiaya Jia, Philip HS Torr, and Vladlen Koltun. Point transformer. In
  Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision, pp. 16259–16268,
  2021.
Ellen D Zhong, Tristan Bepler, Bonnie Berger, and Joseph H Davis. Cryodrgn: reconstruction of
  heterogeneous cryo-em structures using neural networks. Nature Methods, 18(2):176–185, 2021.
Luowei Zhou, Yingbo Zhou, Jason J Corso, Richard Socher, and Caiming Xiong. End-to-end dense
  video captioning with masked transformer. In IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
  Recognition (CVPR), 2018a.
Tinghui Zhou, Richard Tucker, John Flynn, Graham Fyffe, and Noah Snavely. Stereo magnification:
  Learning view synthesis using multiplane images. arXiv preprint arXiv:1805.09817, 2018b.


                                               13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


A    P RELIMINARIES
Self-Attention and Transformer. Multi-Head Self-Attention (MHA) is the key ingredient of
transformers (Vaswani et al., 2017). Data is first tokenized into sequences and a pairwise score is
computed to weight the relation of each token with all the others in a given input context. Formally,
let X ∈ RN ×d represent some sequential data with N tokens of d-dimension. A self-attention layer
transforms the feature matrix as below:
              Attn(X) = softmax(A)fV (X), where Ai,j = α(Xi , Xj ), ∀i, j ∈ [N ]                      (4)
where A ∈ RN ×N is called the attention matrix, softmax(·) operation normalizes the attention
matrix row-wise, and α(·) represents a pair-wise relation function, most commonly the dot-product
α(Xi , Xj ) = fQ (Xi )⊤ fK (Xj )/γ, where fQ (·), fK (·), fV (·) are called query, key, and value
mapping functions. In a standard transformer, they are chosen as fully-connected layers. This
self-attention is akin to an aggregation operation. Multi-Head Self-Attention (MHA) sets a group of
self-attention blocks, and adopts a linear layer to project them onto the output space:
                   MHA(X) = [Attn1 (X)          Attn2 (X) · · ·     AttnH (X)] WO                     (5)
Following an MHA block, one standard layer of transformer also adopts a Feed-Forward Network
(FFN) to do point-wise feature transformation, as well as skip connection and layer normalization to
stablize training. The whole transformer block can be formulated as below:
             X̃ = MHA(LayerNorm(X)) + X,                Y = FFN(LayerNorm(X̃)) + X̃                   (6)

Neural Radiance Field. NeRFs (Mildenhall et al., 2020) converts multi-view images into a radiance
field and interpolates novel views by re-rendering the radiance field from a new angle. Technically,
NeRF models the underlying 3D scene as a continuous radiance field F : (x, θ) 7→ (c, σ) parameter-
ized by a Multi-Layer Perceptron (MLP) Θ, which maps a spatial coordinate x ∈ R3 together with
the viewing direction θ ∈ [−π, π]2 to a color c ∈ R3 plus density σ ∈ R+ tuple. To form an image,
NeRF performs the ray-based rendering, where it casts a ray r = (o, d) from the optical center
o ∈ R3 through each pixel (towards direction d ∈ R3 ), and then leverages volume rendering (Max,
1995) to compose the color and density along the ray between the near-far planes:
                      Z tf                                                 Z t
          C(r|Θ) =         T (t)σ(r(t))c(r(t), d)dt, where T (t) = exp −        σ(s)ds ,        (7)
                        tn                                                        tn

where r(t) = o + td, tn and tf are the near and far planes respectively. In practice, the Eq. 7 is
numerically estimated using quadrature rules (Mildenhall et al., 2020). Given images captured from
surrounding views with known camera parameters, NeRF fits the radiance field by maximizing the
likelihood of simulated results. Suppose we collect all pairs of rays and pixel colors as the training set
D = {(ri , Cbi )}N , where N is the total number of rays sampled, and C    bi denotes the ground-truth
                 i=1
color of the i-th ray, then we train the implicit representation Θ via the following loss function:
                                                                2
                              L(Θ|R) = E(r,C)∈D
                                           b    ∥C(r|Θ) − C(r)∥
                                                          b
                                                                2,                                    (8)

B    I MPLEMENTATION D ETAILS
Memory-Efficient Cross-View Attention. Computing attention between every pair of inputs has
O(N 2 ) memory complexity, which is computational prohibitive when sampling thousands of points
at the same time. Nevertheless, we note that view transformer only needs to read out one token as the
fused results of all the views. Therefore, we propose to only place one read-out token X0 ∈ Rd in
the query sequence, and let it iteratively summarize features from other data points. This reduces
the complexity for each layer up to O(N ). We initialize the read-out token as the element-wise max-
pooling of all the inputs: X0 = max(F1 (Π1 (x), θ), · · · , FN (ΠN (x), θ)). Rather than adopting a
standard dot-product attention, we choose subtraction operation as the relation function. Subtraction
attention has been shown more effective for positional and geometric relationship reasoning (Zhao
et al., 2021; Fan et al., 2022). Compared with dot-product that collapses the feature dimension into a
scalar, subtraction attention computes different attention scores for every channel of the value matrix,
which increases diversity in feature interactions. Moreover, we augment the attention map and value


                                                   14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


matrix with {∆d}N  i=1 to provide relative spatial context. Technically, we utilize a linear layer WP to
lift ∆di to the hidden dimension. We illustrate view transformer in Fig. 2a. To be more specific, the
modified attention adopted in our view transformer can be formulated as:
    View-Attn(X) = diag(softmax(A + ∆⊤ )fV (X + ∆)), where Aj = fQ (X0 ) − fK (Xj ),
                                                                                   (9)
                                                                              ⊤
where Aj ∈ Rd denotes the j-th column of A, ∆ = [∆d1 · · · ∆dN ] WP ∈ RN ×d , fQ , fK ,
and fV are parameterized by an MLP. We note that by applying diag(·), we read out the updated
query token X0 . See Alg. 1 for the implementation in practice.

Network Architecture. To extract features from the source views, we use a U-Net-like architecture
with a ResNet34 encoder, followed by two up-sampling layers as decoder.Each view transformer
block contains a single-headed cross-attention layer while the ray transformer block contains a
multi-headed self-attention layer with four heads. The outputs from these attention layers are passed
onto corresponding feedforward blocks with a Rectified Linear Unit (RELU) activation and a hidden
dimension of 256. A residual connection is applied between the pre-normalized inputs (LayerNorm)
and outputs at each layer. For all our single-scene experiments, we alternatively stack 4 view and ray
transformer blocks while our larger generalization experiments use 8 blocks each. All transformer
blocks (view and ray) are of dimension 64. Following Vaswani et al. (2017); Mildenhall et al. (2020);
Zhong et al. (2021), we convert the low-dimensional coordinates to a high-dimensional representation
using Fourier components, where the number of frequencies is selected as 10 for all our experiments.
The derived view and position embeddings are each of dimension 63.

Algorithm 1 Cross View Attention: PyTorch-like Pseudocode
    X0 → coordinate aligned features(Nrays , Npts , D)
    Xj → epipolar view features(Nrays , Npts , Nviews , D)
    ∆d → relative directions of source views wrt target views(Nrays , Npts , Nviews , 3)
    fQ , fK , fV , fP , fA , fO → functions that parameterize MLP layers

    Q = fQ (X0 )
    K = fK (Xj )
    V = fV (Xj )

    P = fP (∆d)
    A = K − Q[:, :, None, :] + P
    A = softmax(A, dim = −2)

    O = ((V + P ) · A). sum(dim = 2)
    O = fO (O)


Pseudocode. We provide a simple and efficient pytorch pseudo-code to implement the attention
operations in the view, ray transformer blocks in Alg. 1, 2 respectively. We do not indicate the
feedforward and layer normalization operations for simplicity. As seen in Alg. 3, we reuse the
epipolar view features Xj to derive keys, and values across view transformer blocks. Therefore,
one could further improve efficiency by computing them only once while also sharing the network
weights across view transformer blocks or simply put fview i (.) represents the same function across
different values of i. This can be considered analogous to an unfolded recurrent neural network that
updates itself iteratively but using the same weights.

C     T ENTATIVE E XTENSIONS
C.1     AUTO -R EGRESSIVE D ECODING

The final rendered color is obtained by mean-pooling the outputs from the ray transformer block, and
mapping the pooled feature vector to RGB via an MLP layer. It can be understood that the target
pixel’s color is strongly dependent on the closest point from the ray origin and weakly related to the


                                                   15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Algorithm 2 Ray Attention: PyTorch-like Pseudocode
  X0 → coordinate aligned features(Nrays , Npts , D)
  x → point coordinates (after position encoding)(Nrays , Npts , D)
  d → target view direction (after position encoding)(Nrays , Npts , D)
  fQ , fK , fV , fP , fA , fO → functions that parameterize MLP layers

  X0 = fP (concat(Xo , d, x))
  Q = fQ (X0 )
  K = fK (X0 )
  V = fV (X0 )
                        √
  A = matmul(Q, K T )/ D
  A = softmax(A, dim = −1)

  O = matmul(V , A)
  O = fO (O)

Algorithm 3 GNT: PyTorch-like Pseudocode
  Xj → epipolar view features(Nrays , Npts , Nviews , D)
  x → point coordinates (after position encoding)(Nrays , Npts , D)
  d → target view direction (after position encoding)(Nrays , Npts , D)
  ∆d → relative directions of source views wrt target views(Nrays , Npts , Nviews , 3)
   (l)     (l)
  fview , fray → functions that parameterize view transforms, ray transformers at layer l respectively
  frgb → functions that parameterize MLP layers

  l=0
  X0 = maxN  i=1 (Xj )
               views

  while l < Nlayers do
              (l)
     X0 = fview (X0 , Xj , ∆d)
              (l)
     X0 = fray (Xo , d, x)
     l =l+1
  end while
  O = Norm(X0 )
                     Npoints
  RGB = frgb (meani=1        (X0 ))


farthest. Revisiting Eq. 7, volumetric rendering attempts to compose point-wise color depending on
the other points in a far to near fashion. Motivated by this, we propose an auto-regressive decoder
to better simulate the rendering process. Transformers have shown great success in auto-regressive
decoding, more specifically in NLP (Vaswani et al., 2017). We borrow a similar strategy and replace
the simpler MLP-based color prediction with a series of transformer blocks - with self, cross attention
layers.
In the first pass, the decoder is queried with positional encoding of the farthest point (γ(xN )) to
generate an output feature representation of the same. In the next step, the output token is concatenated
with the second farthest point (γ(xN −1 )) to query the decoder. This process repeats until all the points
in the ray are queried in a far-to-near fashion. In the final pass, the encoded view direction (γ(d)) is
concatenated with the per-point output features in the previous passes to query the decoder and the
output token corresponding to the view direction is extracted. The extracted token is mapped to RGB
via an MLP layer. This entire process is summarized in Fig. 8. The auto-regressive procedure closely
resembles the volumetric rendering equation which iteratively blends and overrides the previous color
when marching along a ray from far to near.
Transformer-based decoders used in language iteratively predict output tokens only during inference,
i.e. they are trained in a non-autoregressive fashion due to the availability of ground truth output
tokens in each step. Transferring the same to neural rendering is not possible, as we do not have
access to the groundtruth color for each point sampled along the ray. Hence, we require a loop to


                                                   16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Figure 8: Architecture of auto-regressive ray decoder with sampling strategy in a far to near fashion.
Table 4: Comparison of autoregressive GNT against SOTA methods for single scene rendering on the
LLFF dataset.

                                      Orchids                              Horns
       Models
                         PSNR↑    SSIM↑    LPIPS↓     Avg↓    PSNR↑    SSIM↑    LPIPS↓     Avg↓
       LLFF              18.52     0.588    0.313     0.141   23.22    0.840       0.193   0.064
       NeRF              20.36     0.641    0.321     0.121   27.45    0.828       0.268   0.058
       NeX               20.42     0.765    0.242     0.102   28.46    0.934       0.173   0.040
       NLF               21.05     0.807    0.173     0.084   29.78    0.957       0.121   0.030
       GNT               20.67     0.752    0.153     0.087   29.62    0.935       0.076   0.028
       GNT + AutoReg     21.05     0.736    0.181     0.090   28.20    0.908       0.114   0.037
       GNT + Fine        20.69     0.752    0.153     0.087   29.59    0.934       0.076   0.028



auto-regressively decode features even during training. This reduces the computational efficiency of
the proposed strategy, especially as the number of points sampled along the ray increases. Therefore,
we introduce a caching mechanism to store the per-layer outputs of the previous tokens and only
compute the attention of a new token in the current pass. This does not overcome the iterative loop
during each forward pass but avoids redundant computations, which helps improve the decoding
speed drastically when compared to the naive strategy. Due to computational constraints, we are only
able to train GNT + AutoReg with much fewer rays sampled per iteration (500) when compared to
other methods as discussed in Sec. 4.2. Tab. 4 discusses single scene optimization results on the
LLFF dataset and we can clearly see that the GNT + AutoReg improves the overall performance
when compared to existing baselines, and improving the PSNR scores in complex scenes (Orchids)
when compared to our own method without the decoder. However, this is not consistent across all
scenes and metrics. This could be because of the fewer number of rays sampled and we expect our
results would improve when scaled to similar settings. Nevertheless, this shows that the learnable
decoder predicts per-point RGB features effectively without any supervision from the volumetric
rendering equation.

C.2   ATTENTION G UIDED C OARSE - TO -F INE S AMPLING

GNT’s ray transformer learns point-to-point correspondences which helps model visibility and
occlusion or more formally point-wise density σ. Motivated by this hypothesis, we estimate the depth
maps from the extracted attention maps and qualitatively analyze the same in Sec. 4.5. Therefore, we
could conclude that the learned point-wise importance values can be considered equivalent to point-
wise density or σ. To further test our claim, we attempt to use the learned point-wise correspondence
values to sample “fine” points, which are then queried to GNT to render a higher-quality image. Due
to the set-like property of attention, we directly query the fine points to the same network without
using a separately trained “fine” network unlike other NeRF methods (Mildenhall et al., 2020; Barron


                                                 17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


               (a) Coarse                       (b) Fine                   (c) Ground Truth

Figure 9: Visualization of ray attention extracted during coarse, fine sampling where each color
indicates the distance of each pixel relative to the viewing direction. The sampled fine points inferred
from the learn attention values help GNT capture more fine-grained details. Red indicates far while
blue indicates near.


et al., 2021; Wang et al., 2021b; Liu et al., 2022). Please note that we follow the same training
strategy from Sec. 4.1 and only sample coarse-fine points during evaluation. Tab. 4 compares “GNT
+ Fine” against other methods, and we can clearly see that it outperforms other SOTA methods in
complex scenes like Orchids, performing even better than our own method without fine sampling.
However, the performance improvements are not significant across all scenes and we attribute this to
the lack of training with the coarse-fine sampling strategy and expect our results to improve further.
In Fig. 9, we visualize the estimated depth values obtained from the learned attention maps during
both coarse, and fine stages. We can clearly see that the fine depth map is able to better estimate
differences between nearby pixels which results in a higher resolution output.

D    A DDITIONAL R ESULTS AND A NALYSIS
Breakdown of Table 1. Tables 6 and 7 include a breakdown of the quantitative results presented
in the main paper into per-scene metrics. Our method quantitatively surpasses original NeRF and
achieve on-par results with state-of-the-art methods. Although we slightly underperform NLF (Suhail
et al., 2021) on some scenes, we argue that the comparison is not fair because NLF requires much
larger batch size and longer iterations. We also include videos to demonstrate our results in the
project page.

Comparison with SRT (Sajjadi et al., 2022b). SRT (Sajjadi et al., 2022b) is another pure trans-
former based generalizable view synthesis baseline. In contrast to GNT, SRT barely utilizes attention
blocks to interpolate views without any explicit geometry priors. We directly evaluate our cross-scene
trained GNT in Sec. 4.3 on NMR dataset (Kato et al., 2018) without further tuning. In addition to
SRT, we also include other generalizable novel view synthesis methods LFN (Sitzmann et al., 2021)
and PixelNeRF (Yu et al., 2021) which are compared with SRT in Sajjadi et al. (2022b). All the
results are presented in Tab. 5. Overall, we find GNT can largely outperform all baselines in all the
metrics. We note that the pre-training data of SRT include the samples from NMR dataset (Kato et al.,
2018), which is way more massive than GNT’s pre-training datasets and has a narrower domain gap
to the evaluation set. After all, our superior performance indicates our GNT can generalize better
than SRT. We argue this might be because multi-view geometry is a strong inductive bias for novel
view interpolation. That being said, a pixel on the novel view should be roughly consistent with its
epipolar correspondence. Enforcing such constraints explicitly can significantly improve trainability
and data efficiency. Nevertheless, we admit relieving multi-view geometry and learning a data-driven
light transport prior from scratch can potentially render more sophisticated optics, which we leave for
future exploration.

Comparison with GPNR (Suhail et al., 2022). The concurrent work GPNR (Suhail et al., 2022)
also utilizes fully attention-based architecture for neural rendering. Below, we summarize several
key differences: Embeddings: GPNR leverages three forms of positional encoding (including light
field embeddings) to encode the information of location, camera pose, view direction, etc. In contrast,
GNT merely utilizes image features (with point coordinates). In this sense, GNT enjoys a neat design
space and can potentially suggest such handcrafted feature engineering may not be necessary as


                                                  18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


  Table 5: Comparison with LFN, PixelNeRF, and SRT on the NMR (Kato et al., 2018) dataset.

                Models                            PSNR↑    SSIM↑     LPIPS↓     Avg↓
                LFN (Sitzmann et al., 2021)       24.95     0.870       -         -
                PixelNeRF (Yu et al., 2021)       26.80     0.910     0108      0.041
                SRT (Sajjadi et al., 2022b)       27.87     0.912     0.066     0.032
                GNT                               32.12     0.970     0.032     0.015


              (a) MipNeRF            (b) NLF              (c) GNT         (d) Ground Truth


                (a) NeX              (b) NLF              (c) GNT         (d) Ground Truth

Figure 10: Qualitative results for single-scene rendering. In the Trex scene from LLFF (first row)
and Materials scene from Blender (second row), GNT’s learnable renderer is able to model physical
phenomenon like reflections.


they can be learned through cross-scene training. Aggregation schemes: GPNR has three-stage
aggregation: 1) visual feature transformer to exchange information between patches across views,
2) epipolar aggregator transformer combines features along the epipolar line for each reference
view, 3) reference view aggregator transformer fuses the epipolar information across multiple views.
Such aggregation scheme extends NLF (Suhail et al., 2021) paper, which indicates GPNR rendering
pipeline is more likely to simulate a light field-based rendering. Instead, GNT leverages the two-stage
aggregations, which naturally correspond to the online scene representation and ray-based rendering in
generalizable NeRF. In this sense, the rendering pipeline of GNT looks more like radiance field-based
rendering. Performance: We have a direct comparison with GPNR on cross-scene generalization
experiments (Tab. 2). Our results show that GNT can outperform GPNR on all the tested datasets
with a simpler architecture and lighter feature engineering. Especially on the Shiny dataset (Tab. 2b),
GNT significantly outperforms GPNR by ~3dB in PSNR.


           (a) GNT             (b) Ground Truth            (a) GNT            (b) Ground Truth

Figure 11: Qualitative comparison between images rendered by GNT and Ground truth image to
discuss limitations. Epipolar correspondence for boundary pixels can be missing sometimes, which
causes minor stripe artifacts.



                                                   19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Table 6: Comparison of GNT against SOTA methods for single scene rendering on the NeRF Synthetic
Dataset (scene-wise).

      Models       Lego    Chair    Drums      Ficus     Hotdog   Materials   Mic     Ship
      LLFF         24.54   28.72    21.13      21.79     31.41     20.72      27.48   23.22
      NeRF         32.54   33.00    25.01      30.13     36.18     29.62      32.91   28.65
      MipNeRF      35.70   35.14    25.48      33.29     37.48     30.71      36.51   30.41
      NLF          35.76   35.30    25.83      33.38     38.66     35.10      35.32   30.94
      GNT          34.59   34.60    28.32      32.71     38.43     32.73      35.66   31.76
                                            (a) PSNR↑
      Models       Lego    Chair    Drums      Ficus     Hotdog   Materials   Mic     Ship
      LLFF         0.911   0.948    0.890      0.896     0.965     0.890      0.964   0.823
      NeRF         0.961   0.967    0.925      0.964     0.974     0.949      0.980   0.856
      MipNeRF      0.978   0.981    0.932      0.980     0.982     0.959      0.991   0.882
      NLF          0.989   0.989    0.955      0.987     0.993     0.990      0.992   0.952
      GNT          0.984   0.986    0.966      0.986     0.989     0.984      0.993   0.906
                                            (b) SSIM↑
      Models       Lego    Chair    Drums      Ficus     Hotdog   Materials   Mic     Ship
      LLFF         0.110   0.064    0.126      0.130     0.061     0.117      0.084   0.218
      NeRF         0.050   0.046    0.091      0.044     0.121     0.063      0.028   0.206
      MipNeRF      0.021   0.021    0.065      0.020     0.027     0.040      0.009   0.138
      NLF          0.010   0.012    0.045      0.010     0.009     0.011      0.008   0.084
      GNT          0.012   0.013    0.030      0.012     0.012     0.017      0.005   0.100
                                            (c) LPIPS↓
      Models       Lego    Chair    Drums      Ficus     Hotdog   Materials   Mic     Ship
      LLFF         0.049   0.027    0.069      0.065     0.020     0.069      0.031   0.076
      NeRF         0.018   0.016    0.043      0.020     0.017     0.025      0.013   0.047
      MipNeRF      0.009   0.009    0.036      0.011     0.009     0.019      0.006   0.035
      NLF          0.007   0.007    0.029      0.008     0.005     0.007      0.006   0.025
      GNT          0.008   0.008    0.020      0.009     0.005     0.010      0.004   0.027
                                             (d) Avg↓


                                                20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Table 7: Comparison of GNT against SOTA methods for single scene rendering on the LLFF Dataset
(scene-wise).

      Models    Room     Fern    Leaves    Fortress    Orchids   Flower   T-Rex   Horns
      LLFF      24.54    28.72    21.13        21.79    18.52    20.72    27.48   23.22
      NeRF      32.70    25.17    20.92        31.16    20.36    27.40    26.80   27.45
      NeX       32.32    25.63    21.96        31.67    20.42     28.9    28.73   28.46
      NLF       34.54    24.86    22.47        33.22    21.05    29.82    30.34   29.78
      GNT       32.96    24.31    22.57        32.28    20.67    27.32    28.15   29.62
                                          (a) PSNR↑
      Models    Room     Fern    Leaves    Fortress    Orchids   Flower   T-Rex   Horns
      LLFF      0.932    0.753    0.697        0.872    0.588    0.844    0.857   0.840
      NeRF      0.948    0.792    0.690        0.881    0.641    0.827    0.880   0.828
      NeX       0.975    0.887    0.832        0.952    0.765    0.933    0.953   0.934
      NLF       0.987    0.886    0.856        0.964    0.807    0.939    0.968   0.957
      GNT       0.963    0.846    0.852        0.934    0.752    0.893    0.936   0.935
                                          (b) SSIM↑
      Models    Room     Fern    Leaves    Fortress    Orchids   Flower   T-Rex   Horns
      LLFF      0.155    0.247    0.216        0.173    0.313    0.174    0.222   0.193
      NeRF      0.178    0.280    0.316        0.171    0.321    0.219    0.249   0.268
      NeX       0.161    0.205    0.173        0.131    0.242    0.150    0.192   0.173
      NLF       0.104    0.135    0.110        0.119    0.173    0.107    0.143   0.121
      GNT       0.060    0.116    0.109        0.061    0.153    0.092    0.080   0.076
                                          (c) LPIPS↓
      Models    Room     Fern    Leaves    Fortress    Orchids   Flower   T-Rex   Horns
      LLFF      0.039    0.086    0.110        0.041    0.141    0.058    0.069   0.064
      NeRF      0.028    0.073    0.112        0.036    0.121    0.055    0.056   0.058
      NeX       0.025    0.057    0.077        0.027    0.102    0.037    0.038   0.040
      NLF       0.016    0.053    0.062        0.022    0.084    0.030    0.029   0.030
      GNT       0.017    0.055    0.061        0.021    0.087    0.042    0.031   0.028
                                           (d) Avg↓


                                                21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


E    D EFERRED D ISCUSSION
Discussion on Occlusion Awareness. Conceptually, view transformer attempts to find correspon-
dence between the queried points and source views. The learned attention amounts to a likelihood
score that a pixel on the source view is an image of the same point in the 3D space, i.e., no points
lies between the target point and the pixel. NeuRay (Liu et al., 2022) leverages the cost volume
from MVSNet (Yao et al., 2018) to predict per-pixel visibility and shows that introducing occlusion
information is beneficial for multi-view aggregation in generalizable NeRF. We argue that instead
of explicitly regressing the visibility, purely relying on epipolar geometry-constrained attention can
automatically learn how to infer occlusion, given prior works in Multi-View Stereo (MVS) (Yang
et al., 2022; Ding et al., 2021). In view transformer, the U-Net provides multi-scale features to the
transformer, and the attention block acts as a matching algorithm, which selects the pixels from
neighboring views that maximize view consistency. We defer empirical discussion to Sec. 4.5.

Discussion on Depth Cuing. The ray transformer iteratively aggregates features according to the
attention value. This attention value can be regarded as the importance of each point to form the
image, which reflects visibility and occlusion reasoned by point-to-point interaction. Therefore,
we can interpret the average attention score for each point as the accumulated weights in volume
rendering. In this sense, we can infer the depth map from the attention map by averaging the marching
distance ti with the attention value. This implies our ray transformer learns geometry-aware 3D
semantics on both feature space and attention map, which helps it generalize well across scenes. We
defer visualization and analysis to Sec. 4.5. NLF (Suhail et al., 2021) proposes a similar two-stage
rendering transformer, but it first extracts features on the epipolar lines and then aggregates epipolar
features to get the pixel color. We doubt this strategy may fail to generalize as epipolar features lack
communication with each other and thus cannot induce geometry-grounded semantics.

F    L IMITATIONS
Although our method achieves strong single-scene performance and achieves SOTA cross-scene
generalization, we discuss certain limitations of our method. The view transformer relies on epipolar
constraints so that it can only aggregate information from valid epipolar lines. Therefore, non-epipolar
scenes and complex light transport might not be captured by the view transformer. Although we adopt
a feature extractor with large receptive fields to encode global light transport and our view transformer
empirically works well on complex lighting effects, what is captured by the image encoder remains
unclear. Moreover, epipolar correspondence for the boundary pixels sometimes are missing, which
causes some minor artifacts (see Fig. 11).


                                                   22
