Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


U NSUPERVISED M ODEL - BASED P RE - TRAINING
FOR DATA - EFFICIENT C ONTROL FROM P IXELS

 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                            A BSTRACT
         Controlling artificial agents from visual sensory data is an arduous task. Reinforce-
         ment learning (RL) algorithms can succeed in this but require large amounts of
         interactions between the agent and the environment. To alleviate the issue, unsuper-
         vised RL proposes to employ self-supervised interaction and learning, for adapting
         faster to future tasks. Yet, whether current unsupervised strategies improve gener-
         alization capabilities is still unclear, especially in visual control settings. In this
         work, we design an unsupervised RL strategy for data-efficient visual control. First,
         we show that world models pre-trained with data collected using unsupervised
         RL can facilitate adaptation for future tasks. Then, we analyze several design
         choices to adapt faster, effectively reusing the agents’ pre-trained components, and
         planning in imagination, with our hybrid planner, which we dub Dyna-MPC. By
         combining the findings of a large-scale empirical study, we establish an approach
         that strongly improves performance on the Unsupervised RL Benchmark, requiring
         20× less data to match the performance of supervised methods. The approach also
         demonstrates robust performance on the Real-Word RL benchmark, hinting that
         the approach generalizes to noisy environments.


1   I NTRODUCTION
Modern successes of deep reinforcement learning (RL) have shown promising results for control
problems (Levine et al., 2016; OpenAI et al., 2019; Lu et al., 2021). However, training an agent for
each task individually requires a large amount of task-specific environment interactions, incurring
huge redundancy and prolonged human supervision. Developing algorithms that can efficiently adapt
and generalize to new tasks has hence become an active area of research in the RL community.
In computer vision and natural language processing, unsupervised learning has enabled training
models without supervision to reduce sample complexity on downstream tasks (Chen et al., 2020;
Radford et al., 2019). In a similar fashion, unsupervised RL (URL) agents aim to learn about the
environment without the need for external reward functions, driven by intrinsic motivation (Pathak
et al., 2017; Burda et al., 2019a; Bellemare et al., 2016). Any learned models can then be adapted to
downstream tasks, aiming to reduce the required amount of interactions with the environment.
Recently, the Unsupervised RL Benchmark (URLB) (Laskin et al., 2021) established a common
protocol to compare self-supervised algorithms across several domains and tasks from the DMC
Suite (Tassa et al., 2018). In the benchmark, an agent is allowed a task-agnostic pre-training stage,
where it can interact with the environment in an unsupervised manner, followed by a fine-tuning stage
where, given a limited budget of interactions with the environment, the agent should quickly adapt
for a specific task. However, the results obtained by Laskin et al. (2021) suggest that current URL
approaches may be insufficient to perform well on the benchmark, especially when the inputs of the
agent are pixel-based images.
World models have proven highly effective for solving RL tasks from vision both in simulation
(Hafner et al., 2021; 2019a) and in robotics (Wu et al., 2022), and they are generally data-efficient
as they enable learning behavior in imagination (Sutton, 1991). Inspired by previous work on
exploration (Sekar et al., 2020), we hypothesize this feature could be key in the unsupervised RL
setting, as a pre-trained world model can leverage previous experience to learn behavior for new
tasks in imagination, and in our work, we study how to best exploit this feature. We adopt the URLB
setup to perform a large-scale study, involving several unsupervised RL methods for pre-training


                                                   1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                              Environm ent St at e                                                                                                   Environm ent St at e

                                                                                                             Weig ht
                                                                                                            In i t i a l i ze

                                         m odel
                                         st at e                          act ion                                                                               m odel
        Un su p e r v i se d
         exp lor at ion                                                                                                                                         st at e    Pl a n n e r          act ion
                                                                                                                                     Re w a r d
                                                                                                                                    Pr e d i ct o r
                               Wor ld                                               Ta sk -a g n o st i c
                                                   A ct o r -Cr i t i c
                               M od el                                              En v i r o n m e n t                                              Wor ld                                               D o w n st r e a m
                                                                                                                                                      M od el                                                   Ta sk
                                                                                                                                                                          A ct o r -Cr i t i c

    Pr e -t r a i n i n g                                                                                                       Fi n e -t u n i n g                       Task Reward


Figure 1: Method overview. Our method considers a pre-training (PT) and a fine-tuning (FT) stage.
During pre-training, the agent interacts with the environment through unsupervised RL, maximizing
an intrinsic reward function, and concurrently training a world model on the data collected. During
fine-tuning, the agent exploits its pre-trained components and plans in imagination, to efficiently
adapt to different downstream tasks, maximizing the rewards received from the environment.


model-based agents, different fine-tuning strategies, and a new improved algorithm for efficiently
planning with world models. The resulting approach, which combines the findings of our study,
strongly improves performance on the URL benchmark from pixels, nearly achieving the asymptotic
performance of supervised RL agents, trained with 20x more task-specific data, and bridging the gap
with low-dimensional state inputs (Laskin et al., 2021).
Contributions. This work does not propose a novel complex method. Rather, we study the interplay
of various existing components and propose a novel final solution that outperforms existing state of
the art on URLB by a staggering margin. Specifically:
              • we demonstrate that unsupervised RL combined with world models can be an effective
                pre-training strategy to enable data-efficient visual control (Section 3.1),
              • we study the interplays between the agent’s pre-trained components that improve sample
                efficiency during fine-tuning (Section 3.2),
              • we propose a novel hybrid planner we call Dyna-MPC, which allows us to effectively
                combine behaviors learned in imagination with planning (Section 3.3),
              • combining our findings into one approach, we outperform previous approaches on URLB
                from pixels, nearly solving the benchmark (Section 4.1),
              • we show the approach is resilient to environment perturbations, evaluating it on the Real
                World RL benchmark (Dulac-Arnold et al., 2020) (Section 4.2),
              • we present an extensive analysis of the pre-trained agents, aimed at understanding in-depth
                the current findings and limitations (Section 4.3).
An extensive empirical evaluation, supported by more than 2k experiments, among main results,
analysis and ablations, was used to carefully design our method. We hope that our large-scale
evaluation will inform future research towards developing and deploying pre-trained agents that
can be adapted with considerably less data to more complex/realistic tasks, as it has happened with
unsupervised pre-trained models for vision (Parisi et al., 2022) and language (Ahn et al., 2022). 1

2       P RELIMINARIES

Reinforcement learning. The RL setting can be formalized as a Markov Decision Process (MDP),
denoted with the tuple {S, A, T, R, γ}, where S is the set of states, A is the set of actions, T is the
state transition dynamics, R is the reward function, and γ is a discount factor. The objective of an
RL agent is to maximize the expected discounted sum of rewards over time for a given task, also
                                        PT
called return, and indicated as Gt = k=t+1 γ (k−t−1) rk . In continuous-action settings, you can
learn an actor, i.e. a model predicting the action to take from a certain state, and a critic, i.e. a model
that estimates the expected value of the actor’s actions over time. Actor-critic algorithms can be
combined with the expressiveness of neural network models to solve complex continuous control
tasks (Haarnoja et al., 2018; Lillicrap et al., 2016; Schulman et al., 2017).
    1
        The PyTorch code for the experiments will be open-sourced upon publication.


                                                                                                                   2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Unsupervised RL. In this work, we investigate the problem of fast adaptation for a downstream
task, after a phase of unsupervised training and interaction with the environment. Our training
routine, based on the setup of URLB (Laskin et al., 2021), is made of two phases: a pre-training (PT)
phase, where the agent can interact with a task-agnostic version of the environment for up to 2M
frames, and a fine-tuning phase (FT), where the agent is given a task to solve and a limited budget
of 100k frames. During the PT phase, rewards are removed so that sensible information about the
environment should be obtained by exploring the domain-dependent dynamics, which is expected to
remain similar or unchanged in the downstream tasks. During FT, the agent receives task-specific
rewards when interacting with the environment. As the agent has no prior knowledge of the task, it
should both understand the task and solve it efficiently, in a limited interaction budget. In this setting,
the performance of unsupervised model-free RL (Yarats et al., 2022) were shown to be insufficient as
reported in (Laskin et al., 2021). We believe the key reason for this is that model-free RL algorithms
can exploit only a little part of the information obtained with self-supervised interaction, as they rely
uniquely on actor and critic’s predictions.
World models. In this work, we ground upon the DreamerV2 agent (Hafner et al., 2021), which learns
a world model (Ha & Schmidhuber, 2018; Hafner et al., 2019b) predicting the outcomes of actions in
the environment. The dynamics is captured into a latent space Z, providing a compact representation
of the high-dimensional inputs. The world model consists of the following components:

                Encoder:      et = fϕ (st ),           Decoder:     pϕ (st |zt ),
                Dynamics:     pϕ (zt |zt−1 , at−1 ),   Posterior:   qϕ (zt |zt−1 , at−1 , et ).

The model states zt have both a deterministic component, modeled using the recurrent state of a
GRU (Chung et al., 2014), and a (discrete) stochastic component. The encoder and decoder are
convolutional neural networks (CNNs) and the remaining components are multi-layer perceptrons
(MLPs). The world model is trained end-to-end by optimizing an evidence lower bound (ELBO) on
the log-likelihood of the data collected in the environment (Hafner et al., 2019b;a). For the encoder
and the decoder networks, we used the same architecture as in Hafner et al. (2021).
For control, the agent learns latent actor πθ (at |zt ) and critic vψ (zt ) networks. Both components are
trained online within the world model, by imagining the model state outcomes of the actions produced
by the actor, using the model dynamics. Rewards for imagined trajectories are provided by a reward
predictor, pϕ (rt |zt ) trained to predict environment rewards, and they are combined with the critic
predictions to produce a GAE-λ estimate of the returns (Schulman et al., 2016). The actor maximizes
estimates of returns, backpropagating gradients through the model dynamics. The hyperparameters
for the agent, which we keep fixed across all domains/tasks, can be found in Appendix H.


3    U NSUPERVISED M ODEL - BASED P RE - TRAINING FOR DATA - EFFICIENT
     C ONTROL FROM P IXELS

To best exploit self-supervised pre-training for data-efficient adaptation, it is important that the
agent: (i) meaningfully interacts with the environment during the PT phase, to discover useful
transitions; (ii) successfully reuses the modules learned during PT for fast adaptation; and (iii)
efficiently employs the FT phase to quickly understand and master the downstream task. In this
section, we use an experiment-driven approach to find which methods or components are best at
tackling these challenges.


Experimental procedure. We employ the URL benchmark that consists of three control domains,
Walker, Quadruped and Jaco, and twelve tasks, four per domain. To evaluate the agents, we take
snapshots of the agent at different times during training, i.e. 100k, 500k, 1M, and 2M frames, and fine-
tune the agent for 100k frames. In all bar plots, we show average normalized returns on downstream
tasks with error bars showing the standard deviation. To normalize results in a comparable way for
all tasks, we train a fully-supervised agent with 2M frames per task. We use the mean performance of
this agent, which we refer to as "oracle", as the reference scores to normalize our results in the plots
(details in Appendix A). For all experiments, results are presented with at least three random seeds.


                                                       3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


 (a) Aggregated results from Laskin et al. (2021) of unsupervised RL to pre-train the model-free DrQ agent.


        (b) Our aggregated results of unsupervised RL to pre-train the model-based Dreamer agent.

Figure 2: Unsupervised pre-training. Aggregated performance of different URL techniques for
PT, with FT snapshots taken at different times along training. (a) With the model-free DrQ agent,
performance slightly improves over time only using knowledge-based techniques. (b) With the
model-based Dreamer agent, performance is higher and, overall, improves for all techniques. We also
report Dreamer@100k and DrQ@100k results, which are obtained in 100k FT steps with no PT.


3.1   U NSUPERVISED P RE - TRAINING

In the PT stage, unsupervised RL can be used to explore the environment, collecting the data to train
the components of the agent. The resulting networks are then used to initialize respective components
in the agent deployed for the downstream task, aiming to reduce sample complexity during FT. The
first question we address is thus "What kinds of agents work best with unsupervised pre-training?".
Unsupervised RL methods can be grouped into three categories (Laskin et al., 2021): knowledge-
based, which aim to increase the agent’s knowledge by maximizing error prediction (Pathak et al.,
2017; 2019; Burda et al., 2019b), data-based, which aim to achieve diversity of data (Yarats et al.,
2021; Liu & Abbeel, 2021b) and competence-based, which aim to learn diverse skills (Liu & Abbeel,
2021a; Eysenbach et al., 2019). In Figure 2a we report the results from Laskin et al. (2021), showing
that none of these approaches is particularly effective on URLB when combined with the DrQ
model-free agent (Yarats et al., 2022), state-of-the-art in RL from pixels, where the data collected
with unsupervised RL is used to pre-train the agent’s actor, critic, and encoder.
To demonstrate that world models can be used to effectively exploit unsupervised RL data collection
for fast adaptation, we study multiple approaches and use them to pre-train the Dreamer’s world model
and latent actor. As knowledge-based methods we employ ICM (Pathak et al., 2017), LBS (Mazzaglia
et al., 2021b), Plan2Explore (P2E; (Sekar et al., 2020)), and RND (Burda et al., 2019b). As a
data-based approach, we choose APT (Liu & Abbeel, 2021b), and as competence-based approaches,
we adopt DIAYN (Eysenbach et al., 2019) and APS (Liu & Abbeel, 2021a). Finally, we also test
random actions, as a naive maximum entropy baseline (Haarnoja et al., 2018). Details on these
methods and how we combined them with the Dreamer algorithm are discussed in Appendix B.
Aggregating results per category, in Figure 2b, we show that by leveraging a pre-trained world
model the overall performance improves over time for all categories, as opposed to the model-free
results, where only knowledge-based approaches slightly improve. In particular, data-based and
knowledge-based methods are more effective in the Walker and Quadruped domains, and random
actions and competence-based are more effective in the Jaco domain. Detailed results for each method
are available in Appendix E.

3.2   F INETUNING P RE - TRAINED AGENTS

Some of the components learned during the PT phase, such as the world model, can be reused for fast
adaptation during FT. However, as the reward is changing from pseudo-reward to task reward when


                                                     4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Figure 3: Fine-tuning pre-trained agents.               Figure 4: Learning and planning. Using Dyna-
Comparison of the results when fine-tuning dif-         MPC during fine-tuning improves performance,
ferent pre-trained components of the agent. Re-         increasing mean scores and reducing variance.
sults averaged across all URL methods.                  Results averaged across all URL methods.


changing from the PT to the FT phase, it is not clear if pre-training of the actor and critic can help
the downstream task. To shed light on this, we seek to answer: "Which pre-trained components are
useful for downstream tasks?".
Here, we test different fine-tuning configurations, where we copy the weights of some of the PT
components into the agent to fine-tune for the downstream task. We run the tests for the several
unsupervised RL methods combined with Dreamer that we presented in Section 3.1 and show
aggregated results in Figure 3 (detailed results per each method in Appendix E).
Overall, fine-tuning the PT world model provides the most significant boost in performance, strength-
ening the hypothesis that world models are very effective with unsupervised RL. Fine-tuning the actor
improves performance slightly in Walker and remarkably in Quadruped, but is harmful in the Jaco
domain. An intuitive explanation is that in the Quadruped and Walker moving tasks, the exploratory
behaviors help discovering reward faster. Instead, in the Jaco goal-reaching tasks, the agent needs to
reach a certain target with sparse rewards. If the PT actor is initialized to move far from the target, the
agent might struggle to find rewards in the small FT budget. Finally, using a PT critic is systematically
worse. This can be explained by the discrepancy between intrinsic rewards and task rewards.


3.3   L EARNING AND P LANNING IN I MAGINATION

Knowing a model of the environment, traditional model-based control approaches, e.g. model
predictive control (MPC) (Williams et al., 2015; Chua et al., 2018; Richards, 2005), can be used
to plan the agent’s action. Nonetheless, using actor-critic methods has several advantages, such as
amortizing the cost of planning by caching previously computed (sub)optimal actions and computing
long-term returns from a certain state, without having to predict outcomes that are far in the future.
More recent hybrid strategies, such as LOOP (Sikchi et al., 2020) and TD-MPC (Hansen et al., 2022),
allow combining trajectories sampled from the actor with trajectories sampled from a distribution
over actions that is iteratively improved. The model and the critic are used to evaluate the trajectories,


Algorithm 1 Dyna-MPC
Require: Actor θ, Critic ψ, World Model ϕ
 1:       µ, σ: initial parameters for sampling actions
 2:       N, Nπ : num trajectories, num policy trajectories
 3:       zt , H: current model state, planning horizon
 4: for each iteration j = 1..J do
 5:     Sample N trajectories of length H from N (µ, σ 2 I), starting from zt
 6:     Sample Nπ trajectories of length H using the actor πθ , starting from zt
 7:     Estimate future states, using the model, and returns, using reward and critic predictions
 8:     Update µ and σ using MPPI (Williams et al., 2015)
 9: end for
10: return at ∼ N (µt , σt2 I)



                                                    5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


improve them, and eventually select the most promising actions, i.e. planning. In this section, we
answer the question: Can we accelerate downstream task adaptation by leveraging planning?
Dyna-MPC. As we pre-train a world model, we could exploit planning in latent space to adapt with
limited additional environment interaction. One problem with the above strategies is that they are
based upon learning off-policy actor and critic, which in our context would prevent us from exploiting
the PT model to learn the actor and critic in imagination. In order to enable hybrid planning with the
behavior learned in imagination (Hafner et al., 2019a), we develop a modification of these approaches,
which we call Dyna-MPC, that combines the actor and critic learned in imagination with MPPI
(Williams et al., 2015) for planning.
As detailed in Algorithm 1, at each time step, we imagine a set of latent trajectories using the model,
by sampling actions from a time-dependent multivariate gaussian and from the actor policy, trained
with Dreamer in imagination. Returns for MPPI are estimated using reward predictions by the model
and the critic. MPPI is used to update the parameters of the multivariate gaussian for J iterations.
Details on how returns are estimated and the MPPI updates work are given in Appendix C. One
significant difference with previous approaches is that the policy in Dyna-MPC is learned on-policy
in imagination, thus no correction for learning off-policy is required (Sikchi et al., 2020).
Given the insights from the previous section, we use the world models and actors pre-trained with all
the different unsupervised strategies we considered (see Section 3.1)2 and test their FT performance
with and without planning with Dyna-MPC. Aggregated scores are reported in Figure 4, and detailed
results for each method are available in Appendix E. We observe that adopting Dyna-MPC is always
beneficial, as it improves the average performance and reduces variance in all domains.


3.4   O UR METHOD : COMBINING THE FINDINGS TOGETHER



In the large-scale study, we explored several design choices to establish the most adequate approach
to tackle the URL benchmark, aiming to provide a general recipe for data-efficient adaptation thanks
to unsupervised RL. Our approach combines the main findings we presented in the previous sections:
      1. learning a model-based agent with data collected using unsupervised RL (Figure 2);
      2. fine-tuning the PT world model (always) and the pre-trained actor (where beneficial), while
         learning the critic from scratch (Figure 3);
      3. adopting a hybrid planner, as the proposed Dyna-MPC, to leverage both learning and
         planning in imagination (Figure 4).
An overview of the method is illustrated in Figure 1 and the algorithm is presented in Appendix D.
We believe the above recipe could be generally applied to unsupervised settings, also outside of
URLB, with the precaution that one should carefully make two decisions: (a) whether fine-tuning the
PT actor is meaningful for the downstream task or it’s better to re-learn it from scratch, (b) what is
the best URL strategy to collect data. Both decisions strongly depend on the target domain/task and
so it is difficult to assess their implications beforehand. However, adopting unsupervised strategies
that specifically focus on interacting with interesting elements of the environment, e.g. objects, or
that quickly explore large areas of the environment at the beginning of fine-tuning may help exploring
and revisiting crucial states of the environment more easily (Parisi et al., 2021).
For URLB, we already established (a) that the PT actor is effective in Walker and Quadruped tasks,
but it is better re-learn the actor from scratch in Jaco, in Section 3.2. To decide which URL strategy
to use (b) we present a detailed comparison of the performance of our approach using different
exploration strategies. The results in Figure 5 show that the agent using LBS during pre-training
performs overall best, as it has the highest interquartile mean (IQM) and mean scores, and the lowest
optimality gap. Thus, in the evaluation section, we present Ours (LBS) as our approach.


                                                  6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Figure 5: Unsupervised RL comparison. Stratified bootstrapped performance of our approach on
URLB under different data collection strategies, with 95% CIs. (Agarwal et al., 2021).


Figure 6: URLB results. We compare our approach to the results on URLB after 2M frames of
pre-training from (Laskin et al., 2021) (DrQ pre-trained with different unsupervised RL strategies).


4     E VALUATION AND A NALYSIS
4.1   U NSUPERVISED R EINFORCEMENT L EARNING B ENCHMARK

In Section 3, we presented our approach, which combines the findings from our empirical large-scale
study on URLB. In Figure 6, we compare the results from the original URLB paper with our approach.
The performance of our method is superior in all domains. The second strongest method (DrQ with
Disagreement) approaches an overall performance of 40% of the respective supervised baseline
performance, while our method recovers more than 90% of its supervised counterpart.

4.2   R EAL -W ORLD R EINFORCEMENT L EARNING B ENCHMARK

Algorithms developed in simulation struggle to transfer to real-world systems due to a series of
implicit assumptions that are rarely satisfied in real environments, e.g. URLB assumes the dynamics
between PT and FT stay the same. The RWRL benchmark (Dulac-Arnold et al., 2020) considers
several challenges that are common in real-world systems and implements them on top of DMC tasks.
We employ vision-based variants of the Walker Walk and Quadruped Walk tasks from the RWRL
benchmark. These tasks introduce system delays, stochasticity, and perturbations of the robot’s model
and sensors, which are applied with three degrees of intensity to the original environment, i.e. ‘easy’,
‘medium’, and ‘hard’ (details in Appendix F). We seek to answer whether in perturbed settings:
       • does unsupervised PT enable faster adaptation?
       • does unsupervised RL provide an advantage over random exploration?
       • does hybrid planning improve performance, as in URLB?
In Figure 7, we present the results of our method, using LBS during PT, with and without planning
with Dyna-MPC for FT, and compare to random exploration and training from scratch for 100k,
1M, and 2M frames. Crucially, the PT models are trained in the vanilla task-agnostic version of the
environments from the DMC Suite, so that the results highlight the extent to which models trained in
ideal conditions generalize to perturbed settings when fine-tuned in a low-data regime.
   2
     We exceptionally do not use the pre-trained actor in the Jaco tasks, as this was shown to lead to better
performance in Section 3.2 (Figure 3).


                                                     7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Overall, we found that fine-tuning PT models offer an advantage over training from scratch for 100k
frames, despite all the variations in the environment. Furthermore, on the Quadruped Easy and
Medium settings, our method performs better than Dreamer@1M and not far from Dreamer@2M
while using 10x and 20x less task-specific data, respectively. Our method also performs close to
Dreamer@1M/2M in the Walker Easy task. Unsupervised RL for data collection (Ours) outperforms
random actions in the ‘easy’ and ‘medium’ settings, showing that a better PT model yields higher
FT performance, even when the dynamics of the downstream task is affected by misspecifications
and noisy factors. Finally, in contrast with the findings on URLB, adopting the hybrid planner is not
generally beneficial. We believe this is because the model’s predictions are less certain and precise in
this setting and thus cannot inform the short-term planner accurately.

4.3   E XTENDED A NALYSIS

To better analyze the learned components, we conducted a range of additional experiments. For
conciseness, detailed descriptions of the experimental settings are deferred to Appendix G and we
briefly summarize the takeaways in this section.

Learning rewards online. We verify whether having to discover and learn the reward function
during FT impacts performance. In Figure 8, we compare against agents that (violating the URLB
settings) know the task in advance and can pre-train a reward predictor during the PT stage. We
see that learning the reward predictor does not affect performance significantly for dense-reward
tasks, such as the Walker and Quadruped tasks. However, in sparser reward tasks, i.e. the Jaco ones,
knowing reward information in advance provides an advantage. Efficient strategies to find sparse
rewards efficiently represent a challenge for future research. More details in Appendix G.1.

Zero-shot adaptation. Knowing a reward predictor from PT, it could be possible to perform
zero-shot control with MPC methods if the model and the reward function allow it. In Figure 9, we
show that despite the zero-shot MPC (ZS) offers an advantage over Dreamer@100k, the FT phase is
crucial to deliver high performance on the downstream tasks, as the agent uses this phase to collect
missing information about the environment and the task. Further details in Appendix G.2.

Latent dynamics discrepancy (LDD). We propose a novel metric, Latent Dynamics Discrepancy,
which evaluates the distance between the latent predictions of the PT model and the same model after
FT on a task. In Figure 10, we show the correlation between our metric and the performance ratio
between using the PT model and the FT model for planning (see Appendix G.3 for a detailed expla-
nation). We observed a strong negative Pearson correlation (−0.62, p-value: 0.03), highlighting that
major updates in the model dynamics during FT played an important role in improving performance.
Unsupervised rewards and performance. We analyze the correlation between the normalized
performance of different agents and their intrinsic rewards for optimal trajectories obtained by an
oracle agent in Table 1. In particular, the correlation for LBS, which overall performs best in URLB,
has a statistical significance, as its p-value is < 0.05. We believe this correlation might be one of the
causes of LBS outstanding performance. Further insights are provided in Appendix G.4.


Figure 7: RWRL results. We compare our method to random exploration and training from scratch
on the tasks from the RWRL benchmark. Our models are pre-trained on the vanilla version of the
environment for 2M frames and fine-tuned for 100k frames on the perturbated tasks from RWRL.


                                                   8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Figure 8: Reward learning ablation. Results            Figure 9: Zero-shot (ZS) vs Fine-tuned (FT).
averaged across all unsupervised RL methods.           Results of the agent using Plan2Explore.



5   R ELATED W ORK

Model-based control. Dynamics models combined with powerful search methods have led to
impressive results on a wide variety of tasks such as Atari (Schrittwieser et al., 2020) and continuous
control (Hafner et al., 2019a; Janner et al., 2019; Sikchi et al., 2021; Lowrey et al., 2018). LOOP
(Sikchi et al., 2020) and TD-MPC (Hansen et al., 2022) combine temporal difference learning and
MPC. The model proposed with TD-MPC is task-oriented and thus requires a task to accelerate
learning. In our work, we focus on unsupervised model learning, grounding on the DreamerV2
model (Hafner et al., 2021), whose supervision comes from predicting the environment’s observations.
Methods that use no reconstruction could generalize better to visual differences (Mazzaglia et al.,
2021a; Ma et al., 2020) but they lose in explainability, as they cannot decode imagined trajectories.
Unsupervised RL. Prior to our work, the large-scale study of curiosity (Burda et al., 2018) provided
an insightful analysis of the performance of knowledge-based methods in the reward-free setting. In
our work, we leverage the URLB setting, to provide an analysis of a combination of model-based
control techniques with unsupervised RL. This allowed us to formulate a strategy to adapt pre-trained
models to visual control tasks in a data-efficient manner. Closely, Sekar et al. (2020) combines adapts
the Disagreement (Pathak et al., 2019) to work with Dreamer (Hafner et al., 2019a). In our work, in
addition to analyzing a wider choice of unsupervised RL strategies, we show how to better exploit
the agent PT components for adaptation, and we propose a hybrid planner to improve data-efficiency.
Transfer learning. In the field of transfer learning, fine-tuning is the most used approach. However,
fine-tuning all the pre-trained agent components may not be the most effective strategy. In transfer
learning for RL, they have studied this problem, mainly with the objective of transferring from one
environment to another (Farebrother et al., 2018; Sasso et al., 2022; van Driessel & Francois-Lavet,
2021). Instead, we analyze which agent’s components should be transferred from the unsupervised
PT stage to the supervised FT stage when the environment’s dynamics is assumed to stay similar or
be the same. Another stream of work has studied successor representations, to enable a better transfer
of the agent’s actor-critic (Hansen et al., 2020; Barreto et al., 2016).


                                                          Pre-training for 2M environment frames
                                                                       ICM LBS        P2E RND
                                                        Correlation -0.54 -0.60 -0.34 -0.03
                                                        p-value        0.07    0.04   0.28    0.91



Figure 10: LDD and performance correlation.            Table 1: Pearson correlation and p-value
The line and shaded area represent a linear re-        between fine-tuned performance across URLB
gression model fit and its confidence intervals.       tasks and intrinsic rewards.


                                                   9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


6   C ONCLUSION

In order to accelerate the development and deployment of learning agents for real-world tasks, it is
crucial that the employed algorithms can adapt in a data-efficient way for multiple tasks. Our study
provides an empirical analysis of several design choices, which allowed us to obtain near-optimal
performance in URLB and that showed robustness to perturbations in the environment, on the RWRL
benchmark. We also analyzed several aspects of the learned models, to understand what could be
improved further in the future to ease the adaptation process.
Limitations. In the Jaco reaching tasks, we found that a bad initialization of the pre-trained actor
can actually harm the agent’s performance. While competence-based approaches should address
this limitation, by learning a variety of skill behaviors, their performance on the other domains has
been subpar. Future work should aim to find a more general approach to pre-train behavior for fast
adaptation or improve the exploration capabilities of competence-based approaches.
Another issue we encountered, on the RWRL benchmark, is that if the environment introduces
too intense perturbations during adaptation, relying on the predictions of the adopted world model
becomes problematic, to the extent that exploiting a planner is not useful anymore. Developing more
resilient models that can be trained in an unsupervised fashion and used for data-efficient planning,
even in presence of complex perturbations, will be the focus of future studies.

Reproducibility statement We reported in the main text (Algorithm 1) the pseudo-code for Dyna-
MPC and in Appendix D the pseudo-code for our end-to-end approach. We also provide instructions
on how we implemented our methods (Appendix B) and all the model and training hyperparameters
to implement and reproduce the results (Table 4). We will release our code and scripts.

R EFERENCES
Rishabh Agarwal, Max Schwarzer, Pablo Samuel Castro, Aaron Courville, and Marc G. Bellemare.
  Deep reinforcement learning at the edge of the statistical precipice, 2021. URL https://
  arxiv.org/abs/2108.13264.

Michael Ahn, Anthony Brohan, Noah Brown, Yevgen Chebotar, Omar Cortes, Byron David, Chelsea
 Finn, Keerthana Gopalakrishnan, Karol Hausman, Alex Herzog, Daniel Ho, Jasmine Hsu, Julian
 Ibarz, Brian Ichter, Alex Irpan, Eric Jang, Rosario Jauregui Ruano, Kyle Jeffrey, Sally Jesmonth,
 Nikhil Joshi, Ryan Julian, Dmitry Kalashnikov, Yuheng Kuang, Kuang-Huei Lee, Sergey Levine,
 Yao Lu, Linda Luu, Carolina Parada, Peter Pastor, Jornell Quiambao, Kanishka Rao, Jarek
 Rettinghouse, Diego Reyes, Pierre Sermanet, Nicolas Sievers, Clayton Tan, Alexander Toshev,
 Vincent Vanhoucke, Fei Xia, Ted Xiao, Peng Xu, Sichun Xu, and Mengyuan Yan. Do as i can
 and not as i say: Grounding language in robotic affordances. In arXiv preprint arXiv:2204.01691,
 2022.

Arthur Argenson and Gabriel Dulac-Arnold. Model-based offline planning, 2020. URL https:
  //arxiv.org/abs/2008.05556.

André Barreto, Will Dabney, Rémi Munos, Jonathan J. Hunt, Tom Schaul, Hado van Hasselt, and
  David Silver. Successor features for transfer in reinforcement learning, 2016. URL https:
 //arxiv.org/abs/1606.05312.

Marc Bellemare, Sriram Srinivasan, Georg Ostrovski, Tom Schaul, David Saxton, and Remi Munos.
 Unifying count-based exploration and intrinsic motivation. In D. Lee, M. Sugiyama, U. Luxburg,
 I. Guyon, and R. Garnett (eds.), Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 29,
 2016.

Yuri Burda, Harri Edwards, Deepak Pathak, Amos Storkey, Trevor Darrell, and Alexei A. Efros.
  Large-scale study of curiosity-driven learning, 2018. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/1808.
  04355.

Yuri Burda, Harri Edwards, Deepak Pathak, Amos Storkey, Trevor Darrell, and Alexei A. Efros.
  Largescale study of curiosity-driven learning. ICLR, 2019a.


                                                 10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Yuri Burda, Harrison Edwards, Amos J. Storkey, and Oleg Klimov. Exploration by random network
  distillation. ICLR, 2019b.
Ting Chen, Simon Kornblith, Mohammad Norouzi, and Geoffrey Hinton. A simple framework for
  contrastive learning of visual representations. In Proceedings of the 37th International Conference
  on Machine Learning, pp. 1597–1607, 2020.
Kurtland Chua, Roberto Calandra, Rowan McAllister, and Sergey Levine. Deep reinforcement
  learning in a handful of trials using probabilistic dynamics models. In S. Bengio, H. Wallach,
  H. Larochelle, K. Grauman, N. Cesa-Bianchi, and R. Garnett (eds.), Advances in Neural Informa-
  tion Processing Systems. Curran Associates, Inc., 2018.
Junyoung Chung, Caglar Gulcehre, Kyunghyun Cho, and Yoshua Bengio. Empirical evaluation of
  gated recurrent neural networks on sequence modeling. In NIPS Workshop on Deep Learning,
  2014, 2014.
Gabriel Dulac-Arnold, Nir Levine, Daniel J. Mankowitz, Jerry Li, Cosmin Paduraru, Sven Gowal,
  and Todd Hester. An empirical investigation of the challenges of real-world reinforcement learning,
  2020.
Benjamin Eysenbach, Abhishek Gupta, Julian Ibarz, and Sergey Levine. Diversity is all you need:
  Learning skills without a reward function. In ICLR, 2019.
Jesse Farebrother, Marlos C. Machado, and Michael Bowling. Generalization and regularization in
  dqn, 2018. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/1810.00123.
David Ha and Jürgen Schmidhuber. Recurrent world models facilitate policy evolution. In S. Bengio,
  H. Wallach, H. Larochelle, K. Grauman, N. Cesa-Bianchi, and R. Garnett (eds.), Advances in
  Neural Information Processing Systems. Curran Associates, Inc., 2018.
Tuomas Haarnoja, Aurick Zhou, Pieter Abbeel, and Sergey Levine. Soft actor-critic: Off-policy maxi-
  mum entropy deep reinforcement learning with a stochastic actor. arXiv preprint arXiv:1801.01290,
  2018.
Danijar Hafner, Timothy Lillicrap, Jimmy Ba, and Mohammad Norouzi. Dream to control: Learning
  behaviors by latent imagination. In ICLR, 2019a.
Danijar Hafner, Timothy Lillicrap, Ian Fischer, Ruben Villegas, David Ha, Honglak Lee, and James
  Davidson. Learning latent dynamics for planning from pixels. In ICML, pp. 2555–2565, 2019b.
Danijar Hafner, Timothy P Lillicrap, Mohammad Norouzi, and Jimmy Ba. Mastering atari with
  discrete world models. In ICLR, 2021.
Nicklas Hansen, Xiaolong Wang, and Hao Su. Temporal difference learning for model predictive
  control. 2022.
Steven Hansen, Will Dabney, Andre Barreto, David Warde-Farley, Tom Van de Wiele, and Volodymyr
  Mnih. Fast task inference with variational intrinsic successor features. In ICLR, 2020.
Michael Janner, Justin Fu, Marvin Zhang, and Sergey Levine. When to trust your model: Model-based
 policy optimization. ArXiv, abs/1906.08253, 2019.
Michael Laskin, Denis Yarats, Hao Liu, Kimin Lee, Albert Zhan, Kevin Lu, Catherine Cang, Lerrel
 Pinto, and Pieter Abbeel. URLB: Unsupervised reinforcement learning benchmark. In NeurIPS
 Datasets and Benchmarks Track (Round 2), 2021.
Sergey Levine, Chelsea Finn, Trevor Darrell, and Pieter Abbeel. End-to-end training of deep
  visuomotor policies. J. Mach. Learn. Res., 2016.
Timothy P. Lillicrap, Jonathan J. Hunt, Alexander Pritzel, Nicolas Heess, Tom Erez, Yuval Tassa,
  David Silver, and Daan Wierstra. Continuous control with deep reinforcement learning. In Yoshua
  Bengio and Yann LeCun (eds.), ICLR, 2016.
Hao Liu and Pieter Abbeel. Aps: Active pretraining with successor features. In ICML, pp. 6736–6747,
  2021a.


                                                 11
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Hao Liu and Pieter Abbeel. Unsupervised active pre-training for reinforcement learning. ICLR,
  2021b.
Kendall Lowrey, Aravind Rajeswaran, Sham Kakade, Emanuel Todorov, and Igor Mordatch. Plan
  online, learn offline: Efficient learning and exploration via model-based control, 2018. URL
  https://arxiv.org/abs/1811.01848.
Yao Lu, Karol Hausman, Yevgen Chebotar, Mengyuan Yan, Eric Jang, Alexander Herzog, Ted Xiao,
  Alex Irpan, Mohi Khansari, Dmitry Kalashnikov, and Sergey Levine. AW-opt: Learning robotic
  skills with imitation andreinforcement at scale. In 5th Annual Conference on Robot Learning
  (CoRL), 2021.
Xiao Ma, Siwei Chen, David Hsu, and Wee Sun Lee. Contrastive variational model-based reinforce-
  ment learning for complex observations. In Proceedings of the 4th Conference on Robot Learning
  (CoRL), 2020.
Pietro Mazzaglia, Tim Verbelen, and Bart Dhoedt. Contrastive active inference. In A. Beygelzimer,
  Y. Dauphin, P. Liang, and J. Wortman Vaughan (eds.), Advances in Neural Information Processing
  Systems, 2021a.
Pietro Mazzaglia, Ozan Çatal, Tim Verbelen, and B. Dhoedt. Curiosity-driven exploration via latent
  bayesian surprise. ArXiv, abs/2104.07495, 2021b.
OpenAI, Ilge Akkaya, Marcin Andrychowicz, Maciek Chociej, Mateusz Litwin, Bob McGrew, Arthur
  Petron, Alex Paino, Matthias Plappert, Glenn Powell, Raphael Ribas, Jonas Schneider, Nikolas A.
  Tezak, Jerry Tworek, Peter Welinder, Lilian Weng, Qiming Yuan, Wojciech Zaremba, and Lei M.
  Zhang. Solving rubik’s cube with a robot hand. ArXiv, abs/1910.07113, 2019.
Simone Parisi, Victoria Dean, Deepak Pathak, and Abhinav Gupta. Interesting object, curious agent:
  Learning task-agnostic exploration, 2021. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2111.13119.
Simone Parisi, Aravind Rajeswaran, Senthil Purushwalkam, and Abhinav Gupta. The unsurprising
  effectiveness of pre-trained vision models for control, 2022.
Deepak Pathak, Pulkit Agrawal, Alexei Efros, and Trevor Darrell. Curiosity-driven exploration by
  self-supervised prediction. ICML, 2017.
Deepak Pathak, Dhiraj Gandhi, and Abhinav Gupta. Self-supervised exploration via disagreement.
  In ICML, 2019.
Alec Radford, Jeff Wu, Rewon Child, David Luan, Dario Amodei, and Ilya Sutskever. Language
  models are unsupervised multitask learners. 2019.
Arthur George Richards. Robust constrained model predictive control. PhD thesis, Massachusetts
  Institute of Technology, 2005.
Remo Sasso, Matthia Sabatelli, and Marco A. Wiering. Multi-source transfer learning for deep
  model-based reinforcement learning, 2022. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2205.14410.
Julian Schrittwieser, Ioannis Antonoglou, Thomas Hubert, Karen Simonyan, Laurent Sifre, Simon
  Schmitt, Arthur Guez, Edward Lockhart, Demis Hassabis, Thore Graepel, et al. Mastering atari,
  go, chess and shogi by planning with a learned model. Nature, 588(7839):604–609, 2020.
John Schulman, Philipp Moritz, Sergey Levine, Michael Jordan, and Pieter Abbeel. High-dimensional
  continuous control using generalized advantage estimation. In ICLR, 2016.
John Schulman, Filip Wolski, Prafulla Dhariwal, Alec Radford, and Oleg Klimov. Proximal policy
  optimization algorithms. ArXiv, abs/1707.06347, 2017.
Ramanan Sekar, Oleh Rybkin, Kostas Daniilidis, Pieter Abbeel, Danijar Hafner, and Deepak Pathak.
  Planning to explore via self-supervised world models. In ICML, 2020.
Harshit Sikchi, Wenxuan Zhou, and David Held. Learning off-policy with online planning, 2020.
  URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2008.10066.


                                               12
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Harshit Sikchi, Wenxuan Zhou, and David Held. Learning off-policy with online planning. In 5th
 Annual Conference on Robot Learning, 2021. URL https://openreview.net/forum?
  id=1GNV9SW95eJ.
Harshinder Singh, V. Hnizdo, Adam Demchuk, and Neeraj Misra. Nearest neighbor estimates of
  entropy. American Journal of Mathematical and Management Sciences, 23, 02 2003.
Richard S. Sutton. Dyna, an integrated architecture for learning, planning, and reacting. SIGART
  Bull., 2(4):160–163, jul 1991. ISSN 0163-5719. doi: 10.1145/122344.122377. URL https:
  //doi.org/10.1145/122344.122377.
Erik Talvitie. Learning the reward function for a misspecified model. In Jennifer Dy and Andreas
  Krause (eds.), ICML, volume 80 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pp. 4838–4847.
  PMLR, 10–15 Jul 2018.
Yuval Tassa, Yotam Doron, Alistair Muldal, Tom Erez, Yazhe Li, Diego de Las Casas, David Budden,
  Abbas Abdolmaleki, Josh Merel, Andrew Lefrancq, Timothy P. Lillicrap, and Martin A. Riedmiller.
  Deepmind control suite. CoRR, abs/1801.00690, 2018.
Geoffrey van Driessel and Vincent Francois-Lavet. Component transfer learning for deep rl based on
  abstract representations, 2021. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2111.11525.
Grady Williams, Andrew Aldrich, and Evangelos Theodorou. Model Predictive Path Integral Control
  using Covariance Variable Importance Sampling. arXiv e-prints, art. arXiv:1509.01149, 2015.
Philipp Wu, Alejandro Escontrela, Danijar Hafner, Ken Goldberg, and Pieter Abbeel. Daydreamer:
  World models for physical robot learning, 2022. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2206.
  14176.
Denis Yarats, Rob Fergus, Alessandro Lazaric, and Lerrel Pinto. Reinforcement learning with
  prototypical representations. 2021.
Denis Yarats, Rob Fergus, Alessandro Lazaric, and Lerrel Pinto. Mastering visual continuous control:
  Improved data-augmented reinforcement learning. In ICLR, 2022.


                                                13
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


A PPENDIX

A    N ORMALIZATION SCORES

                                 Pre-trainining for 2M environment frames
  Domain              Task            URLB Expert URLB Disagreement            Dreamer@2M         Ours
                       Flip                 799             346 ± 41               778          938 ± 12
                       Run                  796             208 ± 47               724          596 ± 38
  Walker
                      Stand                 984             746 ± 107              909          973 ± 14
                      Walk                  971             549 ± 117              965          959 ± 1
                      Jump                  888             389 ± 196              753          822 ± 33
                       Run                  888             337 ± 95               904          642 ± 99
  Quadruped
                      Stand                 920             512 ± 281              945          927 ± 28
                      Walk                  866             293 ± 117              947          816 ± 61
                Reach bottom left           193             124 ± 22               223          192 ± 23
                Reach bottom right          203             115 ± 32               231          192 ± 19
  Jaco
                  Reach top left            191             106 ± 38               233          197 ± 17
                 Reach top right            223             139 ± 22               225          212 ± 13


Table 2: Performance of expert baseline and the best method on pixel-based URLB from Laskin et al.
(2021) and performance of our oracle baseline (Dreamer@2M) and best approach, using LBS for
unsupervised data collection, after pre-training for 2M frames and fine-tuning for 100k steps.

In Table 2, we report the mean scores for the URLB Expert, used to normalize the scores in the
URLB paper, and for Dreamer@2M, which we use to normalize returns of our methods, where both
supervised baselines have been trained individually on each of the 12 tasks from URLB for 2M
frames. We additionally report mean and standard deviations for the best performing unsupervised
baseline from URLB. which is Disagreement (Pathak et al., 2019), and our method (using LBS for
data collection). We notice that our scores approach the Dreamer@2M’s scores in several tasks,
eventually outperforming them in a few tasks (e.g. Walker Flip, Quadruped Jump). We believe this
merit is due both to the exploration pre-training, which may have found more rewarding trajectories
than greedy supervised RL optimization and of the improved Dyna-MPC planning strategy.

B    I NTEGRATING U NSUPERVISED RL S TRATEGIES
We summarize here the unsupervised RL approaches tested and how we integrated them with the
Dreamer algorithm for exploration. For all methods, rewards have been normalized during training
using an exponential moving average with momentum 0.95, with the exceptions of RND, which
follows its original reward normalization (Burda et al., 2019b), and APS, whose rewards are not
normalized because they are used to regress the skill that is closer to the downstream task during FT.

ICM. The Intrinsic Curiosity Module (ICM; Pathak et al. (2017)) defines intrinsic rewards as the
error between states projected in a feature space and a feature dynamics model’s predictions. We
use the Dreamer agent encoder et = fϕ (st ) to obtain features and train a forward dynamics model
g(et |et−1 , at−1 ) to compute rewards as:
                                   rt ICM ∝ ∥g(et |et−1 , at−1 ) − et ∥2 .
As the rewards for ICM require environment states (going through the encoder to compute prediction
error), we train a reward predictor to allow estimating rewards in imagination.

Plan2Explore. The Plan2Explore algorithm (Sekar et al., 2020) is an adaptation of the Disagree-
ment algorithm (Pathak et al., 2019) for latent dynamics models. An ensemble of forward dynamics
models is trained to predict the features embedding et = fϕ (st ), given the previous latent state and
actions, i.e. g(et |zt−1 , at−1 , wk ), where wk are the parameters of the k-th predictor. Intrinsic rewards
are defined as the variance of the ensemble predictions:
                         rt P2E ∝ Var({g(et |zt−1 , at−1 , wk )|k ∈ [1, ..., K]}).


                                                    14
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Plan2Explore requires only latent states and actions, thus it can be computed directly in imagination.
We used an ensemble of 5 models.

RND. Random Network Distillation (RND; Burda et al. (2019b)) learns to predict the output of
a randomly initialized network n(st ) that projects the states into a more compact random feature
space. As the random network is not updated during training, the prediction error should diminish for
already visited states. The intrinsic reward here is defined as:
                                       rt RND ∝ ∥g(st ) − n(st )∥2
As the rewards for RND requires environment states (to encode with the random network), we train a
reward predictor to allow estimating rewards in imagination.

LBS. In Latent Bayesian Surprise (LBS; Mazzaglia et al. (2021b)), they use the KL divergence
between the posterior and the prior of a latent dynamics model as a proxy for the information gained
with respect to the latent state variable, by observing new states. Rewards are computed as:
                         rt LBS ∝ DKL [q(zt |zt−1 , at−1 , et )∥p(zt |zt−1 , at−1 )]
As the rewards for LBS requires environment states (to compute the posterior distribution), we train a
reward predictor to allow estimating rewards in imagination.

APT. Active Pre-training (APT; Liu & Abbeel (2021b)) uses a particle-based estimator based on
the K nearest-neighbors algorithm (Singh et al., 2003) to estimate entropy for a given state. We
implement APT on top of the deterministic component of the latent states z̄t , providing rewards as:
                                                 k
                                                 X
                                      rt APT ∝        log ∥z̄t − z̄ti ∥2 ,
                                                  i

where k are the nearest-neighbor states in latent space. As APT requires only latent states, it can be
computed directly in imagination. We used k = 12 nearest neighbors.

DIAYN. Diversity is All you need (DIAYN; Eysenbach et al. (2019)) maximizes the mutual
information between the states and latent skills w. We implement DIAYN on top of the latent space of
Dreamer, writing the mutual information as I(wt , zt ) = H(wt ) − H(wt |zt ). The entropy H(wt ) is
kept maximal by sampling wt ∼ Unif(wt ) from a discrete uniform prior distribution, while H(wt |zt )
is estimated learning a discriminator q(wt |zt ). We compute intrinsic rewards as:
                                         rt DIAYN ∝ log q(wt |zt )
Additionally, DIAYN maximizes the entropy of the actor, so we add an entropy maximization term to
Dreamer’s objective (Haarnoja et al., 2018). As DIAYN requires model states and skills sampled
from a uniform distribution to compute rewards, we can directly compute them in imagination. For
FT, the skill adapted is the one with the highest expected rewards, considering the states and rewards
obtained in the initial episodes.

APS. Active Pre-training with Successor features (APS; Liu & Abbeel (2021a)) maximizes the
mutual information between the states and latent skills w. We implement APS on top of the latent
space of Dreamer, writing the mutual information as I(wt , zt ) = H(zt ) − H(zt |wt ). The entropy
term H(zt ) is estimated using a particle-based estimator on top of the deterministic component of the
latent states z̄t , as for APT, while the term H(zt |wt ) is estimated learning a discriminator q(zt |wt ).
The intrinsic rewards for APS can be written as:
                                     rt APS ∝ rt APT + log q(wt |zt )
As APS requires model states and uniformly sampled skills to compute rewards, we can directly
compute them in imagination. For FT, the skill to adapt is selected using linear regression over the
states and rewards obtained in the initial episodes (Liu & Abbeel, 2021a).


                                                      15
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


C    DYNA -MPC
To further improve data efficiency, we chose to use an hybrid planner that combines reinforcement
learning and MPC (Hansen et al., 2022; Sikchi et al., 2020; Lowrey et al., 2018). Previous works
leveraged model-free off-policy algorithms (Hansen et al., 2022; Sikchi et al., 2020) to learn the actor
and critic in a more computationally efficient manner. The policy used to act on the environment
combines action samples from the actor network with MPC, while the critic and the actor are learned
"offline" from previously collected data. This has several benefits but also leads to an issue referred
to as “actor divergence" (Sikchi et al., 2020), which consists of the policy used for data collection
being different from the policy that is used to learn the critic.
In our study, we found that using the PT world model to learn the actor and the critic is crucial
to improve data-efficiency during FT (see Figure 3). Thus, we discard the option of learning the
actor and critic with off-policy deep RL. Instead, we design a new hybrid planner, which we call
Dyna-MPC, that learns actor and critic functions in the model imagination (Sutton, 1991), using the
Dreamer algorithm (Hafner et al., 2019a), and then combines their predictions with MPPI (Williams
et al., 2015) for acting on the environment. By doing so we mitigate the "actor divergence" issue as
actor and critic are learned on-policy on the trajectories generated with the model.
The critic is learned in the model’s imagination, computing the expected value of the actor’s actions
using GAE-λ estimates of the returns (Schulman et al., 2016; Hafner et al., 2019a):
                                                               λ

                          λ             (1 − λ)vψ (zt+1 ) + λVt+1  if t < H,
                       Vt = rt + γt                                                                (1)
                                        vψ (zH )                   if t = H,
where rt is the reward for state zt , yielded by the reward predictor of the world model, and H is the
imagination horizon. When computing returns for MPPI we use the same return estimates.
At each time step, we use MPPI to select the best action. MPPI iteratively fits the parameters of
a time-dependent multivariate Gaussian distribution with diagonal covariance, updating mean and
standard deviation parameters using an importance weighted average of the top-k trajectories with
the highest estimated returns. At every step, N trajectories Γi = {a0,i , a1,i , ..., aH,i } of length H are
obtained sampling actions from the distributions at ∼ N (µt , σt2 I) and Nπ trajectories are sampled
from the actor network at ∼ πθ (at |zt ) and their outcomes are predicted using the model. At each
MPPI iteration, the distribution parameters are updated as follows:
                                                  v                                
                         Pk           ⋆
                                                     u PN
                                                                     ⋆ − µ)2
                                Ω i Γ i
                                                     u         Ω i (Γ
                    µ= P    i=1
                             N
                                        , σ = max t i=1PN i                   , ϵ ,                    (2)
                             i=1 Ω  i                           i=1  Ω i


where Ωi = exp(τ Viλ ), τ is a temperature parameter, ⋆ indicates the trajectory is in the top-k, and ϵ
is a clipping factor to avoid too small standard deviations (Hansen et al., 2022). To reduce the number
of iterations required for convergence, we reuse the 1-step shifted mean obtained at the previous
timestep (Argenson & Dulac-Arnold, 2020).


                                                    16
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


D    A LGORITHM

Algorithm 2 Unsupervised Model-based Pre-Training for Data-efficient Control from Pixels
Require: Actor θ, Critic ψ, World Model ϕ
 1:      Intrinsic reward rint , extrinsic reward rext
 2:      Environment, M , downstream tasks Tk , k ∈ [1, . . . , M ]
 3:      Pre-train frames NPT , fine-tune frames NFT , environment frames/update τ
 4:      Initial model state z0 , hybrid planner Dyna-MPC, replay buffers DPT , DFT
 5:
 6: // Pre-training
 7: for t = 0, . . . , NPT do
 8:     Draw action from the actor, at ∼ πθ (at |zt )
 9:     Apply action to the environment, st+1 ∼ P (·|st , at )
10:     Add transition to replay buffer, DPT ← DPT ∪ (st , at , st+1 )
11:     Infer model state, zt+1 ∼ q(zt+1 |zt , at , fϕ (st+1 ))
12:     if t mod τ = 0 then
13:         Update world model parameters ϕ on the data from the replay buffer DPT
14:         Update actor-critic parameters {θ, ψ} in imagination, maximizing rint
15:     end if
16: end for
17: Output pre-trained parameters {ψPT , θPT , ϕPT }
18:
19: // Fine-tuning
20: for Tk ∈ [T1 , . . . , TM ] do
21:     Initialize fine-tuning world-model with ϕPT
22:     (Optional) Initialize fine-tuning actor with θPT
23:     for t = 0, . . . , NFT do
24:         Draw action from the actor, at ∼ πθ (at |zt )
25:         Use the planner for selecting best action, at ∼ Dyna-MPC(zt )
26:         Apply action to the environment, st+1 , rtext ∼ P (·|st , at )
27:         Add transition to replay buffer, DFT ← DFT ∪ (st , at , rtext , st+1 )
28:         Infer model state, zt+1 ∼ q(zt+1 |zt , at , fϕ (st+1 ))
29:         if t mod τ = 0 then
30:              Update world model parameters ϕ on the data from the replay buffer DFT
31:              Update actor-critic parameters {θ, ψ} in imagination, maximizing rext
32:         end if
33:     end for
34:     Evaluate performance on Tk
35: end for


                                               17
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


E    A DDITIONAL R ESULTS
We present complete results, for each unsupervised RL method, for the large-scale study experiments
presented in Section 3.


                        Figure 11: Complete results for Section 3.1 (Figure 2b).


            (a) Model                       (b) Model, Actor             (c) Model, Actor, Critic

                        Figure 12: Complete results for Section 3.2 (Figure 3).


                        (a) FT                                    (b) FT + Dyna-MPC

                        Figure 13: Complete results for Section 3.3 (Figure 4).


                                                  18
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Figure 14: Longer pre-training. Fine-tuning performance of our method when pre-training for
longer than 2M steps. Every bar reports mean performance and standard errors.


Can a pre-training stage longer than 2M frames be beneficial? In Figure 14, we report FT results with
our full method, every 1M frames up to 5M PT frames. The aggregated results show that, adopting
our method, longer PT can increase performance further, especially until 4M steps. The performance
in all domains keeps increasing or remains steady until 5M steps, with two exceptional cases, Walker
for Plan2Explore and Jaco for APS, where performance drops between 4M and 5M steps.
For these experiments, we kept the size of the model and all the hyperparameters unvaried with
respect to the 2M PT frames experiments but we increased the replay buffer maximum size to 5M
frames. Increasing model capacity, and adopting additional precautions, such as annealing learning
rate, it is possible that the agent could benefit even more from longer pre-training and we aim to
analyse this more in details for future work.


                                                 19
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


F     RWRL SETTINGS
We take the Quadruped and Walker tasks from the RWRL benchmark and replace the low-dimensional
sensor inputs with RGB camera inputs. While this removes some of the perturbations planned in the
benchmark (Dulac-Arnold et al., 2020), such as noise in the sensors, it introduces the difficulty of
a different dynamics in pixel space (due to the other perturbations), compared to the one observed
during pre-training in the vanilla simulation environment.

        Setting              Easy                     Medium                 Hard
        System Delays        Time Steps               Time Steps             Time Steps
        Action               3                        6                      9
        Rewards              10                       20                     40
        Action Repetition    1                        2                      3
        Gaussian Noise       Std. Deviation           Std. Deviation         Std. Deviation
        Action               0.1                      0.3                    1.0
        Perturbation         [Min,Max]      Std.      [Min,Max]      Std.    [Min,Max]      Std.
        Quadruped
        (shin length)        [0.25, 0.3]     0.005    [0.25, 0.8]    0.05    [0.25, 1.4]     0.1
        Perturbation         [Min,Max]       Std.     [Min,Max]      Std.    [Min,Max]       Std.
        Walker
        (thigh length)       [0.225, 0.25]   0.002    [0.225, 0.4]   0.015   [0.15, 0.55]]   0.04


Table 3: Perturbations setting for each challenge of our adapted tasks from the RWRL benchmark, in
increasing levels of intensity.


G     E XTENDED A NALYSIS
We note that, to run the experiments faster, we did not use Dyna-MPC for the extended analysis.
Furthermore, the Jaco tasks used slightly differ from the original ones in URLB, only in that the
target to reach cannot move. This allows consistency of the reward function between PT and FT, so
that a reward predictor can be trained on ‘reward-labelled’ PT data. However, because of this change,
the performance in Jaco may differ from the other main results (particularly in Figure 8 and Figure 9).

G.1    L EARNING R EWARDS O NLINE

In Figure 8 of the main text, we measure the gap in performance between pre-trained agents that
have no knowledge of the reward function at the beginning of fine-tuning and agents whose reward
predictor is initialized from a reward predictor learned on top of the unsupervised pre-training data
(violating the URLB settings). Crucially, the agent during unsupervised PT can learn the reward
predictor without affecting neither the model learning or the exploration process. To not affect the
model, gradients are stopped between the reward predictor and the rest of the world model. To not
affect exploration, the rewards used to train the agent’s actor and critic remain the intrinsic rewards,
for exploration.

G.2    Z ERO - SHOT A DAPTATION

Using agents that have access to a PT reward predictor, we explore the idea of zero-shot adaptation
using MPC, which is trying to solve the URLB tasks using only planning and the pre-trained world
model and reward predictor. In order to obtain good performance, this assumes that the model
correctly learned the dynamics of the environment and explored rewarding transitions that are relevant
to the downstream task, during pre-training. In Figure 9 of the main text, we compare the results of
performing MPC in a zero-shot setting (ZS) with the performance of an MPC agent that is allowed
100k frames for fine-tuning (FT). As for the MPC method, we employ MPPI (Williams et al., 2015).
Because these experiments are particularly expensive to run, we just them on the agents trained with
the Plan2Explore URL approach.
We observe that the performance of zero-shot MPC is generally weak. While it overall performs
better than the non-pre-trained model, simply applying MPC leveraging the pre-trained world model


                                                     20
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


and reward predictor trained on the pre-training stage data is not sufficient to guarantee satisfactory
performance. The fact that exploiting the fine-tuning stage using the same MPC approach generally
boosts performance demonstrates that the model has a major benefit from the FT stage. Still, the
performance of MPC generally lacks behind the actor-critic performance, suggesting that, especially
in a higher-dimensional action space such as the Quadruped one, amortizing the cost of planning with
actor-critic seems crucial to achieve higher performance.

G.3    L ATENT DYNAMICS D ISCREPANCY

Model misspecification is a useful measure to assess the uncertainty or inaccuracy of the model
dynamics. It is computed as the difference between the dynamics predictions and the real environment
dynamics. The metric helps build robust RL strategies, that take the dynamics uncertainty into account
while searching for the optimal behavior (Talvitie, 2018). However, with pixel-based inputs the
dynamics of the environment are observed through high-dimensional images. And this in-turn could
hurt the metric evaluation, since the distances in pixel space can be misleading. In our approach, we
use a model-based RL agent that learns the dynamics model in a compact latent space Z.
Our novel metric, Latent Dynamics Discrepancy (LDD), quantifies the “misspecification" of the
learned latent dynamics accordingly. The metric quantifies the distance between the predictions of
the pre-trained model and the same model after fine-tuning on a downstream task. However, as the
decoder of the world model gets updated during fine-tuning, the latent space mapping between model
states z and environment states s might drift. For this reason, we freeze the agent’s decoder weights,
so that the model can only improve the posterior and the dynamics. This ensures that the mapping
Z→ − S remains unchanged and allows to compare the dynamics model after fine-tuning with the one
before fine-tuning. In order to measure the distance between the distribution output by the dynamics
network, we chose the symmetrical Jensen-Shannon divergence:

                      LDD = E(zt ,at ) DJS [pFT (zt+1 |zt , at )∥pPT (zt+1 |zt , at )] ,          (3)
where the expectation is taken over the previous model states zt sampled from the fine-tuned posterior
qFT (zt ), actions at−1 sampled from an oracle actor π ∗ (at |zt ), so that we evaluate the metric on
optimal trajectories, whose environment’s state distribution corresponds to the stationary distribution
                              ∗
induced by the actor st ∼ dπ (st ). We used 30 trajectories per task in our evaluation.
We observe in our experiments that there exists a correlation between the metric and the performance
ratio between a zero-shot model and a fine-tuned model (see Figure 10 in the main paper). The
key observation is that major updates in the model dynamics during fine-tuning phase played an
important role in improving the agent’s performance, compared to the pre-trained model and zero-shot
performance. Future research may attempt to reduce such dependency by either improving the model
learning process, so that the pre-trained dynamics could have greater accuracy, or the data collection
process, proposing URL methods that directly aid to reduce such uncertainty.

G.4    U NSUPERVISED R EWARDS AND P ERFORMANCE

We further analyzed the correlation between the normalized performance of the different exploration
agents and their intrinsic rewards for optimal trajectories obtained by an oracle agent. A strong
negative correlation between the two factors should indicate that the agent is more interested in seeing
the optimal trajectories when its performance is low on the task.
We observe that there is negative correlation between Plan2Explore (P2E), ICM, LBS’s performance
and their intrinsic rewards, while we found ∼0 correlation for RND (see Table 1 in the main text). Out
of the methods tested, LBS significantly demonstrated the correlation, as its p-value is < 0.05. This
is likely one of the key factors for the high performance of the agent using LBS on the benchmark.
One possible explanation is that LBS searches for transitions of the environment that are difficult to
predict for the dynamics, so the model likely learns those transitions more accurately, facilitating
planning during the fine-tuning stage. Another potential explanation is that, given the high correlation
between intrinsic and extrinsic rewards, the actor initialized by LBS performs better at the beginning
of FT, speeding up adaptation.


                                                  21
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


H    H YPERPARAMETERS
Most of the hyperparameters we used for world-model training are the same as in the original
DreamerV2 work (Hafner et al., 2021). Specific details are as outlined here:

                          Name                                 Value
                          World Model
                          Batch size                              50
                          Sequence length                         50
                          Discrete latent state dimension         32
                          Discrete latent classes                 32
                          GRU cell dimension                     200
                          KL free nats                             1
                          KL balancing                           0.8
                          Adam learning rate                  3 · 10−4
                          Slow critic update interval            100
                          Actor-Critic
                          Imagination horizon                     15
                          γ parameter                           0.99
                          λ parameter                           0.95
                          Adam learning rate                  8 · 10−5
                          Actor entropy loss scale            1 · 10−4
                          Dyna-MPC
                          Iterations                             12
                          Number of samples                     512
                          Top-k                                  64
                          Mixture coefficient (Actor/CEM)       0.05
                          Min std (fixed)                        0.1
                          Temperature                            0.5
                          Momentum                               0.1
                          Planning horizon                        5
                          Common
                          Environment frames/update               10
                          MLP number of layers                     4
                          MLP number of units                    400
                          Hidden layers dimension                400
                          Adam epsilon                        1 · 10−5
                          Weight decay                        1 · 10−6
                          Gradient clipping                      100


     Table 4: World model, actor-critic, planner (Dyna-MPC) and common hyperparameters.

For the pure MPC-based experiments, we increased the number of MPPI samples from 512 to 1000,
the number of top-k from 64 to 100, and the horizon from 5 to 15, to compensate for the absence of
the actor network’s samples and the critic’s predictions in the return estimates.


                                               22
