Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


GuoFeng: A D ISCOURSE - AWARE E VALUATION B ENCH -
MARK FOR L ANGUAGE U NDERSTANDING , T RANSLA -
TION AND G ENERATION

 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                            A BSTRACT
        Modeling discourse – the linguistic phenomena that go beyond individual sen-
        tences, is a fundamental and challenging problem in natural language processing
        (NLP). However, existing evaluation benchmarks mainly focus on the evaluation of
        inter-sentence properties and overlook important discourse phenomena that cross
        sentences. To bridge the gap, we propose a GuoFeng benchmark that can evaluate
        intra-sentence discourse properties across a diverse set of NLP tasks, covering
        understanding, translation, and generation. GuoFeng consists of 9 document-level
        testsets in the literature domain, which contain rich discourse phenomena (e.g.
        cohesion and coherence) in Chinese and/or English. For linguistic analysis, we
        also propose a diagnostic test suite that can examine whether the target models
        learn discourse knowledge. We evaluate 17 general- and in-domain models based
        on Transformer and advanced pretraining architectures, showing that fine-grained
        pretraining based on document-level training data consistently improves the model-
        ing of discourse information. We will release the datasets, pretrained models, and
        leaderboard, which we hope can significantly facilitate research in this field.


1   I NTRODUCTION
To evaluate the general performance of models,
previous work proposed a variety of benchmarks,
covering different tasks and languages such as
GLUE (Wang et al., 2018), CLUE (Xu et al.,
2020) and XGLUE (Liang et al., 2020). How-
ever, existing benchmarks pay little attention to
discourse phenomena, which is a fundamental
and challenging problem in natural language pro-
cessing (NLP) (Kevitt et al., 1992). The natural
language generally consists of meaningful, uni-
fied, and purposive groups of sentences, which
are organized as a whole according to discourse Figure 1: Discourse definition and example. The
properties (Cook, 1989). As shown in Figure 1, concept of discourse is detailed in Appendix §A.
the discourse property manifests in two ways: (1)
cohesion, where the dependency between words or phrases makes them logically and consistently
connected; (2) coherence, where the structural relation between segments or sentences enables them
semantically and meaningfully composed.
To bridge the gap, we introduce a GuoFeng benchmark for the target evaluation on the discourse
modeling. GuoFeng comprises three parts:

• GuoFeng Benchmark: It consists of nine Chinese/English discourse-aware tasks covering a broad
  range of NLP tasks (understanding, translation, and generation), data quantities (from 26.4K to
  2.4M), and difficulties. Besides, most benchmarking datasets are newly created in this work.
• GuoFeng Diagnostic Dataset: To understand the discourse information learned by models,
  GuoFeng also includes a dataset of hand-crafted 600 examples for probing trained models. Each
  instance in the dataset is a contrastive pair, where the correct candidate is the original instance in


                                                  1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                                                     Dataset
    Task    Description                       Metric                                        Language
                                                      # Train       # Test     Domain
                                         Understanding Task
      SI    Speaker Identification           F1         48.0K       17.5K       novel          zh
    ZPR     Zero Pronoun Recovery            F1          2.2M        8.1K      mixed           zh
    MRC     Machine Reading Comprehension Accuracy      26.4K        6.5K    composition     mzh, czh
                                            Translation Task
     NT     Novel Translation                 BLEU         1.9M      1.3K       novel        zh→en
    CCT     Classical Chinese Translation     BLEU       778.1K      5.3K       dianji      czh→mzh
     PT     Poetry Translation                BLEU        47.1K      2.7K       poetry       zh→en
                                            Generation Task
      TE    Text Expansion                   BLEU         2.4M        10K       book            en
      TI    Text Infilling                    PPL         233K        10K       book            zh
      TC    Text Completion                   PPL         233K        10K       book            zh

Table 1: An overview of our discourse-aware evaluation benchmark, covering language understanding,
translation and generation. All datasets consist of document-level texts in the literature domain, which
are rich in discourse phenomena. Eight of them are newly created by us and one is expanded based
on existing corpus (i.e. MRC). It covers three languages: English (en), Modern Chinese (mzh/zh)
and Classical Chinese (czh). We only report commonly-used evaluation metrics here while more
metrics are discussed in Appendix §B. “#” means the number of instances (e.g. sentences, pairs or
documents). “Test” represents both validation and testing sets.


    the benchmark and the incorrect one is a perturbation by modifying discourse devises or structures
    in the correct candidates.
• GuoFeng Training Data: We release a large-scale, document-level data (400G) in Chinese and
  English, which is in the same literature domain with the benchmark. The training data enables
  fine-grained pretraining to better model discourse information required by the benchmark.

To better understand challenges posed by GuoFeng, we conduct experiments on a variety of state-
of-the-art models, including Transformer and pretrained models. We found that these tasks display
different levels of difficulty, resulting in different behaviors and performances across models. Fur-
thermore, the fine-grained pretraining based on the document-level and discourse-rich GuoFeng data
improves performances particularly on cohesive translation and coherent generation. However, the
best models still achieve a fairly low absolute score, highlighting the difficulty of modeling discourse.
There are three main contributions in this work:

• Challenging Tasks: We propose a diverse set of discourse-aware tasks to evaluate monolingual
  and cross-lingual models’ ability to understand and generate nature language.
• Considerable Resources: We build and release a variety of discourse-aware resources, including
  benchmarking datasets, diagnostic test suite, large-scale pretraining corpus and discourse-aware
  pretrained models.
• Comprehensive Comparisons: We systematically compare many advanced pretraining methods
  on the benchmark, and identify current challenges in discourse modelling for future exploration.


2     D ISCOURSE -AWARE TASKS

To comprehensively evaluate the target models, GuoFeng covers three types of NLP tasks, including
language understanding, translation and generation. We design the benchmarking tasks using the
following criteria: (1) our tasks should measure the ability of models to handle discourse phenomena,
thus we define discourse-related tasks at different levels of difficulty; (2) our datasets should contain
rich discourse phenomena, thus we build document-level datasets with whole contexts extracted
from literary texts. To this end, we introduce nine discourse-aware tasks, which are representative of
challenging NLP tasks, and easily applicable to real-world situations.


                                                   2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Figure 2: Illustration of the proposed understating tasks in terms discourse properties and task
definition. As seen, SI needs to recognize named entity and resolve coreference. While ZPR demands
the further ability to tackle zero anaphora and gender identification. MRC is the hardest because it
should fully understand coherence (e.g. discourse structure based on temporal relation) apart from
cohesion in previous tasks. English translations of example sentences are listed in Table 6.


Accordingly, the benchmark contains a collection of nine datasets in Chinese and/or English: eight
of which are newly created, and one is expanded based on existing data. Table 1 lists the details
of the benchmark, where each task contains training, validation, and testing sets. In the following
subsections, we mainly introduce task definition, discourse awareness, and data construction. More
details such as additional evaluation results are described in Appendix §B.

2.1   L ANGUAGE U NDERSTANDING TASKS

NLU aims to analyze what human language means, containing various tasks such as natural language
inference and story comprehension. Discourse is one of the fundamental problems for NLU models. It
is difficult to determine the referents of pronouns and definite noun phrases, and understand elliptical
sentence fragments, as well as a host of other long-range language phenomena that have not even
been adequately characterized much less conquered (Bates, 1995). As shown in Figure 2, we classify
tasks into three difficulty levels according to the length of contexts and the amount of knowledge,
required for discourse modeling.

SI (Speaker Identification) Given a paragraph that may contain an utterance and the surrounding
context, SI aims to identify the corresponding speaker(s) for the utterance or the content within
quotation marks if no speaker exists. To archive this goal, models need to examine the existence of
quotes, recognize named entities or phrases that can serve as speakers, and resolve coreference. We
construct the dataset that contains 66K instances based on eighteen Chinese novels. Unlike previous
SI datasets such as P&P (He et al., 2013) in which all speakers are entities, speakers in our dataset
can also be phrases, pronouns, or multi-entities.

ZPR (Zero Pronoun Recovery) ZPR aims to recover omitted pronouns in terms of position
and form, according to its anaphora information in the given sentence (Yang & Xue, 2010; Zhang
et al., 2019b; Song et al., 2020). The BaiduKnows is a widely-used Chinese ZPR corpus, which
contains only 5K human-annotated sentences extracted from a Q&A forum (Zhang et al., 2019b).
The insufficient data limits the investigation of model performance on ZPR. Inspired by Wang et al.
(2016), we automatically built a large-scale training set from Chinese-English movie subtitles using
word alignments. For a clean test set, we hire experts to manually annotate 8K sentences covering
five domains (i.e. 1.7K novel, 2.2K movie subtitle, 1.2K Q&A forum, 1.6K news, and 1.5K resume).
The label set contains 30 Chinese pronouns according to person, number, and gender.


                                                   3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Figure 3: The illustration of the proposed translation tasks in terms of discourse properties and
task definition. As seen, a variety of elements may be omitted in the Chinese input but should be
recalled in English translation. NT mainly deals with zero pronouns while CCT needs to further
tackle omitted connective words that are the marker of discourse structure. PT is the most difficult
task because even prepositions could be further omitted. English translations of example sentences
are listed in Table 6.


MRC (Machine Reading Comprehension) The goal of MRC is to answer questions based on the
understanding of its meaning given an unstructured text (Liu et al., 2019a; Zeng et al., 2020). We
collected the Haihua2021 corpus, which contains 8K articles extracted from reading comprehension
tests in primary/high school examinations.1 Each article is followed by at least one question with 2∼5
choices and one correct answer. We manually create 2K articles as an additional supplement. Different
from previous benchmarks based on Wikipedia texts (Cui et al., 2019) or Chinese idioms (Zheng
et al., 2019), the Haihua2021 corpus is in the literary domain (i.e. modern/ancient composition
and poetry) that contains rich discourse phenomena. Different from the C3 benchmark (Sun et al.,
2020) where problems are collected from Chinese-as-a-second-language examinations, this dataset is
extracted from more challenging examinations designed for native speakers.

2.2       L ANGUAGE T RANSLATION TASKS

Language translation is a sequence-to-sequence generation task to translate text from one language
to another. Discourse information is important for document-level translation to produce cohesive
and coherent translations (Wang et al., 2017; Bawden et al., 2018). As shown in Figure 3, we design
three translation tasks of increasing hardness, which differ in the conciseness of source sentences in
Chinese. The more concise the Chinese text, the more discourse information is needed for translation.

NT (Novel Translation) The significant challenges for translating novels are entity consistency,
anaphora resolution, and lexical choice (Matusov, 2019). We build a document-level Chinese-English
corpus, which is extracted from web fictions (150 books in 14 genres). We manually align them at
both document and sentence levels. Different from previous document-level MT datasets such as
LDC2 and OpenSubtitle3 from the news and movie subtitle domains, ours is the first literature-domain
MT corpus containing richer linguistic phenomena especially in discourse.
      1
        https://www.biendata.xyz/competition/haihua_2021.
      2
        https://www.ldc.upenn.edu.
      3
        https://opus.nlpl.eu/OpenSubtitles-v2018.php.


                                                  4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Figure 4: The illustration of the proposed generation tasks in terms of discourse properties and
task definition. As seen, discourse structure and main contents have been specified in TE, thus the
task needs to generate cohesive words. While TI should further consider cohesion relations when
generating a whole sentence based on the previous and following ones. TC is the most difficult
because it needs to generate more sentences with a unified structure. English translations of example
sentences are listed in Table 6.


CCT (Classical Chinese Translation) Compared with modern Chinese as in novel translation,
classical Chinese texts contain more implicit connectives and pronouns, which require discourse
information for information recovery. We construct a document-level classical-modern Chinese
dataset, extracted from Chinese classics across history branch.4 Different from the NiuTrans Classical-
Modern corpus5 that has no discourse context, ours maintain the original context.

PT (Poetry Translation) Poetry translation is regarded as one of the hardest tasks in computational
linguistics, or even artificial intelligence in general (Genzel et al., 2010; Ghazvininejad et al., 2018).
Chinese poetry is more concise with implicit coherence, which is generally reflected through situa-
tional context and contextual context. For example, Chinese poetry does not use any cohesive means,
but the semantic is still clear. We build a document-level Chinese Poetry-English corpus, covering
different types of Chinese poetry (e.g. Shi, Ci, Qu, and Fu) translated by famous translators.

2.3       L ANGUAGE G ENERATION TASKS

Language generation is a sequence generation task to produce text based on a given context (Reiter
& Dale, 1997). Generating long and coherent text is an important but challenging task, particularly
on lexical cohesion (Wanner, 1996; Guan et al., 2021). As shown in Figure 4, we design three
representative generation tasks that differ in degrees of freedom. The more open-ended the generation
task, the more difficult to generate accurate cohesive devices and discourse structure.

TE (Text Expansion) We also define a new task, which has been seldom studied previously:
given a predefined text, the goal of TE is to insert appropriate words, phrases, or clauses for adding
more details and deepening the meaning, while retaining coherence and cohesiveness. We use a
semi-automatic generation method to obtain large-scale training data. The raw data are extracted
from English books detailed in Table 14 Specifically, we use the Stanford Parser6 to produce the
syntactic tree of a text, and then manually design some rules to delete the modifier words and phrases
in the text. We use the remaining words as the input and predict the dropped modifier. Since some
      4
        https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Chinese_classics.
      5
        https://github.com/NiuTrans/Classical-Modern.
      6
        https://github.com/stanfordnlp/CoreNLP.


                                                    5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


    Type        Input/Source/Previous                                      Hypothesis/Target/Next
                                                    Understanding Task
    Cohesion
                Correct: 菲比很想买台电视。                                         但乔伊不让她买它。
                (Phoebe really wants to buy a TV.)                         (But Joey won’t let her buy it.)
                Incorrect: 吉姆想买台电视。
                (Jim really wants to buy a TV.)
                Correct: 小公主爬出城堡。::::           最后她躲进了森林。                  小公主逃跑后去了哪里？
    Coherence
                (The little princess escaped from the castle. In the end   (Where did the little princess go after
                she hid in the forest.)                                    she escaped?)
                Incorrect: 小公主爬出城堡。然而她没躲进森林。     :::
                                                                           (B) 森林
                (The little princess escaped from the castle. However,     (B) (Forest)
                she did not hide in the forest.)
                                                   Translation Task
                Context: 定王含笑看着清霜。                                         Correct: He thinks Qingshuang is funny.
    Cohesion
                (King Ding looked at Qingshuang with a smile.)
                Current: 觉得清霜很滑稽。                                          Incorrect: I think the clear cream is funny.
                Context: 丽莎没上过学。                                           Correct: Thus, she can only write to this level.
    Coherence
                (Lisa did not go to school.)
                Current: 她只能写到这个水平。                                        Incorrect: She can only write to this level.
                                                     Generation Task
                慕小小被莫名其妙训了一顿。                                              Correct: 她趴在桌子上闷闷不乐。
    Cohesion
                (Mu Xiaoxiao was reprimanded for no reason.)               (She was sullen on the table.)
                                                                           Incorrect: 她趴在桌子上开心坏了。
                                                                           (She was overjoyed lying on the table.)
                天降大雨，陈旭又饿又冷。                                               Correct: 于是他赶紧煮了一锅面。
    Coherence
                (It rained heavily, and Chen Xu was hungry and cold.)      (So he quickly cooked a pot of noodles.)
                                                                           Incorrect: 然而他赶紧煮了一锅面。
                                                                           (However, he quickly cooked a pot of noodles.)

Table 2: The illustration of the proposed test suite. We design each contrastive instance with correct
and incorrect discourse markers in terms of cohesion and coherence. Tested systems are asked to
rank candidates according to their model scores.


delete operations may produce ill-formed text, we filter out the training instances if the remaining
text has a large perplexity measured by a language model.

TI (Text Infilling) The TI task aims to predict a text snippet given its surrounding context (Zhu
et al., 2019). To evaluate the discourse-level model capability, we focus on the sentence infilling task
that predicts a missing bridge sentence x0 given two preceding sentences (x−2 and x−1 ) and two
subsequent sentences (x1 and x2 ) (Huang et al., 2020; Cai et al., 2020). We build a new TI dataset by
extracting consecutive 5-sentence paragraphs from Chinese web fictions used in the NT task.

TC (Text Completion) The TC task is to predict a writing continuation given a preceding prompt.
We focus on multi-sentence paragraph completion for a target evaluation of discourse modeling,
which completes a multi-sentence paragraph xs:e given its leading sentence xs . We use the same data
collected for the TI task to construct the TC dataset. Specifically, given a sentence x−2 , we aim to
predict the concatenation of x1 , x0 , x1 , and x2 .

3     D ISCOURSE -AWARE T EST S UITE
The general-purpose automatic metrics (e.g. BLEU and PPL) may be not sufficient to distinguish
model performance in terms of discourse (Wong & Kit, 2012; Müller et al., 2018; Voita et al., 2018;
2019; Lin et al., 2011). To better measure the ability of models on discourse modeling, we handcraft
a discourse-aware test suite that is complementary to general evaluation. More specifically, each
instance is a contrastive pair with correct and incorrect propoteties in terms of cohesion or coherence.
We directly employ the original texts in the benchmark testset as correct candidates. For incorrect
candidates, we add noises to the correct one by modifying its discourse devices (cohesion) and
structures (coherence). Given the input and output, we can calculate the model score candidates in
each instance. Accordingly, we assess models on their ability to rank the correct candidate higher
than the incorrect one. To end, we totally construct 600 instances, and each task/type contains 100.


                                                             6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                                                               Corpus
      #    Model                 Language        Size   Task
                                                                     Size    Sources
       1   BERT (base)           zh             110M    U, T       1.5GB     Wiki
       2   RoBERTa (base)        zh             110M    U, T        15GB     Wiki, EXT Corpus
       3   RoBERTa (large)       zh             340M    U, T       15GB      Wiki, EXT Corpus
       4   AnchiBERT (base)      zh             102M    U, T       1.5GB     Classical Chinese
       5   MengziBERT (base)     zh             103M    U, T      300GB      Wiki, Common Crawl
       6   BART (large)          zh, en         406M    U, T, G   200GB      Wiki, WuDao Corpus
       7   mBART (CC25)          zh, en, etc.   610M    T          1.4TB     Common Crawl
       8   GPT2 (base)           zh             102M    G          14GB      CLEU Corpus
       9   GPT2 (large)          en             762M    G          40GB      Web Text
      10   T5 (base)             zh             231M    G          14GB      CLEU Corpus
      11   T5 (large)            en             770M    G         745GB      C4
      12   GuoFeng (family)      zh, en             –   U, T, G   400GB      Literature

Table 3: Summary of pretrained models used as baseline, varying in model architecture, parameter
scale, training data, and targeted task (i.e. understanding, translation, and generation). #1∼11 are
publicly available. #12 denote a series of pretrained models that are continuously trained on our
literature-domain data initialized by corresponding parameters in #1∼11.


Considering three types of tasks, we employed different strategies, varying in the place that is
modified. Table 2 illustrates how we design contrastive pairs:

• Understanding Tasks: for incorrect candidate, we add noises to the input x (i.e. x → x′ ) while
  keeping hypothesis y unchanged. Thus, each instance contains correct (x, y) and incorrect (x′ , y)
  candidates. We calculate model scores by feeding them into corresponding models.
• Translation Tasks: inspired by Bawden et al. (2018) and Voita et al. (2019), we add noises to the
  target translation to generate an incorrect candidate (i.e. y → y ′ ) while keeping the source input x
  unchanged. We ask model to score two candidates (x, y) and (x, y ′ ) via force-decoding method.
• Generation Tasks: for TE task, we add noises to expanded sentences (i.e. y → y ′ ) in a text while
  keep the predefined one x unchanged. Given (x, y) or (x, y ′ ), models can calculate their models
  scores. In TI and TC, we regard generation models as the language model, which can directly
  calculate perplexity of a sequence of sentences. Thus, we add noises to any sentences in a text.

4     B ENCHMARK R ESULTS
4.1   BASELINES

Plain Models We use the Transformer (Vaswani et al., 2017) with base and big configurations
as our plain models. We use the Adam optimizer with β1 = 0.9 and β2 = 0.98, and employed
large batching Ott et al. (2018) for model training. We set the max learning rate to 0.0007 and
warmup-steps to 16000. All the dropout probabilities are set to 0.3.

Existing Pretrained Models We systematically compare SOTA pretraining models on our con-
structed discourse-aware benchmark, including BERT (Devlin et al., 2019), RoBERTa (Cui et al.,
2020), AnchiBERT (Tian et al., 2021), MengziBERT (Zhang et al., 2021), BART (Lewis et al., 2020;
Shao et al., 2021), mBART (Liu et al., 2020), GPT2 (Radford et al., 2019; Zhao et al., 2019), and
T5 (Raffel et al., 2020; Zhao et al., 2019). Table 3 shows the summary information of the pretrained
models detailed in Appendix §C. We fine-tuned these public models on the corresponding datasets
for downstream tasks For translation tasks, we use BERT-based pretrained models (e.g. BERT,
RoBERTa) to initialize the encoder of NMT models. We choose the hyper-parameters based on the
performance on the validation set for each model. We fine-tune each model twice and report the
averaged test results. The fine-tuning hyper-parameters are detailed in Table 13.

Discourse-Aware GuoFeng Pretrained Models The frequencies and types of discourse phenomena
vary in different domains (Yang et al., 2015), leading to differences in model behavior and quality


                                                   7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                    Understanding            Translation           Generation
      Model
                                 ↑        ↑         ↑      ↑         ↑      ↑
                               SI     ZPR      MRC      NT     CCT       PT      TE↑    TI↓   TC↓
                                               Plain Models
      Transformer (base)       9.1      10.8      39.9 22.0      43.9      6.6   20.2 15.5    20.0
      Transformer (big)        4.4      11.1      38.4 22.5      44.8      6.6   22.4 14.7    18.5
                                       Existing Pretrained Models
      BERT (base)             85.1     17.4      49.2 21.6      57.0       6.7      -     -       -
      AnchiBERT (base)        81.3     23.2      47.2 22.2      58.2       6.7      -     -       -
      MengziBERT (base)       86.9     31.5      47.3 21.8      57.2       6.1      -     -       -
      RoBERTa (base)          86.3     28.5      48.6 22.2      57.7       6.4      -     -       -
      RoBERTa (large)         88.7     33.0      50.8 22.8      59.5       6.0      -     -       -
      BART (large)            86.5      32.8     50.2   20.6     56.7 7.0        41.6 10.2    12.2
      mBART (CC25)               -         -        -   23.5     23.1 15.0          -    -       -
      GPT2                       -         -        -      -        -    -       37.3 13.5    13.5
      T5                         -         -        -      -        -    -       35.0 12.2    16.1
                                       GuoFeng Pretrained Models
      RoBERTa (base)          87.7      31.2    46.6 22.5     58.7         6.6      -     -       -
      RoBERTa (large)         89.6      34.3    52.2 21.0     60.1         7.2      -     -       -
      BART (large)            87.6      33.5     50.3   21.0     62.7  7.1       45.2   8.5     8.0
      mBART (CC25)               -         -        -   24.0     25.1 15.7          -     -       -
      GPT2                       -         -        -      -        -    -       40.4   9.6     9.1

Table 4: Performance of baseline models on GuoFeng benchmark. A similar table is presented on the
online platform. Bold denotes the best result in each column. SI and ZPR are measured by F1 while
MRC by accuracy. We report BLEU for NT, CCT, PT and TE, and PPL for others. Results using
additional evaluation metrics are reported in Appendix §B.



across domains. However, most existing pretrained models are trained on datasets without discourse
information (e.g. sentence level) or in mixed domains (e.g. Wikipedia and news). Considering that
texts in literature domain contains rich discourse phenomena (De Beaugrande & Dressler, 1981), we
construct a large-scale, in-domain and document-level datasets in Chinese and English. The data
statistics are detailed in Table 14. To fill the gap, we follow Wang et al. (2022) to train the existing
pretraining models (coarse-grained pretraining) on the document-level GuoFeng data in the literal
domain (fine-grained pretraining) to model discourse phenomena. For each GuoFeng model, we
use the existing pretrained models for weight initialization, and we further train the models on the
GuoFeng data with the same loss. We limit the input length to 512 tokens for RoBERTa models and
1024 tokens for BART, mBART, and GPT models. The pretraining hyper-parameters details of the
release Guofeng models can be found in Table 15.


4.2   M AIN R ESULTS

Table 4 lists the results on the proposed benchmarks, where several observations can be made.
Concerning the existing pretrained models, pretraining improves performance over plain models in all
tasks, which is consistent with previous studies. These results validate that the proposed benchmarks
are reasonable. Among the BERT variants with the base setting, AncientBERT trained on small-scale
classical Chinese data outperforms other models on CCT and PT, demonstrating the necessity of
bridging the domain gap. Enlarging the model capacity (e.g. from base to large setting) consistently
improves performance.
Clearly, fine-grained pretraining on GuoFeng data outperforms their coarse-grained counterparts,
demonstrating the effectiveness and necessity of modeling discourse information. The RoBERTa
models work better on language understanding tasks, and the BART variants produce superior
performances on the language translation and generation tasks.


                                                    8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                Understanding                    Translation                       Generation
    Model
                                SI     ZPR      MRC         NT       ACT          PT        TE           TI        TC
                                               Existing Pretrained Models
    RoBERTa (large)        0.1/0.5   0.4/0.4   0.3/0.2 0.7/0.7 0.8/0.8         0.5/0.6         -           -          -
    BART (large)           0.2/0.4   0.3/0.4   0.3/0.2 0.7/0.7 0.7/0.8         0.5/0.6   0.8/0.7     0.6/0.2    0.5/0.6
    mBART (CC25)                 -         -          - 0.8/0.7 0.2/0.4        0.6/0.6         -           -          -
                                               GuoFeng Pretrained Models
    RoBERTa (large)        0.1/0.5   0.4/0.4    0.4/0.2 0.7/0.7 0.8/0.8 0.6/0.6                -           -          -
    BART (large)           0.2/0.5   0.4/0.4    0.4/0.2 0.8/0.7 0.8/0.8 0.6/0.6          0.8/0.7     0.6/0.4    0.5/0.7
    mBART (CC25)                 -         -          - 0.8/0.8 0.4/0.4 0.8/0.7                -           -          -

Table 5: Results of selected baseline models on GuoFeng diagnostic dataset. We assess models on
their ability to rank the correct candidate higher than the incorrect one according to model score. We
report accuracy (%) in terms of cohesion/coherence.


4.3        A NALYSIS

We evaluate three representative models on the diagnostic dataset: RoBERTa (large), BART (large),
and mBART (CC25). Each model is fine-tuned on the training data of the corresponding downstream
task (e.g. SI) and then tested on our diagnostic dataset. As illustrated in Table 5, GuoFeng pretrained
models generally improve the cohesion and coherence accuracies over their coarse-grained coun-
terparts, which reconfirms our claim that fine-grained pretraining on GuoFeng data helps model
discourse information. Although the numbers are not comparable across tasks, we find that pre-
training models on the understanding tasks generally perform worse on discourse modeling. One
possible reason is that the understanding tasks are mostly classification tasks, whose signals may not
be sufficient to guide models to learn discourse information.

5         R ELATED W ORK

Evaluation benchmarks are important for developing deep learning models, which enable comparison
between different models and probe models for understanding of specific linguistic phenomena.
Conneau & Kiela (2018) collected SentEval containing several sentence-level classification tasks
to test the representational power of models. Closely related to this work, DiscoEval (Chen et al.,
2019) extended these tasks to evaluate discourse-related knowledge in pretrained models. DiscoEval
only evaluates sentence encoder with language understanding tasks in English. In contrast, we
extend the tasks to a boarder range of NLP tasks, which can evaluate different types of models (e.g.
encoder-based BERT, decoder-based GPT, and encoder-decoder based mBART). In addition, our
benchmarks cover both Chinese and English.
GLUE (Wang et al., 2018) and SuperGLUE (Wang et al., 2019) included a wider variety of natural
language understanding tasks, further examining the capabilities of the models and making the results
comparable for multi-task learning. Followed researchers extend the benchmarks to other languages,
such as CLUE (Xu et al., 2020) and LOT (Guan et al., 2022) in Chinese, and XGLUE (Liang et al.,
2020) in multiple languages. While these works focus on evaluating inter-sentence information,7 our
benchmark evaluates intra-sentence discourse phenomena that cross sentences.

6         C ONCLUSION

This paper introduces a GuoFeng benchmark for Chinese and/or English that can evaluate intra-
sentence discourse properties across a diverse set of NLP tasks, covering understanding, translation,
and generation. We also propose a diagnostic test suite that can examine whether the target models
learn discourse knowledge for in-depth linguistic analysis. Extensive experiments demonstrate that
fine-grained pretraining based on document-level training data consistently improves the modeling
of discourse information. We offer the datasets, pretrained models, and leaderboards to facilitate
research in this field.
      7
          LOT (Guan et al., 2022) evaluates models’ abilities to model long text but ignores discourse information.


                                                           9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


R EFERENCES
Satanjeev Banerjee and Alon Lavie. Meteor: An automatic metric for mt evaluation with improved
  correlation with human judgments. In ACL, 2005.
Madeleine Bates. Models of natural language understanding. Proceedings of the National Academy
 of Sciences, 92(22):9977–9982, 1995.
Rachel Bawden, Rico Sennrich, Alexandra Birch, and Barry Haddow. Evaluating discourse phenom-
  ena in neural machine translation. In NAACL, 2018.
Deng Cai, Yizhe Zhang, Yichen Huang, Wai Lam, and Bill Dolan. Narrative incoherence detection.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2012.11157, 2020.
Mingda Chen, Zewei Chu, and Kevin Gimpel. Evaluation benchmarks and learning criteria for
 discourse-aware sentence representations. In EMNLP-IJCNLP, 2019.
Alexis Conneau and Douwe Kiela. Senteval: An evaluation toolkit for universal sentence representa-
  tions. In LREC, 2018.
Guy Cook. Discourse. Oxford University Press, 1989.
David Crystal. A Dictionary of Linguistics and Phonetics. Oxford: Blackwell Publishers, 1985.
Yiming Cui, Ting Liu, Wanxiang Che, Li Xiao, Zhipeng Chen, Wentao Ma, Shijin Wang, and
  Guoping Hu. A span-extraction dataset for Chinese machine reading comprehension. In EMNLP,
  2019.
Yiming Cui, Wanxiang Che, Ting Liu, Bing Qin, Shijin Wang, and Guoping Hu. Revisiting pre-trained
  models for Chinese natural language processing. In EMNLP: Findings, 2020.
Robert De Beaugrande and Wolfgang Ulrich Dressler. Einführung in die Textlinguistik, volume 28.
  Tübingen: Niemeyer, 1981.
Jacob Devlin, Ming-Wei Chang, Kenton Lee, and Kristina Toutanova. BERT: Pre-training of deep
  bidirectional transformers for language understanding. In NAACL, 2019.
Benjamin Franklin Elson and Velma Pickett. Beginning morphology and syntax. Summer Inst of
  Linguistics, 1983.
Dmitriy Genzel, Jakob Uszkoreit, and Franz Josef Och. “poetic” statistical machine translation:
 Rhyme and meter. In EMNLP, 2010.
Marjan Ghazvininejad, Yejin Choi, and Kevin Knight. Neural poetry translation. In NAACL, 2018.
Jian Guan, Xiaoxi Mao, Changjie Fan, Zitao Liu, Wenbiao Ding, and Minlie Huang. Long text
   generation by modeling sentence-level and discourse-level coherence. In ACL, 2021.
Jian Guan, Zhuoer Feng, Yamei Chen, Ruilin He, Xiaoxi Mao, Changjie Fan, and Minlie Huang.
   LOT: A story-centric benchmark for evaluating chinese long text understanding and generation.
   TACL, 2022.
Michael Alexander Kirkwood Halliday and Ruqaiya Hasan. Cohesion in english. Longman, 1976.
William F Hanks. Discourse genres in a theory of practice. American Ethnologist, 14(4):668–692,
 1987.
Hua He, Denilson Barbosa, and Grzegorz Kondrak. Identification of speakers in novels. In ACL,
  2013.
Yichen Huang, Yizhe Zhang, Oussama Elachqar, and Yu Cheng. INSET: Sentence infilling with
  INter-SEntential transformer. In ACL, 2020.
Paul Mc Kevitt, Derek Partridge, and Yorick Wilks. Approaches to natural language discourse
  processing. Artificial Intelligence Review, 6(4):333–364, 1992.


                                               10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Fang Kong and Guodong Zhou. A tree kernel-based unified framework for chinese zero anaphora
  resolution. In EMNLP, 2010.
Mike Lewis, Yinhan Liu, Naman Goyal, Marjan Ghazvininejad, Abdelrahman Mohamed, Omer Levy,
 Veselin Stoyanov, and Luke Zettlemoyer. Bart: Denoising sequence-to-sequence pre-training for
 natural language generation, translation, and comprehension. In ACL, 2020.
Charles N Li and Sandra A Thompson. Mandarin Chinese: A functional reference grammar. Uni-
  versity of California Press, Oakland, California, USA, 1989.
Jiwei Li, Michel Galley, Chris Brockett, Jianfeng Gao, and Bill Dolan. A diversity-promoting
  objective function for neural conversation models. In NAACL, 2016.
Yaobo Liang, Nan Duan, Yeyun Gong, Ning Wu, Fenfei Guo, Weizhen Qi, Ming Gong, Linjun Shou,
  Daxin Jiang, Guihong Cao, Xiaodong Fan, Bruce Zhang, Rahul Agrawal, Edward Cui, Sining
  Wei, Taroon Bharti, Ying Qiao, Jiun-Hung Chen, Winnie Wu, Shuguang Liu, Fan Yang, Rangan
  Majumder, and Ming Zhou. XGLUE: A new benchmark dataset for cross-lingual pre-training,
  understanding and generation. CoRR, 2020.
Ziheng Lin, Hwee Tou Ng, and Min-Yen Kan. Automatically evaluating text coherence using
  discourse relations. In ACL, 2011.
Shanshan Liu, Xin Zhang, Sheng Zhang, Hui Wang, and Weiming Zhang. Neural machine reading
  comprehension: Methods and trends. Applied Sciences, 9(18):3698, 2019a.
Yinhan Liu, Myle Ott, Naman Goyal, Jingfei Du, Mandar Joshi, Danqi Chen, Omer Levy, Mike
  Lewis, Luke Zettlemoyer, and Veselin Stoyanov. Roberta: A robustly optimized bert pretraining
  approach. arXiv preprint arXiv:1907.11692, 2019b.
Yinhan Liu, Jiatao Gu, Naman Goyal, Xian Li, Sergey Edunov, Marjan Ghazvininejad, Mike Lewis,
  and Luke Zettlemoyer. Multilingual denoising pre-training for neural machine translation. 2020.
Robert E Longacre. Storyline concerns and word order typology in East and West Africa, volume 10.
  Los Angeles: African Studies Center, UCLA, 1990.
William C Mann and Sandra A Thompson. Rhetorical structure theory: Toward a functional theory of
 text organization. Text-Interdisciplinary Journal for the Study of Discourse, 8(3):243–281, 1988.
Evgeny Matusov. The challenges of using neural machine translation for literature. In Proceedings
  of the qualities of literary machine translation, 2019.
Ruslan Mitkov. Anaphora resolution. Routledge, 2014.
Mathias Müller, Annette Rios, Elena Voita, and Rico Sennrich. A large-scale test set for the evaluation
 of context-aware pronoun translation in neural machine translation. In WMT, 2018.
Myle Ott, Sergey Edunov, David Grangier, and Michael Auli. Scaling neural machine translation. In
 WMT, 2018.
Kishore Papineni, Salim Roukos, Todd Ward, and Wei-Jing Zhu. BLEU: A Method for Automatic
  Evaluation of Machine Translation. In ACL, 2002.
Telmo Pires, Eva Schlinger, and Dan Garrette. How multilingual is multilingual bert? In ACL, 2019.
Alec Radford, Jeffrey Wu, Rewon Child, David Luan, Dario Amodei, and Ilya Sutskever. Language
  models are unsupervised multitask learners. OpenAI blog, 1(8):9, 2019.
Colin Raffel, Noam Shazeer, Adam Roberts, Katherine Lee, Sharan Narang, Michael Matena, Yanqi
  Zhou, Wei Li, Peter J Liu, et al. Exploring the limits of transfer learning with a unified text-to-text
  transformer. J. Mach. Learn. Res., 21(140):1–67, 2020.
Pranav Rajpurkar, Jian Zhang, Konstantin Lopyrev, and Percy Liang. SQuAD: 100,000+ questions
  for machine comprehension of text. In EMNLP, 2016.


                                                   11
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Sudha Rao, Allyson Ettinger, Hal Daumé III, and Philip Resnik. Dialogue focus tracking for zero
  pronoun resolution. In NAACL, 2015.
Ricardo Rei, Craig Stewart, Ana C Farinha, and Alon Lavie. COMET: A neural framework for MT
  evaluation. In EMNLP, 2020.
Ehud Reiter and Robert Dale. Building applied natural language generation systems. Natural
  Language Engineering, 3(1):57–87, 1997.
T Sanders and H Pander Maat. Cohesion and coherence: Linguistic approaches. Reading, 99:
  440–466, 2006.
Yunfan Shao, Zhichao Geng, Yitao Liu, Junqi Dai, Fei Yang, Li Zhe, Hujun Bao, and Xipeng Qiu.
  Cpt: A pre-trained unbalanced transformer for both chinese language understanding and generation.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2109.05729, 2021.
Matthew Snover, Bonnie Dorr, Richard Schwartz, Linnea Micciulla, and John Makhoul. A study of
 translation edit rate with targeted human annotation. In AMTA, 2006.
Linfeng Song, Kun Xu, Yue Zhang, Jianshu Chen, and Dong Yu. ZPR2: Joint zero pronoun recovery
  and resolution using multi-task learning and BERT. In ACL, 2020.
Kai Sun, Dian Yu, Dong Yu, and Claire Cardie. Investigating prior knowledge for challenging chinese
  machine reading comprehension. TACL, 2020.
Huishuang Tian, Kexin Yang, Dayiheng Liu, and Jiancheng Lv. Anchibert: A pre-trained model
  for ancient chinese language understanding and generation. In 2021 IEEE International Joint
  Conference on Neural Networks, 2021.
Ashish Vaswani, Noam Shazeer, Niki Parmar, Jakob Uszkoreit, Llion Jones, Aidan N Gomez, Łukasz
  Kaiser, and Illia Polosukhin. Attention is all you need. In NeurIPS, 2017.
Elena Voita, Pavel Serdyukov, Rico Sennrich, and Ivan Titov. Context-aware neural machine
  translation learns anaphora resolution. In ACL, 2018.
Elena Voita, Rico Sennrich, and Ivan Titov. When a good translation is wrong in context: Context-
  aware machine translation improves on deixis, ellipsis, and lexical cohesion. In ACL, 2019.
Alex Wang, Amanpreet Singh, Julian Michael, Felix Hill, Omer Levy, and Samuel R. Bowman.
  GLUE: A multi-task benchmark and analysis platform for natural language understanding. In
  EMNLP, 2018.
Alex Wang, Yada Pruksachatkun, Nikita Nangia, Amanpreet Singh, Julian Michael, Felix Hill, Omer
  Levy, and Samuel R. Bowman. Superglue: A stickier benchmark for general-purpose language
  understanding systems. In NeurIPS, 2019.
Longyue Wang, Zhaopeng Tu, Xiaojun Zhang, Hang Li, Andy Way, and Qun Liu. A novel approach
  for dropped pronoun translation. In NAACL, 2016.
Longyue Wang, Zhaopeng Tu, Andy Way, and Qun Liu. Exploiting cross-sentence context for neural
  machine translation. In EMNLP, 2017.
Wenxuan Wang, Wenxiang Jiao, Yongchang Hao, Xing Wang, Shuming Shi, Zhaopeng Tu, and
 Michael Lyu. Understanding and improving sequence-to-sequence pretraining for neural machine
 translation. In ACL, 2022.
Leo Wanner. Lexical choice in text generation and machine translation. Machine Translation, 11(1):
  3–35, 1996.
Billy TM Wong and Chunyu Kit. Extending machine translation evaluation metrics with lexical
  cohesion to document level. In EMNLP, 2012.
Deyi Xiong, Guosheng Ben, Min Zhang, Yajuan Lv, and Qun Liu. Modeling lexical cohesion for
  document-level machine translation. In IJCAI, Beijing, China, 2013.


                                                12
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Liang Xu, Xuanwei Zhang, and Qianqian Dong. Cluecorpus2020: A large-scale chinese corpus for
  pre-training language model. ArXiv, abs/2003.01355, 2020.
Yaqin Yang and Nianwen Xue. Chasing the ghost: recovering empty categories in the chinese
  treebank. In COLING, 2010.
Yaqin Yang, Yalin Liu, and Nianwen Xue. Recovering dropped pronouns from chinese text messages.
  In ACL-IJCNLP, 2015.
Changchang Zeng, Shaobo Li, Qin Li, Jie Hu, and Jianjun Hu. A survey on machine reading
  comprehension—tasks, evaluation metrics and benchmark datasets. Applied Sciences, 10(21):
  7640, 2020.
Tianyi Zhang, Varsha Kishore, Felix Wu, Kilian Q Weinberger, and Yoav Artzi. Bertscore: Evaluating
  text generation with bert. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2019a.
Weinan Zhang, Ting Liu, Qingyu Yin, and Yu Zhang. Neural recovery machine for Chinese dropped
 pronoun. In Frontiers of Computer Science, 2019b.
Zhuosheng Zhang, Hanqing Zhang, Keming Chen, Yuhang Guo, Jingyun Hua, Yulong Wang, and
  Ming Zhou. Mengzi: Towards lightweight yet ingenious pre-trained models for chinese. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2110.06696, 2021.
Zhe Zhao, Hui Chen, Jinbin Zhang, Wayne Xin Zhao, Tao Liu, Wei Lu, Xi Chen, Haotang Deng,
  Qi Ju, and Xiaoyong Du. Uer: An open-source toolkit for pre-training models. In EMNLP, 2019.
Chujie Zheng, Minlie Huang, and Aixin Sun. ChID: A large-scale Chinese IDiom dataset for cloze
  test. In ACL, 2019.
Wanrong Zhu, Zhiting Hu, and Eric Xing. Text infilling. arXiv preprint arXiv:1901.00158, 2019.


                                               13
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


A     C ONCEPT OF D ISCOURSE
A discourse is an instance of language use whose type can be classified on the basis of such factors as
grammatical and lexical choices and their distribution in main versus supportive materials, theme,
style, and the framework of knowledge and expectations within which the addressee interprets
the discourse (Elson & Pickett, 1983; Crystal, 1985; Hanks, 1987; Longacre, 1990). A discourse
contains seven fundamental properties including cohesion, coherence, intentionality, acceptability,
informatively, situationality and intertextuality (De Beaugrande & Dressler, 1981). Among them,
cohesion and coherence have often been studied in discourse analysis (Sanders & Maat, 2006; Xiong
et al., 2013).

A.1   C OHESION

Cohesion occurs whenever “the interpretation of some element in the discourse is dependent on that
of another” (Halliday & Hasan, 1976). The referential cohesion (i.e. anaphora and coreference) and
lexical cohesion (i.e. repetition and collocation) are commonly-used cohesive devices. The examples
are shown in Figure 5.


                         Figure 5: Examples of different cohesion devices.

Anaphora It is the use of an expression whose interpretation depends specifically upon antecedent
expression. The anaphoric (referring) term is called an anaphor. Sometimes anaphor may rely on
the postcedent expression, and this phenomenon is called cataphora. As shown in Figure 5(a), the
pronoun “It” is an anaphor, which points to the left toward its antecedent “Audi”. Zero anaphora is a
more complex case of anaphora. In pro-drop languages such as Chinese and Japanese, pronouns can
be omitted to make the sentence compact yet comprehensible when the identity of the pronouns can
be inferred from the context. These omissions may not be problems for our humans since we can
easily recall the missing pronouns from the context.

Coreference Two or more expressions (e.g. nouns) in a text refer to the same referent. As the
referents point to persons or things in the real world, the coreference relation can exist independently
of the context. As shown in Figure 5(b), the noun phrases “HK Chief Executive” and “Mr. Tung
Chee-hwa” point to the same person, although their surfaces are totally different.

Lexical Cohesion Lexical cohesion refers to the way related words are chosen to link elements of a
text. The “repetition” indicates the linking between the same word, or synonyms, antonyms, etc. As
shown in Figure 5(c), the synonyms “dress” and “frock” across two sentences are the repetition case.
In the “collocation” form, related words are typically put together or tend to repeat the same meaning.
For example, the phrase “once upon a time” in Figure 5(d) is a collocation case.

A.2   C OHERENCE

Coherence is created referentially, when different parts of a text refer to the same entities, and
relationally, by means of coherence relations such as “Cause–Consequence” between different


                                                  14
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


discourse segments. The discourse structure such as RST (Rhetorical Structure Theory, (Mann &
Thompson, 1988) is usually used to analyze the coherence of a text.
RST relations are applied recursively in a text until all units in that text are constituents in a predefined
relation. As shown in Figure 6, the result of such analysis is that RST structure is typically represented
as a tree, with one top-level relation that encompasses other relations at lower levels. There are a
number of predefined relations such as “Attribution” (causality) and “Contrast” (adversative relation),
and the leaves are presented as segments/parts of the text.8


                     Figure 6: An example of coherence represented by RST tree.


B       A DDITIONAL TASK AND R ESULT D ETAILS

The English translation of examples in Figure 2, 3 and 4 are listed in Table 6.

B.1      L ANGUAGE U NDERSTANDING TASKS

SI The macro-averaged F1 and exact match (EM) can be used as the evaluation metrics following
standard extractive machine reading comprehension tasks (e.g. (Rajpurkar et al., 2016)). The EM
scores are reported in Table 8.

ZPR Table 7 shows all Chinese pronouns with English translation. Chinese pronouns correspond
to the personal pronouns in English, and the Chinese pronominal system is relatively simple as there
is no inflection, conjugation, or case makers (Li & Thompson, 1989). Thus, there is no difference
between subjective and objective pronouns (we call them “basic pronouns”). Besides, possessive and
reflexive pronouns can be generated by adding some particle or modifier based on the basic pronouns.
The (zero) anaphora resolution is an alternative task on discourse understanding, which aims to
identify the antecedent of a referential (zero) pronoun (Kong & Zhou, 2010; Mitkov, 2014). However,
we did not consider this task for two reasons: (1) more than 50% zero pronouns are non-anaphoric
which can not be modelled in the resolution task (Rao et al., 2015); (2) different from previous
benchmarks such as OntoNotes and CLUEWSC2020 which mainly focus on explicit pronouns,
while ZPR considers implicit pronouns which are complementary to each other. We follow common
practice to use micro F1 score as the standard evaluation metric. And we also report precision and
recall in Table 8.

MRC Considering the average length of texts, the Haihua2021 corpus is also more challenging
than C3 (i.e. the length ratio is 753:117).
    8
        http://www.sfu.ca/rst/index.html.


                                                    15
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


   Task     Discourse Context                                           Task Description
                                                          Figure 2
       SI   Xing Jiu’an followed Mu Qing into the car and sat in the    Inp: "Um, yes."
            co-pilot position.                                          Out: Speaker=Xing Jiu’an
            "Are you in a bad mood?" Mu Qing asked.
            "Um, yes."
      ZPR   A: Phoebe would love to buy a TV.                           Inp: B: Joey won’t let ∅ buy ∅?
            B: Joey won’t let ∅ buy ∅?                                  Out: B: Joey won’t let her buy it?
            A: Yes.
   MRC      The little princess climbed out of the castle window        Inp: Where did the little princess go after she
            while her mother was sleeping.                              escaped?
            She climbed down the south wall and slipped out.            (A) South Wall; (B) Forest; (C) Castle; (D)
            Finally ∅ walked into the forest without telegraph poles.   Mountain.
                                                                        Out: Answer=(B) Forest
                                                         Figure 3
      NT    King Ding sat on the side,                                  Inp: ∅ mind had already flown to a faraway
            smiling as he looked at Qing Shuang’s astounded             place.
            thoughts.                                                   Out: –
            ∅ mind had already flown to a faraway place.
   CCT      ©, when she is playing Xiao, not only can her beautiful     Inp: ©, when shrinking ∅ month to blow, ∅
            face remain as usual, but also her charm increases.         mouth appears to be smaller.
            Why?                                                        Out: Besides, when shrinking her month to blow,
            © ∅ is playing, ∅ fingers press the holes on the flute,     her mouth appears to be smaller.
            and in this way, ∅ tender and slim fingers will seem to
            be slimmer and fairer.
            ©, when shrinking ∅ month to blow, ∅ mouth appears
            to be smaller.
       PT   I ask your lad beneath a tree.                              Inp: I ask your lad beneath a tree.
            “My master’s gone for herbs, ” says he,                     Out: –
            “Amid the hills I know not where,
            For clouds have veiled them here and there. ”
                                                         Figure 4
       TE   –                                                           –
       TI   Mu Xiaoxiao looked at his back aggrieved, why did it        Inp: Mu Xiaoxiao looked at his back aggrieved,
            suddenly change like this?                                  why did it suddenly change like this? [x] [x] [x]
            She was inexplicably trained for a while, which made        ... When she got to class S, she was lying on the
            her feel bad.                                               table and was sullen.
            When she got to class S, she was lying on the table and     Out: She was inexplicably trained for a while,
            was sullen.                                                 which made her feel bad.
      TC    Chen Xu was hungry and cold. He used a small gas            Inp: Chen Xu was hungry and cold. [x] [x] [x]
            stove to cook a pot of noodles.                             ...
            The two gathered around the pot and devoured every-         Out: The two gathered around the pot and de-
            thing.                                                      voured everything. After they ate the noodles,
            After they ate the noodles, they felt alive.                they felt alive.

Table 6: English translations of examples in Figure 2, 3 and 4. Some are literal translations in order
to map discourse phenomena into English language.


B.2     L ANGUAGE T RANSLATION TASKS

There are a number of evaluation metrics for measuring general performance of MT systems. BLEU
is the most widely-used one, which measures the precision of n-grams of the MT output compared to
the reference, weighted by a brevity penalty to punish overly short translations (Papineni et al., 2002).
TER is an error metric for machine translation that messures the number of edits required to change
a system output into one of the references (Snover et al., 2006). METEOR incorporates semantic
information by calculating either exact match, stem match, or synonymy match (Banerjee & Lavie,
2005). Furthermore, COMET is a neural framework for training multilingual MT evaluation models
which obtains new SOTA levels of correlation with human judgements (Rei et al., 2020). We report
TER, METEOR and COMET in Table 9.

NT (Novel Translation) We crawl 45,134 chapters in 152 books from web fiction websites,
covering 14 genres such as fantasy science and romance. We manually align them into parallel corpus
with document boundary. The copyright owner has agreed to open the data to research community


                                                            16
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


  Form          Subject        Object   Possessive adjective        Possessive                Reflexive
  1st SG         我 (I)      我 (me)               我的 (my)          我的 (mine)           我自己的 (myself)
  2nd SG       你 (you)      你 (you)             你的 (your)        你的 (yours)          你自己的 (yourself)
  3rd SGM       他 (he)     他 (him)               他的 (his)          他的 (his)           他自己的 (himself)
  3rd SGF      她 (she)      她 (her)              她的 (her)         她的 (hers)           她自己的 (herself)
  3rd SGN       它 (it)      它 (me)               它的 (its)          它的 (its)            它自己的 (itself)
  1st PL      我们 (we)      我们 (us)            你们的 (your)        你们的 (yours)        你们自己的 (yourselves)
  2nd PL     你们 (you)     你们 (you)             我们的 (our)         我们的 (ours)         我们自己的 (ourselves)
  3rd PLM    他们 (they)    他们 (them)           他们的 (their)       他们的 (theirs)       他们自己的 (themselves)
  3rd PLF    她们 (they)    她们 (them)           她们的 (their)       她们的 (theirs)       她们自己的 (themselves)
  3rd PLN    它们 (they)    它们 (them)           它们的 (their)       它们的 (theirs)       它们自己的 (themselves)

Table 7: Chinese-English pronouns with corresponding forms. The pronoun types are short for:
person = 1st, 2nd, 3rd, singular = SG, plural = PL, male = M, female = F and neutral = N.

                                                  SI                  ZPR
                       Model
                                                          ↑
                                            Exact Match        Precision↑   Recall↑
                                             Plain Models
                       Transformer (base)            0.3            10.2         11.5
                       Transformer (big)             0.1            10.5         11.9
                                     Existing Pretrained Models
                       BERT (base)                  81.9        26.1             31.0
                       AnchiBERT                    76.9        22.1             24.6
                       MengziBERT                   84.0        36.6             29.6
                       RoBERTa (base)               83.4        29.0             29.9
                       RoBERTa (large)              85.9        39.3             28.7
                       BART (large)                    83.7         38.3         30.2
                                    GuoFeng Pretrained Models
                       RoBERTa (base)             85.2        32.0               30.6
                       RoBERTa (large)            87.2        38.7               30.8
                       BART (large)                    84.6         39.0         30.5

Table 8: More results on understanding tasks using additional evaluation metrics, including Exact
Match, Precision, and Recall. This is complementary to Table 4.


under the Open Data Commons Open Database License (ODbL). Thus, researchers can use the
dataset for non-commercial research purposes and follow the principle of fair use (e.g. CC BY).


B.3   L ANGUAGE G ENERATION TASKS

There are a number of automatic evaluation metrics for measuring the quality of generated texts.
We use two groups of metrics: (1) Reference-based scores BLEU (Papineni et al., 2002) and
BERTScore (Zhang et al., 2019a), which measure the lexical and semantic similarities between the
generated texts and the ground-truth references respectively. Note that, for open-ended text generation
tasks such as TI and TC, reference-based metrics are less reliable because the generated text could
be of high quality but different from the ground-truth reference. How to accurately measure the
performance of open-ended text generation is still an open question and is beyond the scope of this
paper. (2) Dist-n scores (Li et al., 2016) calculate the ratio of distinct n-grams in generated text
to evaluate lexical diversity. We report Dist-2 and Dist-4 as well. Additional results are shown in
Table 10.

TE To better understand the task of TE, we present some examples in Table 11. In order to retain
the coherence and meaning of the source document, the expanded parts in the target text tends to be
modifier phrases or clauses. In general, the expanded contents in our task are mainly summarized into
5 categories, shown in Table 12. To evaluate the TE models, we use two metrics: BLEU and PPL.


                                                  17
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                        NT                             CCT                             PT
 Model
                          TER↓      MET.↑       COM.↑       TER↓     MET.↑        COM.↑     TER↓      MET.↑     COM.↑
                                                      Plain Models
 Transformer (base)        70.0         24.0       0.10     70.4             -       0.65   104.5      10.3      -0.82
 Transformer (big)         69.2         24.5       0.14     77.5             -       0.65   103.6      11.1      -0.78
                                               Existing Pretrained Models
 BERT (base)               69.6         24.0       0.10     27.6        -            0.65    97.0      13.3      -0.68
 AnchiBERT                 69.5         24.3       0.11     27.1        -            0.67    91.4      13.4      -0.66
 MengziBERT                69.8         23.9       0.10     27.7        -            0.67    96.4      11.8      -0.71
 RoBERTa (base)            69.7         24.0       0.13     27.2        -            0.65    96.0      12.2      -0.71
 RoBERTa (large)           68.9         25.0       0.15     27.0        -            0.68    97.5      11.9      -0.75
 BART (large)              70.9         24.6       0.12      28.2            -       0.65    90.5      13.5      -0.74
 mBART(CC25)               64.7         26.9       0.28         -            -       0.23    72.4      21.7      -0.14
                                               GuoFeng Pretrained Models
 RoBERTa (base)            69.7         24.2      0.14     27.3       -              0.67    96.0      12.3      -0.70
 RoBERTa (large)           70.0         24.9      0.15     28.3       -              0.67    95.9      13.0      -0.74
 BART (large)              70.0         24.8       0.12      25.6            -       0.70    90.4      13.3      -0.74
 mBART (large)             64.8         27.0       0.30         -            -       0.23    73.3      22.0      -0.11

Table 9: More results on translation tasks using additional evaluation metrics, including TER,
METEOR and COMET. This is complementary to Table 4.

                   TE                             TI↑                                          TC↑
 Model
                  PPL↓      BLEU         BERTscore        Dist-2    Dist-4       BLEU    BERTscore     Dist-2    Dist-4
                                               Existing Pretrained Models
 BART (large)      48.0           3.7           62.2       0.2      0.6            2.7         60.3       0.1      0.4
 GPT2              50.7           1.6           59.4       0.2      0.5            2.1         57.6       0.0      0.2
 T5                54.8           3.3           61.1       0.1      0.5            2.2         57.3       0.0      0.1
                                               GuoFeng Pretrained Models
 BART (large)      34.0           3.9            62.5     0.2     0.7              4.2         61.0       0.0      0.6
 GPT2              45.0           2.2            60.2     0.2     0.7              4.7         60.2       0.1      0.5

Table 10: More results on generation tasks using additional evaluation metrics, including BLEU,
BERTscore, Dist-2 and Dist-4. This is complementary to Table 4.


TI To evaluate different models, we take the following automatic metrics: Perplexity (PPL),
BLEU (Papineni et al., 2002), BertScore (Zhang et al., 2019a) and diversity scores (Dist-2/4) (Li
et al., 2016). We report degree of diversity by calculating the ratio of distinct 2-grams/4-grams in
generated text.

TC To evaluate different models, we take the following automatic metrics: Perplexity (PPL), BLEU,
BertScore and diversity scores.

C        A DDITIONAL E XPERIMENT D ETAILS
We evaluate the following public pretrained models on GuoFeng Benchmark and Test Suite:

• BERT (base): we use the base model (12 layer encoder, hidden size 768, vocabulary size 21128)
  published by Devlin et al. (2019), which was pretrained on Chinese Wikipedia dump of about 0.4
  billion tokens using the losses of mask language model (MLM) and next sentence prediction. 9
• RoBERTa (base): Cui et al. (2020) a model with the same architecture of BERT (base) except it
  uses whole word masking and is trained on additional 5 billion tokens with only MLM pretrained
  task. This model uses BERT (base) as the initial weight. 10
     9
         https://huggingface.co/bert-base-chinese.
    10
         https://huggingface.co/hfl/chinese-roberta-wwm-ext/tree/main.


                                                            18
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                  In 1823 James Monroe proclaimed the doctrine. The United States was an infant, threatened
     Source 1     by European actions.
                  To this effect, in 1823 President James Monroe proclaimed the doctrine that still bears his
     Target 1     name. The United States at this time was an infant, weak country, threatened by European
                  actions.
                  First was the rule. Political democracies have not been institutionalized in parts of Latin
     Source 2     America. No democratic regime had lasted half a century.
                  First was the weakness of democratic rule. Political democracies even now still have not been
     Target 2     firmly institutionalized in parts of Latin America. In the past no democratic regime had lasted
                  half a century.
                  The peasant was sentenced to death, and was to be rolled into the water. He was led forth, and
     Source 3     a priest was brought.
                  The innocent little peasant was unanimously sentenced to death, and was to be rolled into the
     Target 3     water, in a barrel pierced full of holes. He was led forth, and a priest was brought who was to
                  say a mass for his soul.

Table 11: Three examples to illustrate the task of TE, where the blue span in Target are expanded
content generated based on the source input as context.

          Expanded Content Type       Exemplar Spans
          (1) adjective (phrase)      innocent little
          (2) adverb (phrase)         firmly, even now still, unanimously
          (3) noun (phrase)           President, weak country, weakness of democratic
          (4) prepositional phrase    To this effect, In the past, at this time, in a barrel pierced full of holes
          (5) attributive clause      that still bears his name, who was to say a mass for his sou

Table 12: The expansion types in TE task are summarized. All the exemplar spans are highlighted in
texts in Table 11.


• RoBERTa (large): Cui et al. (2020) the large model size of RoBERTa model (24 layer encoder,
  hidden size 1024, vocabulary size 21128) This model has the same training procedure of RoBERTa-
  wwm-ext (base). This model is trained from scratch. 11
• AnchiBERT: Tian et al. (2021) a model continues pretraining based on the BERT (base) model
  with the 39.5M anchient Chinese tokens. It uses the same tokenizer and other techniques as
  BERT-base. 12
• MengziBERT: Zhang et al. (2021) a model initial on the RoBERTa (base) (Liu et al., 2019b) with
  special-designed objectives. 13
• BART (large): Shao et al. (2021) train a large model (12 layer encoder and 12 layer decoder, hidden
  size 1024, vocabulary size 21128) with denoising auto-encoding (DAE) objective. This model is
  trained on the open source large-scale raw text, Chinese Wikipedia, and a part of WuDaoCorpus.
  The training data contains 200GB cleaned text ranging from different domains. 14
• mBART (CC25): Pires et al. (2019) use a large model (12 layer encoder and 12 layer decoder,
  hidden size 1024, vocabulary size 250,000), trained with 25 language web corpus. This model is
  trained from scratch. 15 .
• GPT2: Zhao et al. (2019) train a 12-layer decoder-only Transformers and its vocabulary is size
  21,128. This model is trained with the CLUECorpusSmall corpus. 16 .

     11
        https://huggingface.co/hfl/chinese-roberta-wwm-ext.
     12
        https://github.com/ttzHome/AnchiBERT.
     13
        https://huggingface.co/Langboat/mengzi-bert-base.
     14
        https://huggingface.co/fnlp/bart-base-chinese.
     15
        https://dl.fbaipublicfiles.com/fairseq/models/mbart/mbart.cc25.v2.tar.
gz
     16
          https://github.com/CLUEbenchmark/CLUECorpus2020.


                                                          19
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


• T5: For Chinese langauge, Zhao et al. (2019) train a 12-layer encoder-decoder Transformers and
  its vocabulary is size 21,128. This model is trained with the CLUECorpusSmall corpus. 17 . For
  English langauge, Raffel et al. (2020) provides a transformer model (24 layer encoder and 24 layer
  decoder, hidden size 1024, vocabulary size 32,000), trained with unified generation task on C4
  dataset. 18

                        Task   Batch Size   Max Length         Epoch      Learning Rate
                       SI             64             512           5                  3e-5
                     ZPR               5             512          40                  5e-6
                     MRC               6             512          10                  2e-5
                         NT     3K token            1024     30K step                 1e-4
                        ACT     3K token            1024     30K step                 1e-4
                         PT     3K token            1024     30K step                 1e-5
                         TE           32             512            3                 2e-4
                          TI          24              64            3                 2e-5
                         TC           24             512            8                 2e-5

             Table 13: A summary of hyper-parameter for fine-tuning downstream tasks.


                                                      Size
   Category     Genre                                                                  Description
                                # Document        # Sentence     # Character/Word
                                              Chinese Language
   Electronic   Novel            91,620,211    1,169,127,191      58,639,454,317       Web Fiction
                Classical        38,495,887      490,733,235      24,613,514,541       Masterpiece
   Modernist
                Book                324,912        4,141,874         155,189,807       Publication
                Poetry              378,323        1,495,466             31,746,541    Shi, Ci, Qu, Fu
   Ancient      Couplet           8,979,186        8,979,186            192,214,600    Antithetical Couplet
                Classical             1,011        1,947,136             53,721,504    Ancient Text
                Lyrics              452,715        4,952,039            165,338,679    World’s Songs
                Screenplay            5,213       10,426,213            156,390,000    Movie Script
   Others
                Movie                66,050       24,108,241            642,392,397    Movie Subtitle
                Dialogue              3,642        1,653,469             49,406,618    Talk, Message
   Total                        140,327,150    1,717,564,050      84,699,369,004
                                            English Language
   Electronic   Novel            33,156,134    422,757,234        26,777,401,794       Web Fiction
                Classical         3,104,507       39,593,119        2,507,247,359      Masterpiece
   Modernist
                Book                324,912        4,162,821           78,695,499      Publication
   Ancient      Poetry                2,269           21,456               148,222     World’s Poetry
                Lyrics            3,088,688      110,268,328            632,820,393    World’s Songs
                Movie Script          2,826       12,534,815             67,433,609    Movie Script
   Others
                Movie               155,670       56,819,567            315,189,001    Movie Subtitle
                Dialogue              9,191        4,172,736             27,208,957    Talk, Message
   Total                         39,844,197      650,330,076      30,406,144,834

Table 14: Statistics of data for GuoFeng pretraining. All data are extracted from literature texts with
discourse context. We count number of characters in Chinese and number of words in English.


   17
        https://github.com/CLUEbenchmark/CLUECorpus2020.
   18
        https://github.com/google-research/text-to-text-transfer-transformer.


                                                    20
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                 Model             RoBERTa     GPT2       BART       mBART
                 Tokenization      BERTtok.    BERTtok.   BERTtok.   SentPiece
                 Optimizer         Adam        Adam       Adam       Adam
                 Masking           word        -          word       word
                 Vocabulary Size   21128       21131      21128      250000
                 Learning Rate     3e-4        3e-4       3e-4       3e-4
                 Batch Size        4K          4K         4K         4K
                 Training Step     1M          1M         1M         1M
                 Max Length        512         512        512        1024
                 Layer             12/24       36         24         12/24
                 Head              12/16       36         16         12/16
                 Total Param.      110m/340m   737M       477M       669M

        Table 15: The summary of hyper-parameters used for Guofeng pretrained models.


                                               21
