Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


L EARNING INTERPRETABLE NEURAL DISCRETE REP -
RESENTATION FOR TIME SERIES CLASSIFICATION

 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                            A BSTRACT

         Time series classification is a challenging research field with many real-life appli-
         cations. Recent advances in deep learning have significantly improved the state
         of the art: recurrent or convolutional architectures allow automatic extraction of
         complex discriminating patterns that improve performance. Those approaches
         suffer from a lack of interpretability: the patterns are mapped into a high dimen-
         sional latent vector space, they are not representable in the time domain, and are
         often even not localizable. In this paper, we present a novel neural convolutional
         architecture that aims to provide a trade-off between interpretability and effective-
         ness based on the learning of a dictionary of discrete representations. The pro-
         posed model guarantees (1) that a small number of patterns are learned, and they
         are visualizable and interpretable (2) a shift equivariance property of the model
         associated with a time-consistency of the representation (3) a linear classifier over
         a limited number of patterns leading to an explainable decision. To ensure the ro-
         bustness of the discrete representation, they are learned in an unsupervised process
         independently of the classification task. This allows further great performances in
         transfer learning. We present extensive experiments on the UCR benchmark wrt
         usual baselines. The interpretability of the model is illustrated empirically. The
         chosen trade-off results obviously in a decrease in performance compared to the
         state of the art. The performance drop is however limited and very dependent on
         the application domain. The experiments highlight the efficiency of the model for
         the transfer learning task, showing the robustness of the representations.


1   I NTRODUCTION

Over the recent years, Deep Neural Networks (DNNs) have become efficient for Time Series Clas-
sification (TSC) tasks (Fawaz et al., 2019; Tang et al., 2021). These models are highly capable of
extracting complex discriminative features at different frequencies. In the meantime, representa-
tion learning approaches demonstrate good performances for clustering (Ma et al., 2019), few-shot
learning classification (Franceschi et al., 2019; Malhotra et al., 2017), missing values imputation
or forecasting (Zerveas et al., 2022). However, they lack interpretability. Indeed mapping signals
into an abstract continuous space of high dimension in which weights have no meaning prevents
any justification of the decision resulting from these architectures. In their review of representation-
based learning, Bengio et al. (2013) emphasize the ability to extract Explanatory Factors and retain
Temporal Coherence to build good representations. Current approaches do not meet these criteria.
Moreover, most of the time, these opaque models are highly specialized in a single task and cannot
be transferred to other problems.
In this paper, we propose to discuss the fundamental properties required to build a transparent,
explainable, and potentially transferable time series classification process between tasks. First, con-
cerning temporal aspects, we assume that important information has limited support. Therefore, we
try to preserve both the shift equivariance of the extracted patterns and the temporal consistency
of the latent representation (Cohen & Welling, 2016; Bengio et al., 2013). Second, to achieve a
transparent model interpretable by an expert, we impose that the extracted patterns belong to a dic-
tionary of limited size and that their pre-images in the time domain can be computed (Araujo et al.,
2019). Third, we restrict ourselves to a strongly regularized linear classifier to explain the deci-
sion at the model-level for each task (in addition to an instance-wise interpretation) (James et al.,


                                                   1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


2013). Finally, we want a model that is ready for multi-tasking and transfer, i.e. a model where the
representation is learned in an unsupervised way, independently from the decision module.
We present a new convolutional architecture relying on neural discrete representation inspired by
Van Den Oord et al. (2017) that meets these criteria. Unsupervised representation learning is based
on a discrete hierarchical autoencoder. The discretization is a simple vector quantization, which
efficiently removes noise in the manner of matrix factorization approaches (Gray, 1984). The hier-
archical aspect represents the best compromise to keep a good expressiveness with atoms modeling
phenomena at different frequencies while limiting the size of the pattern dictionary (Razavi et al.,
2019). For the classification part, a logistic regression is used on the n-grams formed by the suc-
cessive detections of the dictionary patterns. The model is penalized by an elasticnet regularization
(Zou & Hastie, 2005). We demonstrate the competitiveness of this processing chain on UCR data
and compare the results to the state of the art while providing qualitative interpretations of the deci-
sions (Dau et al., 2019). We propose an analysis of the origin of performance losses in some classes
of applications to better identify the strengths and weaknesses of the different properties related to
the interpretability.

                                                         Discretization phase                     Decoding phase                   Classification phase
         1     Encoding phase                  2        -> Pattern dictionnary           3   -> Additive reconstruction
                                                                                                                          4   -> Penalized logistic regression

                                                                                              Top elements decoded
                                                   VQ          Codebook top
         Top level                                                                                                             Counts
                                         ...
                                     ....


                                                                                                                                          Histogram of
                                                                                                                                            n-grams
                                                    Upscaling
                               .......
                                                                                                                                            ......         ......
                                                               Stacking +
                                                                                                                                                          Support
                                                              convolution

                                                              VQ
    Bottom
     level
                               ...
                           ....


                                                                                                                                                      Logistic
                                                                                                                                                     regression
                                                            Codebook bottom

                     .......
                                                                                             Bottom elements decoded
                                                                                 +


Figure 1: Overview of the whole process: unsupervised representation learning (1+2+3) and
logistic regression on extracted features (4). One should notice that the training of the architec-
ture (1+2+3) is independent of the classification task. For more details on encoder’s and decoder’s
structure see Appendix A.1.

Our main contributions can be summarized as follows:

         • Formalization of the properties required for a more transparent signal classification archi-
           tecture.
         • A model derived from Van Den Oord et al. (2017) taking into account the previous con-
           straints for more interpretability and allowing transfer between tasks.
         • A series of experiments demonstrating both the efficiency of the implemented architecture
           and the qualitative and interpretative interest of the previous constraints.

2      I NTERPRETABILITY OBJECTIVES FOR TIME SERIES CLASSIFICATION AND
       GENERALIZATION

In the Time-Series Classification (TSC) field, interpretability can be instance-wise or/and class-
wise. Instance-wise interpretability allows weighting the responsible areas of the instance for the


                                                                                     2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


classification decision. But, it does not enable retrieval of class-specific features. Class-wise inter-
pretability characterizes a category by a set of features extracted from the representations. Ideally,
in the time series framework, these features should be expressive and localizable in time.
K-NN classifiers paired with Euclidean distance (ED) or Dynamical Time Warping (DTW) distance
(Rakthanmanon et al., 2012) are popular for time series classification tasks. Although these models
are sometimes presented as instance-wise interpretable in the sense of reasoning by analogy, they
do not allow discriminative feature retrieval for the classification tasks (for both instance and class
levels). Most famous instance-wise interpetability methods are gradient-based methods. We can
mention ResNet Fawaz et al. (2019) that benefits from the class activation methods (Zhou et al.,
2016) because of the Global Average Pooling layer before the softmax classifier.
Some methods fall between class-wise interpretability and instance-wise interpretability. The dic-
tionary method developed by Le Nguyen et al. (2019) relies on a linear classifier over a symbolic
representation. The extracted symbolic representation is composed of local statistics that could be in
the time-domain (Lin et al., 2003) as well as in the frequency-domain (Schäfer & Högqvist, 2012).
However, identical elements in the representation can be representative of different patterns. Thus,
even if the authors can highlight the areas of interest for each time series, they cannot extract class-
specific features.
In this paper, the proposed model aims to build a class-wise interpretable model based on a neural
representation of patterns. In the following paragraphs, we list the associated required criteria.
A temporally consistent representation based on patterns. One of our main objectives is to
build a representation with a meaningful temporal dimension, the elements of which are related
to patterns in the initial time series. The time consistency guarantees that the pre-images of two
successive elements a and b in the representation are two successive regions (Ra and Rb ) in the
initial time series. These two regions might have a non-empty intersection and their borders are
easily computable. Furthermore, an element of the representation must be decodable in the time
domain independently of its neighbors. Generally, unsupervised neural models for time series do not
allow the interpretation of the extracted features according to the temporal dimension. For example,
Franceschi et al. (2019) builds a time series representation using an encoder and a contrastive loss,
a triplet loss like Mikolov et al. (2013) where the representation is squeezed along the temporal
axis. Secondly, a desirable property for the encoded elements of the representation is the shift
equivariance property (Cohen & Welling, 2016). It means that the proposed model should encode
two identical patterns with the same value. Moreover, since our model is an autoencoder, we intend
two identical elements of the representation to be decoded as the same pattern regardless of their
position. Theoretically, it is not easy to satisfy these two properties in an efficient architecture but
empirically, we can enforce our model to tend toward this aim.
A model that can be interpreted by an expert. By taking all of the above factors into account,
we can obtain a time-consistent representation whose elements are identifiable, decodable, and lo-
catable. However, we need additional requirements to make this representation interpretable for
a human expert. First, to distinguish the elements of the representation and to make them mean-
ingful, the elements must have discrete and limited support. Van Den Oord et al. (2017); Fortuin
et al. (2019) demonstrate that image, audio, or video data can be accurately characterized by dis-
crete factors derived from an autoencoder based on the vector quantization mechanism (Gray, 1984).
Secondly, in the time series framework, the temporal dimension of the initial time series has to be
compressed through the encoder so that a unique element of the representation must correspond to
a (more or less global) pattern that is robust to noise. It is well known that compression is the key
to noise robustness, by aggregating similar phenomena (Gillis & Vavasis, 2013). For the compres-
sion to be effective and meaningful, several hierarchical levels of representations must be allowed
to characterize the different frequencies of the time series (Razavi et al., 2019). The main difference
between our proposal and the state of the art lies in the use of a simple additive reconstruction: this
approach limits the expressiveness of our model but allows us much greater interpretability of the
discrete elements of the representation.
Multi-tasks & Transfer The two previous constraints concerned the representation of time series.
We impose in our architecture that the classification phase is decoupled from the representation
learning, to be able to transfer the encoder-decoder from one application to another. The represen-
tation learning is therefore unsupervised, the model being trained exclusively on a reconstruction
criterion, in the manner of language models (Devlin et al., 2018). Any classifier can then exploit
the time series representation. Franceschi et al. (2019) demonstrated that their trained unsupervised


                                                   3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


model could be reused for new time series and that their classifier (SVM with RBF kernel) still
performed well on the transferred representation. In contrast, for deep end-to-end models, the gains
from transfer seem limited (Fawaz et al., 2018). Our experiments demonstrate the interest of our
approach in a transfer setting.
An explainable decision by a sparse linear model. The classification decision must preserve
interpretability. Linear models such as logistic regression enable the interpretation of the relationship
between the extracted features and the class. However, when the logistic regression support is too
large, the linear decision is hard to understand. Thus, it is relevant to select the features used for the
decision by using ℓ1 penalty.

3     M ODEL
As explained above, our global objective is 2 folds: build a meaningful, robust & transferable rep-
resentation of the input time series which respects several fundamental properties on the temporal
level on the one hand (localization, translation, . . . ) and the transparency toward the expert on the
other hand. We then train an efficient linear classifier. Our model is depicted in Figure 1.

3.1   U NSUPERVISED REPRESENTATION LEARNING

To fulfill the first objective, we choose to use a convolutional auto-encoder architecture with a dis-
cretization mechanism. As stated in (Bengio et al., 2013), one of the fundamental principles of
representation learning is that the space of hidden factors characterizing the underlying distribution
of the data is of a much lower dimension than the space of observations. Besides, dimension reduc-
tion using neural networks (Hinton & Salakhutdinov, 2006) allows focusing on important features
of the signal while being less sensitive to noise (Van Den Oord et al., 2017). This architecture is
built on the neural discrete model of Van Den Oord et al. (2017); Razavi et al. (2019) but we do not
learn a probabilistic distribution on the representation space and we use it for interpretability (not for
generation purposes). The mechanisms of this architecture allow us to respect the conditions stated
in Section 2.
First, at the encoder level, a sequence of convolutions interspersed with non-linearities allows one
to learn patterns underlying the time series while respecting the temporal consistency. Furthermore,
Cohen & Welling (2016) proves that convolutions with strides of one respect the shift equivari-
ance. If the stride is greater than one, the theoretical shift equivariance is lost (Azulay & Weiss,
2018) because the Nyquist-Shannon sampling theorem (Nyquist, 1928) is not respected anymore.
However, using a stride of one does not adequately reduce the dimension. In practice, we prefer
to use strides of two and we observe that there is some empirical shift equivariance in that very
similar patterns are encoded in the same way despite the dimension reduction and their localiza-
tion. We have conducted a series of experiments on the ShapeletSim dataset (Bagnall et al., 2017a)
where we quantify this phenomenon empirically (see Appendix A.2). In the literature, Mouton et al.
(2021) has demonstrated that the quality of the empirical shift equivariance depends on the stride
(the larger it is the more property is lost) but also on the variance between intermediary elements
in a given window. They call this concept, local homogeneity. In practice, in our architecture, an
encoder is a succession of convolutions that divides the size of the signal by two (stride of two) at
each new convolution. These convolutions are interspersed with LearkyRelu activation functions.
Once the desired dimension reduction is reached, we use residual blocks (which do not downscale)
for better training stability. For more details on an encoder block see Appendix A.1.
Once the time series has been projected into a vector space of a smaller temporal dimension, we
use vector quantization (VQ). To describe the vector quantization mechanism in the context of this
autoencoder we use the notations of Van Den Oord et al. (2017). Given a set of K centroids {ek ∈
Rd , k ∈ 1, ..., K}, vector quantization consists in assigning an output point of the encoder ze ∈ Rd
to the nearest centroid :
                            zq ← ek      where k = arg min||ze − ej ||22 .                            (1)
                                                           j

The benefit of the VQ mechanism, also known as the self-organizing map (Kohonen, 1990), is that
it enables the centroids to move as iterations go on. The number of centroids K is fixed before the
learning process and is a hyperparameter of the model. Then, zq the vector of the point to which


                                                    4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


ze has been assigned is given as input to the decoder. In a nutshell, similar patterns are enforced to
be encoded as very similar vectors thanks to empirical shift equivariance. And vector quantization
mechanism assigns nearby vectors to the same centroid while respecting temporal coherence.
After having performed the VQ, we pass the quantized vectors to the decoder by ensuring that we
keep the original temporality. For the choice of the decoder, we use transposed convolutions whose
parameters are symmetrical with those of the encoder. The transposed convolutions are chosen
because they allow upscaling of the encoded signal while keeping temporal coherence. Moreover,
the transposed convolutions are shift equivariant in translations if the element in the representation
to decode is bounded by vectors of 0RC . This property was not true in the instance-wise interpretable
classifier of Le Nguyen et al. (2019). However, in practice, there are always edge effects, but the
reconstruction between the element and the same shifted element is very close (see Appendix A.2).
In practice, a decoder block is a succession of transposed convolutions with a stride of 2. The
transposed convolutions are interspersed with LeakyRelu activation functions. We note that the
upscaling parameters of the decoder are perfectly symmetrical with the downscaling parameters of
the encoder. Moreover, we do not use any bias in our transposed convolutions to avoid the creation
of possible artifacts. For more details on a decoder block see Appendix A.1.
Finally, similarly to the architecture of Razavi et al. (2019), we set up two levels of representation: a
level that characterizes the high-frequency features and a level that characterizes the low-frequency
features (see Figure 1). Thus, for the downscaling phase, there will be two successive encoders.
A first encoder whose output will be used to characterize the high frequencies (bottom level) and
a second one that takes as input the output of the first encoder and whose output will be used to
characterize the low frequencies (top-level). As seen in Figure 1, there will be a quantization for
each frequency level. One note that before quantizing the high-frequency information, the output of
the bottom encoder must be cleansed of the low-frequency information. Finally, there will be two
decoders for the two levels of representation. Each decoder will reconstruct with its information the
signal in the initial space (the two decoders are not sequential but parallel). The final reconstruction
will be the sum of these two decoded signals.
The unsupervised architecture is trained using the loss below, introduced by Van Den Oord et al.
(2017). To simplify the notations we present the loss for a single level model and an instance xi
of a time series with T time steps. The transition to the hierarchical framework is not complicated,
it is simply a matter of summing up the different losses linked to the vector quantization for the
different levels of representations. Let’s introduce some notations. The operator sg stands for the
stop gradient operator that blocks gradients during the backward computation time, D is the number
of time steps in the representation space, C is the number of channels, and K is the number of
available centroids for quantization. The encoder is defined as ϕθ and the decoder as ψθ′ . Finally,
the matrices involved in the model are E ∈ RK×C the set of K vectors that form the embedding
space and Zqi ∈ RD×C the temporal vectors sequence after quantization for instance i.

            arg min ||xi − ψθ′ (Zqi )||22 + ||sg[ϕθ (xi )] − Zqi ||22 + β||ϕθ (xi ) − sg[E]||22 .    (2)
             θ,θ ′ ,E


The first term of the loss refers to the reconstruction ability of the model. In practice, we consider
the mean square error pointwise between the real-time series and the decoder output. This part of
the loss optimizes the decoder and the encoder. Although the argmin operator is not differentiable
(at the vector at the VQ level in eq.1), Van Den Oord et al. (2017) advise passing the gradients of
the embedding vectors to the encoder output vectors that have been assigned to them. Thus the
reconstruction loss can optimize the encoder.
The second term of the loss refers to the codebook loss, it moves the embedding vectors according
to the vectors that have been assigned to them. However, in practice, we use an exponential moving
average optimizer instead. That trick is employed by Van Den Oord et al. (2017) and reproduced
in several articles (Razavi et al., 2019). It turns out to be empirically stable to train and allows the
choose the solver independently for the rest of the loss. In the model implementation, the solver for
the other terms of the loss is Adam (Kingma & Ba, 2014).
The last part of the loss is the commitment loss and ensures that the encoder outputs do not land
too far from the embedding vectors. It guarantees better training stability. In practice we choose
β = 0.25 as Van Den Oord et al. (2017) and Razavi et al. (2019).


                                                     5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


3.2     C LASSIFIER INSIGHTS : LOGISTIC REGRESSION ON HISTOGRAMS OF N - GRAMS

Similar to dictionary methods for TSC (Lin et al., 2003; Schäfer & Högqvist, 2012), the proposed
representation learning process leads to a numerical representation of the time series: rather than the
actual embedding vectors, the series are represented by the sequence of the indices of the vectors
in the codebook. To perform the classification task in this context, n-grams are generally extracted
and used as input to a K-NN classifier or to a linear classifier. For instance, Le Nguyen et al. (2017)
proposes an efficient algorithm to find the most relevant n-grams for a logistic regression classifier.
In the following, only unigrams and bigrams are used for the two levels of representations. We show
in Section 4 that with these simple statistics on our representations the results are already close to
SOTA for unsupervised models. Bigrams provide a great indication of the local dynamics while
remaining in a relatively low dimensional space.
To obtain the final representation of a time series i, the histogram hi of unigrams and bigrams
is constructed by concatenating the two histograms of the levels of the representation. Logistic
regression is used to solve the binary classification problem:
                                                     n
                      1−ρ T                         X
                                                        log exp −yi hTi w + b + 1 ,

             arg min         w w + ρ∥w∥1 + C                                                 (3)
                w,c     2                           i=1
with C the regularization parameter, ρ the trade-off between the ℓ1 penalty and the ℓ2 penalty and
b the bias. Sparsity in interpretable classification models is desirable to more easily understand the
decision (Wu et al., 2018; Li et al., 2019). In the case of multiclass classification, the usual One vs
All method (Rifkin & Klautau, 2004) is applied to provide better interpretability.

4     E XPERIMENTS AND R ESULTS
4.1     Q UANTITATIVE RESULTS : CLASSIFICATION TASK ON UCR T IME S ERIES ARCHIVE

4.1.1    P ROTOCOL AND HYPERPARAMETERS SEARCH
In the following, for all considered datasets the number of centroids for vector quantization is fixed at
32 for each scale. Experimentally, this hyperparameter is not very sensitive, but too few vectors lead
to worse performances as the representation is unable to catch important features, when too many
are useless - numerous atoms correspond to very few representations - and can lead to overfitting.
The main hyperparameters for our unsupervised architecture are the number of convolutional lay-
ers of the encoder providing the bottom time-scale reduction and the top time-scale reduction.
We explore with a grid search a reduction of {4, 8, 16, 32, 64, 128} for the bottom scale and of
{2, 4, 8, 16, 32} for the top scale. Regarding the classification part, we explore various values for
the hyperparameters ρ and C of the logistic regression.
The protocol for the choice of the hyperparameters is the following: the unsupervised architecture
is trained for the different possible time-scale reductions on the whole dataset; the training dataset
is divided into two parts, 70% used to train the classifier and 30% used for validation. The choice
of time-scale reduction is made through the results on the validation dataset. The optimal C and ρ
hyperparameters are finally selected by cross-validating on the whole training set1 .
Unfortunately, many of the training data sets in the UCR archive are too small (resulting in a vali-
dation set of 4 to 10 instances). Validating on such small data sets does not make sense and gives
very variable results (Xu & Goodacre, 2018). Thus, we choose to consider only the datasets with
a validation set larger than 30 instances. Furthermore, we restrict the considered datasets to time
series with enough time steps (> 80) and on supervised problems where the number of classes to
predict is between 2 and 6. In summary, 39 datasets meeting these conditions are considered in the
following experiments. The presented results report the accuracy of the best model on the test set of
each dataset.
To evaluate our classification performance, we compare ourselves to several efficient supervised and
unsupervised methods. For supervised models, the considered baselines are: the ensemble method
    1
      Training for a fixed hyperparameter set can range from 2 minutes to 2 hours depending on the dataset and
the dimension reduction. For a fixed dataset, we only use a single Nvidia Titan V for the unsupervised training


                                                      6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


HIVE-COTE (Lines et al., 2018), the dictionary method BOSS (Schäfer, 2015), the random con-
volutional kernels method ROCKET (Dempster et al., 2020), the deep learning methods ResNet
(Fawaz et al., 2019) and InceptionTime (Fawaz et al., 2020). For unsupervised models, we compare
our model to the results of Franceschi et al. (2019) (Triplet Loss + SVM), and 1-NN’s on Euclidian
distance and DTW distance. Finally, the random method consists in predicting each time the major-
ity class. The reported results of the baselines are from the 2021 updated results of the survey by
Bagnall et al. (2017b) and the results of Franceschi et al. (2019).

4.1.2             Q UANTITATIVE RESULTS
We present the results as a boxplot (see Figure 2) to see how our method compares to existing
models.

           1.0


           0.8
Accuracy


           0.6


           0.4

                                                                                                      Random
                                  Unsupervised representation                  Ensemble Dictionnary   kernels        Deep Learning
           0.2
                 Random    Ours      Ours      1-NN ED   1-NN DTW Triplet Loss Hive Cote     Boss     Rocket      ResNet Inception Time
                           + LR     + ResNet              (w=100)    + SVM
                                                                      (K=1)

Figure 2: Boxplot of accuracies. The results cover the 39 datasets respecting the conditions of the
protocol. Triangles represent the arithmetic mean.

The aggregated results presented in the boxplot hide a wide variety of applications: we detail these
categories in Table 1 to show that the hierarchy of approaches is variable. Some tasks (like Chlo-
rineConcentration or Yoga) require patterns learned on discriminative criteria but many data are
very well handled by representations from auto-encoders. Other performance drops (on Image and
Simulated) are due to the form of the classifier: we can see the gap between logistic regression and
ResNet with equal representations. For more details on the results see Appendix A.3.


Table 1: Average Accuracies for unsupervised representation + classifier methods on the 39 datasets
of interest by type. The last column shows the results of the best supervised end-to-end model. The
best results are in bold and the second best results are underlined (if they exist).

                                                                                                       Triplet
                                                                                            1-NN                         Best
                                   Ours +        Ours +                      1-NN                       Loss
       Type               Count                                 Random                      DTW                       supervised
                                    LR           ResNet                       ED                       + SVM
                                                                                           (w=100)                    Hive Cote
                                                                                                       (K=1)
       Device                 7        0.70          0.72          0.44        0.57           0.67        0.70                 0.81
       Image                 13        0.70          0.75          0.49        0.73           0.72        0.78                 0.82
       Motion                 4        0.91          0.91          0.53        0.86           0.84        0.93                 0.95
       Sensor                 8        0.84          0.86          0.60        0.78           0.78        0.88                 0.92
       Simu                   1        0.78          1.00          0.26        0.91           1.00        1.00                 1.00
       Spectro                3        0.69          0.63          0.47        0.61           0.56       0.67                  0.89
       Spectrum               3        0.73          0.80          0.34        0.51           0.70        0.77                 0.94
        Global
                             39        0.76          0.79          0.49        0.70           0.73         0.80                0.87
       accuracy

In terms of unsupervised methods, our interpretable model (unsupervised representation + logistic
regression) is slightly less accurate than Franceschi et al. (2019). However, when using a powerful


                                                                     7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


classifier but less interpretable on our representation such as a ResNet (refer to the Appendix A.4
to see the structure of the ResNet in these experiments), the performances are improved. Even in
this case, there is still a small gap in accuracy compared to the best supervised models. We believe
that this gap is bridged by the following two points. Firstly, our representation can extract features
that will subsequently lead to an interpretable and understandable classification (see Section 4.2).
Besides, our feature extraction model is reusable for time series of the same size (see Section 4.3).

4.2   V ISUALIZATION OF INTERPRETABILITY ( USECASE : F REEZER R EGULART RAIN DATASET )

To illustrate the inter-
pretability of our model,
we focus in this section
on the analysis of the re-
sults on the FreezerReg-
ularTrain dataset, where
it performs well (97% of
accuracy). There are two
classes, one represent-
ing the power demand Figure 3: Coefficients for the logistic regression. Here are the co-
of the fridge freezer in efficients of the logistic regression for the FreezerRegularTrain dataset
the kitchen, and the other classification problem. The intercept is 0.15. The dotted line repre-
representing the power sents the boundary between the features from the codebook bottom and
demand of the less fre- features from the codebook top.
quently used freezer in
the garage. After applying our procedure, we obtain two representations where the bottom code-
book length is 19 (downscaling by 24 ) and the top codebook length is 3 (downscaling by 27 ). The
reconstruction is very accurate with an MSE loss of less than 0.002. Figure 3 shows the weight of
each feature of the learned classifier. Only a few features are used as a consequence of the regular-
ization and those features belong mainly to the bottom-scale representation.


                                                                        Centroid reconstruction



                                                         .   .   a*           .


                                                         Bottom codebooks for an
                                                          instance of each class


                                                         .   .   b*           .


                                                                        Centroid reconstruction



                                                 The two patterns represent the peak power
                                                  demand for class 1 and class 2 devices
                                                   respectively, they differ only in power.


Figure 4: Visualization of the decoded most important feature for each class according to the
logistic regression coefficients. On the left, is a visualization of a few power curves for each class.
On the right, are the most discriminative features for each class. Patterns are rebuilt according to the
decoder and individually (in the representation space, neighbor embedding vectors are set to 0RC )
Moreover, when we look at the position of the centroid of interest and its receptive field, we notice
that both patterns are related to the power demand peak.

Let us note a∗ and b∗ are the two most discriminative features with the higher coefficients in absolute.
Their values are respectively 4.23 and -1.86 (for an intercept of 0.15). Since the logistic regression


                                                   8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


acts on histograms of unigrams and bigrams coding for centroid vectors, it is straightforward to
retrieve the meaning of a∗ and b∗ . Here, a∗ and b∗ correspond to unigrams appearing each time
at most once in the bottom representation sequence. By reconstructing these centroids through the
decoder, we see that these patterns represent the power demand of respectively the class 1 device
and the class 2 device (see Figure 4). Thus, without any prior knowledge, it can be inferred from the
model that the level of peak power is an important feature to tell apart the two devices. For another
interpretable use-case see Appendix A.5.

4.3    T RANSFER LEARNING

The other main advantage of our model is to reuse the learned representation for one time series for
another time series of the same length to extract a representation. Then, we only have to learn the
logistic regression for the specific classification problem and cross-validate it to obtain the adapted
hyperparameters (ρ and C). This process is fast and requires only one single CPU for the training
phase (for the logistic regression). Table 2 shows the transfer accuracy for datasets where the time
series are composed of 80-time steps. For more results, see Appendix A.6. In addition to being fast,
the transferred representation enables good accuracy. The results are sometimes even better than
the logistic regression on the representation learned on the time series itself. It demonstrates that
our unsupervised model can learn and extract key features for different time series without being
re-trained. Table 2 shows the transfer accuracy for datasets where the time series are composed of
80-time steps. For more results, see Appendix A.6.


Table 2: Transfer learning on time series of length 80. Columns indicate the source datasets whose
unsupervised architectures are re-used. Rows indicate the target datasets. For each target dataset,
the target time series is encoded thanks to the unsupervised model learned on the source dataset.
The logistic regression is next trained on the obtained representations. Bold accuracies stand for the
best results for each target dataset. Underlined accuracies stand for the results when the source and
target datasets are the same (without transfer). Dataset names are shortened for the sake of space.

    Target   MTW      MOC      MAG      DAG     DTW      DOC      PPAG     PPTW      PPOC      POC
    MTW       0.49     0.53     0.52    0.47     0.49     0.47     0.57      0.47     0.54     0.52
    MOC       0.70     0.70     0.74    0.65     0.69     0.70     0.70      0.66     0.70     0.74
    MAG       0.55     0.56     0.49    0.57     0.57     0.55     0.62      0.53     0.55     0.55
    DAG       0.63     0.71     0.74    0.68     0.73     0.70     0.70      0.71     0.65     0.77
    DTW       0.58     0.58     0.63    0.57     0.57     0.53     0.61      0.58     0.53     0.58
    DOC       0.71     0.74     0.75    0.69     0.69     0.75     0.75      0.67     0.67     0.75
    PPAG      0.83     0.82     0.85    0.80     0.81     0.83     0.83      0.84     0.81     0.86
    PPTW      0.73     0.76     0.76    0.79     0.77     0.74     0.80      0.76     0.71     0.76
    PPOC      0.82     0.78     0.80    0.78     0.80     0.79     0.77      0.74     0.82     0.80
    POC       0.71     0.73     0.73    0.70     0.71     0.73     0.72      0.67     0.68     0.79

For these classification problems which are relatively close, we observe that transferring the unsu-
pervised model and training a logistic regression on top of it allows us to improve the accuracy.

5     C ONCLUSION AND PERSPECTIVES
The proposed process enables building interpretable representations of time series, classifying ac-
curately for a wide variety of problems, and explaining the classification decision over the represen-
tation. The reusable unsupervised model is a step forward toward general semantics of time series
as in image or text. For future work, it seems interesting to consider the choice of the reconstruction
loss in the unsupervised architecture. Indeed, the mean squared error (MSE) tends to smooth the
time series when the model reconstructs them, which can weaken some important features. One
can consider using the DILATE Loss (Le Guen & Thome, 2019) instead of the MSE. Another lim-
itation of our process is that we only consider unigrams and bigrams. By reusing the coordinate
descent of Ifrim & Wiuf (2011), we can find longer sequences of centroids that allow us to discrim-
inate classes. Finally, the last track to consider is to use autoML methods to automatically find the
number of hierarchical levels to use in the unsupervised model.


                                                  9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


R EFERENCES
André Araujo, Wade Norris, and Jack Sim. Computing receptive fields of convolutional neural
  networks. Distill, 2019.
Aharon Azulay and Yair Weiss. Why do deep convolutional networks generalize so poorly to small
  image transformations? Journal of Machine Learning Research, 2018.
Anthony Bagnall, Aaron Bostrom, James Large, and Jason Lines. Simulated data experiments
  for time series classification part 1: accuracy comparison with default settings. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:1703.09480, 2017a.
Anthony Bagnall, Jason Lines, Aaron Bostrom, James Large, and Eamonn Keogh. The great time se-
  ries classification bake off: a review and experimental evaluation of recent algorithmic advances.
  Data mining and knowledge discovery, 2017b.
Yoshua Bengio, Aaron Courville, and Pascal Vincent. Representation learning: A review and new
  perspectives. IEEE transactions on pattern analysis and machine intelligence, 2013.
Taco Cohen and Max Welling. Group equivariant convolutional networks. International conference
  on machine learning, 2016.
Hoang Anh Dau, Anthony Bagnall, Kaveh Kamgar, Chin-Chia Michael Yeh, Yan Zhu, Shaghayegh
  Gharghabi, Chotirat Ann Ratanamahatana, and Eamonn Keogh. The ucr time series archive.
  IEEE/CAA Journal of Automatica Sinica, 2019.
Angus Dempster, François Petitjean, and Geoffrey I Webb. Rocket: exceptionally fast and accu-
  rate time series classification using random convolutional kernels. Data Mining and Knowledge
  Discovery, 2020.
Jacob Devlin, Ming-Wei Chang, Kenton Lee, and Kristina Toutanova. Bert: Pre-training of deep
  bidirectional transformers for language understanding. arXiv preprint arXiv:1810.04805, 2018.
Hassan Ismail Fawaz, Germain Forestier, Jonathan Weber, Lhassane Idoumghar, and Pierre-Alain
  Muller. Transfer learning for time series classification. IEEE international conference on big data
  (Big Data), 2018.
Hassan Ismail Fawaz, Germain Forestier, Jonathan Weber, Lhassane Idoumghar, and Pierre-Alain
  Muller. Deep learning for time series classification: a review. Data mining and knowledge
  discovery, 2019.
Hassan Ismail Fawaz, Benjamin Lucas, Germain Forestier, Charlotte Pelletier, Daniel F Schmidt,
  Jonathan Weber, Geoffrey I Webb, Lhassane Idoumghar, Pierre-Alain Muller, and François Petit-
  jean. Inceptiontime: Finding alexnet for time series classification. Data Mining and Knowledge
  Discovery, 2020.
Vincent Fortuin, Matthias Hüser, Francesco Locatello, Heiko Strathmann, and Gunnar Rätsch. Som-
  vae: Interpretable discrete representation learning on time series. International Conference on
  Learning Representations, 2019.
Jean-Yves Franceschi, Aymeric Dieuleveut, and Martin Jaggi. Unsupervised scalable representation
  learning for multivariate time series. Advances in neural information processing systems, 2019.
Nicolas Gillis and Stephen A Vavasis. Fast and robust recursive algorithms for separable nonnegative
  matrix factorization. IEEE transactions on pattern analysis and machine intelligence, 36(4):698–
  714, 2013.
Robert Gray. Vector quantization. IEEE Assp Magazine, 1984.
Geoffrey E Hinton and Ruslan R Salakhutdinov. Reducing the dimensionality of data with neural
  networks. science, 2006.
Georgiana Ifrim and Carsten Wiuf. Bounded coordinate-descent for biological sequence classifica-
  tion in high dimensional predictor space. ACM SIGKDD international conference on knowledge
  discovery and data mining, 2011.


                                                 10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Gareth James, Daniela Witten, Trevor Hastie, and Robert Tibshirani. An introduction to statistical
  learning. 2013.
Diederik P Kingma and Jimmy Ba. Adam: A method for stochastic optimization. International
  Conference on Learning Representations, 2014.
Teuvo Kohonen. The self-organizing map. Proceedings of the IEEE, 1990.
Vincent Le Guen and Nicolas Thome. Shape and time distortion loss for training deep time series
  forecasting models. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2019.
Thach Le Nguyen, Severin Gsponer, and Georgiana Ifrim. Time series classification by sequence
  learning in all-subsequence space. IEEE international conference on data engineering (ICDE),
  2017.
Thach Le Nguyen, Severin Gsponer, Iulia Ilie, Martin O’Reilly, and Georgiana Ifrim. Interpretable
  time series classification using linear models and multi-resolution multi-domain symbolic repre-
  sentations. Data mining and knowledge discovery, 2019.
Yuchao Li, Shaohui Lin, Baochang Zhang, Jianzhuang Liu, David Doermann, Yongjian Wu, Feiyue
  Huang, and Rongrong Ji. Exploiting kernel sparsity and entropy for interpretable cnn compres-
  sion. Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern recognition, 2019.
Jessica Lin, Eamonn Keogh, Stefano Lonardi, and Bill Chiu. A symbolic representation of time
  series, with implications for streaming algorithms. ACM SIGMOD workshop on Research issues
  in data mining and knowledge discovery, 2003.
Jason Lines, Sarah Taylor, and Anthony Bagnall. Time series classification with hive-cote: The
  hierarchical vote collective of transformation-based ensembles. ACM Transactions on Knowledge
  Discovery from Data, 2018.
Qianli Ma, Jiawei Zheng, Sen Li, and Gary W Cottrell. Learning representations for time series
  clustering. Advances in neural information processing systems, 2019.
Pankaj Malhotra, Vishnu TV, Lovekesh Vig, Puneet Agarwal, and Gautam Shroff. Timenet: Pre-
  trained deep recurrent neural network for time series classification. European Symposium on
  Artificial Neural Networks, Computational Intelligence and Machine Learning, 2017.
Tomas Mikolov, Kai Chen, Greg Corrado, and Jeffrey Dean. Efficient estimation of word represen-
  tations in vector space. International Conference on Learning Representations, ICLR, 2013.
Coenraad Mouton, Johannes C Myburgh, and Marelie H Davel. Stride and translation invariance in
  cnns. Southern African Conference for Artificial Intelligence Research, 2021.
Harry Nyquist. Certain topics in telegraph transmission theory. Transactions of the American Insti-
  tute of Electrical Engineers, 1928.
Thanawin Rakthanmanon, Bilson Campana, Abdullah Mueen, Gustavo Batista, Brandon Westover,
  Qiang Zhu, Jesin Zakaria, and Eamonn Keogh. Searching and mining trillions of time series
  subsequences under dynamic time warping. Proceedings of the 18th ACM SIGKDD international
  conference on Knowledge discovery and data mining, 2012.
Ali Razavi, Aaron Van den Oord, and Oriol Vinyals. Generating diverse high-fidelity images with
  vq-vae-2. Advances in neural information processing systems, 2019.
Ryan Rifkin and Aldebaro Klautau. In defense of one-vs-all classification. The Journal of Machine
  Learning Research, 2004.
Patrick Schäfer. The boss is concerned with time series classification in the presence of noise. Data
  Mining and Knowledge Discovery, 2015.
Patrick Schäfer and Mikael Högqvist. Sfa: a symbolic fourier approximation and index for similarity
  search in high dimensional datasets. International conference on extending database technology,
  2012.


                                                 11
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Wensi Tang, Guodong Long, Lu Liu, Tianyi Zhou, Michael Blumenstein, and Jing Jiang. Omni-scale
 cnns: a simple and effective kernel size configuration for time series classification. International
 Conference on Learning Representations, 2021.
Aaron Van Den Oord, Oriol Vinyals, et al. Neural discrete representation learning. Advances in
  neural information processing systems, 2017.
Mike Wu, Michael Hughes, Sonali Parbhoo, Maurizio Zazzi, Volker Roth, and Finale Doshi-Velez.
 Beyond sparsity: Tree regularization of deep models for interpretability. AAAI Conference on
 Artificial Intelligence, 2018.
Yun Xu and Royston Goodacre. On splitting training and validation set: A comparative study of
  cross-validation, bootstrap and systematic sampling for estimating the generalization performance
  of supervised learning. Journal of analysis and testing, 2018.
George Zerveas, Srideepika Jayaraman, Dhaval Patel, Anuradha Bhamidipaty, and Carsten Eick-
  hoff. A transformer-based framework for multivariate time series representation learning. ACM
  SIGKDD Conference on Knowledge Discovery & Data Mining, 2022.
Bolei Zhou, Aditya Khosla, Agata Lapedriza, Aude Oliva, and Antonio Torralba. Learning deep
  features for discriminative localization. IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recog-
  nition (CVPR), 2016.
Hui Zou and Trevor Hastie. Regularization and variable selection via the elastic net. Journal of the
  royal statistical society: series B (statistical methodology), 67(2):301–320, 2005.


                                                 12
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


A      A PPENDIX
A.1      I NSIDE AN ENCODER BLOCK OR A DECODER BLOCK


                                                                   ENCODER STRUCTURE


                                                                                                                                         FINAL
           INPUT                Conv1D                                REDUCE             Conv1D                        Conv1D           OUTPUT
        (Batch size,         Kernel size = 3                          OUTPUT          Kernel size = 3               Kernel size = 3
                                                   Leaky                                                                              (Batch size,
       Nb channels           or 4, Stride = 2               ....    (Batch size,        Stride = 1        Leaky       Stride = 1
                                                    Relu                                                                                   Nb
      in, seq. length         Padding = 1,                          Nb channels        Padding = 1,        Relu      Padding = 1,       channels
             in)               Dilation = 1                           out, seq.        Dilation = 1                  Dilation = 1       out, seq.
                                                                     length out)
                                                                                                                                       length out)

                                      Downscaling
                                        blocks                                                       Residual blocks


                                                                   DECODER STRUCTURE


                                                                                                                  INCREASED
                            INPUT           ConvTranspose1D                        ConvTranspose1D                   OUTPUT
                        (Batch size, Nb     Kernel size = 3 or 4                   Kernel size = 3 or 4            (Batch size,
                         channels out,          Stride = 2             Leaky           Stride = 2                       Nb
                          seq. length          Padding = 1,             Relu          Padding = 1,         ....
                                                                                                                   channels in,
                             out)              Dilation = 1,                          Dilation = 1,                 seq. length
                                               bias = False                           bias = False                      in)



                                                                       Upscaling blocks


Figure 5: Encoders and decoders architectures. The convolution kernels with strides of two allow
to contract the temporal dimension and thus to aggregate local information. The dotted line means
that several convolution blocks with a stride of two can be added. At the end of the encoding, residual
blocks are added to speed up the learning process. In the decoder, the choice of the parameters of
the transposed convolutions is perfectly symmetrical with the parameters of the convolutions in the
downscaling blocks. The dotted line means that several transposed convolution blocks with a stride
of two can be added. There is no bias in these transposed convolutions to avoid potential artifacts.


                                                                             13
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


A.2   E MPIRICAL SHIFT EQUIVARIANCE , S HAPELET S IM DATASET EXPERIENCE

The theoretical shift equivariance of the non-strided convolutions guarantees that a pattern in the
                                                                                            ′
signal which occurs at time t or at time t + τ is encoded in the same way with a shift τ . More for-
mally this can be written as follows. Let S be an element of the signal (for instance a subsequence),
and let T be the group of discrete translations along the temporal axis. If we take τ to be any dis-
crete translation in T and f to be a function equivariant by discrete translation for T then there exists
τ ′ ∈ T ′ such that :
                                          f (τ (S)) = τ ′ (f (S))

In the proposed model, theoretical shift equivariance does not stand because of the strided convo-
lutions (stride of 2). However, we observe that empirically, our model has some empirical shift
equivariance in the way patterns are encoded. The experiment below attempts to show this.
In the ShapeletSim dataset, there are 100 instances generated with white noise (class 0) and 100
instances generated with white noise as well as a randomly inserted triangle (class 1). The purpose
of this experiment is to show that the triangle is encoded (most of the time) in the same way in the
codebook regardless of its position in the time series.
After applying our procedure 4.1.1, we obtain two representations where the bottom codebook
length is 125 (downscaling by 22 ) and the top codebook length is 16 (downscaling by 25 ). The
reconstruction loss is 0.12 pointwise. In Figure 6, we see examples of reconstructions for instances
of class 1.


Figure 6: Visualization few time series for ShapeletSim dataset where a triangle is encoded at a
random position (class 1). The blue curve stands for the true time series and the red one for its
reconstruction.

In Figure 7, we see how an instance of class 1 is decomposed between the codebook bottom and the
codebook top.


                                                   14
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


    Codebook Bottom        . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13 7 7 7 13 . . . . . . . . . . . .

                                                                        Decoder


Figure 7: Visualization of how the triangle is encoded for a given position in time according to the
bottom/top decomposition.


We notice that for the 100 instances of class 1, the triangles are enconded almost always in the
same way. However, there are some edge effects to take into account. Table 3 shows for class 1 the
percentage of instances where the triangle is encoded with a given sequence of centroids. We can
also see the percentage of instances of class 0 where this given sequence of centroids is present.


                      Table 3: Pattern of the sub-sequence that encodes the triangle.

          Centroides sequences          White Noise (class 0)            White noise + triangle (class 1)
          ’7 7’                                        23 %                                       100 %
          ’7 7 7’                                        1%                                        91 %
          ’13 7 7 7’                                     0%                                        88 %
          ’13 7 7 7 13’                                  0%                                        75 %

The Table can be interpreted as follows. In 91 % of the cases of class 1, the triangle is encoded in
the bottom codebook by the sub-sequence of centroids ’7 7 7’. This sub-sequence of centroids is
found in 1 % of the cases of class 0.
To conclude with this experiment, it is interesting to see how simple it is for other algorithms to
distinguish class 0 from class 1. We see from ResNet’s performance that this task is not so simple.


          Table 4: Test accuracy comparison for few methods on the ShapeletSim dataset

                                              1-NN                        Triplet
                                                            1-NN
                           Ours + LR          DTW                       Loss (K=1)         ResNet     Hive Cote
                                                             ED
                                             (w=100)                     + SVM)
      Test Accuracy                0.95         0.65          0.54             0.89            0.73         1.0


                                                           15
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


A.3     A DDITIONAL QUANTITATIVE RESULTS


Table 5: Results and comparisons for unsupervised methods on the 39 datasets of interest. The
best results are in bold and the second best results are underlined (if they exist). Sometimes dataset
names are shortened for the sake of space.

                                                                                           Triplet
                                             Ours +    Ours +    Ran-    1-NN     1-NN      Loss
 Type         Dataset
                                              LR       ResNet    dom      ED      DTW      (K=1)
                                                                                           + SVM
 Device       Computers                        0.77       0.73    0.50     0.58     0.70      0.69
 Device       SmallKitchenApp                  0.70       0.69    0.33     0.34     0.64      0.68
 Device       ScreenType                       0.48       0.45    0.33     0.36     0.40      0.41
 Device       RefrigerationDevices             0.47       0.55    0.33     0.39     0.46      0.53
 Device       ECG200                           0.77       0.84    0.64     0.88     0.77      0.87
 Device       ECG5000                          0.92       0.93    0.58     0.92     0.92      0.94
 Device       LargeKitchenApp                  0.77       0.83    0.33     0.49     0.79      0.80
 Image        MiddlePhalanxOC                  0.70       0.78    0.57     0.77     0.70      0.75
 Image        ProximalPhalanxTW                0.75       0.81    0.35     0.71     0.76      0.82
 Image        ProximalPhalanxOC                0.82       0.85    0.68     0.81     0.78      0.87
 Image        ProximalPhalanxOAG               0.83       0.84    0.49     0.79     0.80      0.85
 Image        PhalangesOC                      0.79       0.75    0.61     0.76     0.73      0.81
 Image        MixedShapesRegularTrain          0.67       0.86    0.27     0.90     0.84      0.92
 Image        MiddlePhalanxTW                  0.50       0.56    0.29     0.51     0.51      0.60
 Image        MiddlePhalanxOAG                 0.49       0.63    0.57     0.52     0.50      0.62
 Image        HandOutlines                     0.88       0.89    0.64     0.86     0.88      0.92
 Image        Yoga                             0.70       0.73    0.54     0.83     0.84      0.82
 Image        DistalPhalanxTW                  0.57       0.68    0.30     0.63     0.59      0.70
 Image        DistalPhalanxOAG                 0.68       0.71    0.47     0.63     0.77      0.72
 Image        DistalPhalanxOC                  0.75       0.72    0.58     0.72     0.72      0.76
 Motion       GunPointOvY                      1.00       0.99    0.52     0.95     0.84      1.00
 Motion       GunPointMvF                      0.97       0.99    0.53     0.97     1.00      1.00
 Motion       GunPointAgeSpan                  0.97       0.91    0.51     0.90     0.92      0.98
 Motion       WormsTwoClass                    0.70       0.75    0.57     0.61     0.62      0.75
 Sensor       FreezerRegularTrain              0.97       0.98    0.50     0.80     0.90      0.99
 Sensor       Wafer                            0.99       1.00    0.89     1.00     0.98      0.99
 Sensor       StarLightCurves                  0.96       0.96    0.58     0.85     0.91      0.96
 Sensor       ChlorineConcentration            0.55       0.56    0.53     0.65     0.65      0.72
 Sensor       Earthquakes                      0.73       0.75    0.75     0.71     0.72      0.75
 Sensor       FordA                            0.89       0.93    0.52     0.67     0.55      0.92
 Sensor       PowerCons                        0.91       0.94    0.50     0.93     0.88      0.96
 Sensor       FordB                            0.75       0.79    0.50     0.61     0.62      0.79
 Simu         TwoPatterns                      0.78       1.00    0.26     0.91     1.00      1.00
 Spectro      EthanolLevel                     0.55       0.27    0.25     0.27     0.28      0.42
 Spectro      Strawberry                       0.93       0.90    0.64     0.95     0.94      0.95
 Spectro      Ham                              0.57       0.71    0.51     0.60     0.47      0.65
 Spectrum     SemgHandSubjectCh2               0.72       0.88    0.20     0.40     0.73      0.77
 Spectrum     SemgHandGenderCh2                0.89       0.91    0.65     0.76     0.80      0.84
 Spectrum     SemgHandMovementCh2              0.57       0.61    0.17     0.37     0.58      0.71


                                                 16
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Table 6: Results and comparisons for supervised methods on the 39 datasets of interest. The best
results are in bold and the second best results are underlined (if they exist). Sometimes dataset
names are shortened for the sake of space.

                                               Ours +                                   Incep-
                                     Ours +             Hive    Rock-           Res-
 Type        Dataset                            Res-                     Boss            tion
                                      LR                Cote     et             Net
                                                Net                                      Time
 Device      Computers                 0.77      0.73    0.81     0.84   0.80    0.86     0.87
 Device      SmallKitchenApp           0.70      0.69    0.83     0.82   0.75    0.80     0.77
 Device      ScreenType                0.48      0.45    0.72     0.61   0.58    0.76     0.71
 Device      RefrigerationDevices      0.47      0.55    0.56     0.54   0.44    0.52     0.51
 Device      ECG200                    0.77      0.84    0.86     0.90   0.88    0.88     0.90
 Device      ECG5000                   0.92      0.93    0.95     0.95   0.94    0.94     0.94
 Device      LargeKitchenApp           0.77      0.83    0.92     0.93   0.84    0.95     0.95
 Image       MiddlePhalanxOC           0.70      0.78    0.81     0.83   0.81    0.82     0.83
 Image       ProximalPhalTW            0.75      0.81    0.82     0.80   0.77    0.79     0.78
 Image       ProximalPhalOC            0.82      0.85    0.89     0.90   0.87    0.91     0.91
 Image       ProximalPhalOAG           0.83      0.84    0.86     0.85   0.83    0.82     0.82
 Image       PhalangesOC               0.79      0.75    0.83     0.84   0.82    0.85     0.86
 Image       MixedShapesRegTr          0.67      0.86    0.97     0.97   0.92    0.97     0.97
 Image       MiddlePhalanxTW           0.50      0.56    0.58     0.59   0.53    0.53     0.53
 Image       MiddlePhalanxOAG          0.49      0.63    0.70     0.71   0.66    0.60     0.59
 Image       HandOutlines              0.88      0.89    0.92     0.94   0.90    0.94     0.95
 Image       Yoga                      0.70      0.73    0.91     0.91   0.91    0.88     0.91
 Image       DistalPhalanxTW           0.57      0.68    0.70     0.70   0.67    0.67     0.67
 Image       DistalPhalanxOAG          0.68      0.71    0.82     0.81   0.82    0.78     0.77
 Image       DistalPhalanxOC           0.75      0.72    0.82     0.82   0.81    0.81     0.82
 Motion      GunPointOvY               1.00      0.99    1.00     0.99   1.00    1.00     1.00
 Motion      GunPointMvF               0.97      0.99    1.00     1.00   1.00    0.99     1.00
 Motion      GunPointAgeSpan           0.97      0.91    1.00     0.99   0.99    0.99     0.98
 Motion      WormsTwoClass             0.70      0.75    0.79     0.79   0.81    0.77     0.80
 Sensor      FreezerReguTrain          0.97      0.98    1.00     0.99   0.99    1.00     1.00
 Sensor      Wafer                     0.99      1.00    1.00     1.00   1.00    1.00     1.00
 Sensor      StarLightCurves           0.96      0.96    0.98     0.98   0.98    0.97     0.98
 Sensor      ChloConcentration         0.55      0.56    0.73     0.80   0.66    0.84     0.86
 Sensor      Earthquakes               0.73      0.75    0.75     0.75   0.75    0.72     0.73
 Sensor      FordA                     0.89      0.93    0.94     0.94   0.92    0.93     0.96
 Sensor      PowerCons                 0.91      0.94    0.99     0.96   0.89    0.89     0.99
 Sensor      FordB                     0.75      0.79    0.93     0.81   0.91    0.82     0.86
 Simu        TwoPatterns               0.78      1.00    1.00     1.00   0.99    1.00     1.00
 Spectro     EthanolLevel              0.55      0.27    0.85     0.63   0.51    0.85     0.88
 Spectro     Strawberry                0.93      0.90    0.98     0.98   0.97    0.97     0.98
 Spectro     Ham                       0.57      0.71    0.84     0.86   0.84    0.81     0.85
 Spectrum    SemgHandSCh2              0.72      0.88    0.95     0.91   0.84    0.55     0.76
 Spectrum    SemgHandGCh2              0.89      0.91    0.97     0.92   0.89    0.81     0.88
 Spectrum    SemgHandMCh2              0.57      0.61    0.89     0.65   0.66    0.42     0.55


                                               17
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Table 7: Results for supervised methods on the 39 datasets of interest by type. The best results
are in bold and the second best results are underlined (if they exist). Sometimes dataset names are
shortened for the sake of space.

                           Ours +    Ours +     Hive                               Inception
     Type         Count                                Rocket    Boss    ResNet
                            LR       ResNet     Cote                                 Time
     Device            7     0.70      0.72     0.81      0.80    0.75      0.82        0.81
     Image            13     0.70      0.75     0.82      0.82    0.79      0.80        0.80
     Motion            4     0.91      0.91     0.95      0.94    0.95      0.94        0.95
     Sensor            8     0.84      0.86     0.92      0.90    0.89      0.90        0.92
     Simulated         1     0.78      1.00     1.00      1.00    0.99      1.00        1.00
     Spectro           3     0.69      0.63     0.89      0.82    0.77      0.88        0.90
     Spectrum          3     0.73      0.80     0.94      0.83    0.80      0.59        0.73


                                                18
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


A.4    R ES N ET ARCHITECTURE ON REPRESENTATION AND TRAINING PROCEDURE


                                                    Output
                                                  (Batch size,
                                                  Nb classes)



                                              Block linear : Linear
                                               layer + LeakyRelu
                                                    (3 times)



                                              Concatenate output
                                                  (Batch size,
                                                2*Nb channels)

            Flatten bottom output                                                Flatten top output
                (Batch size, Nb                                                    (Batch size, Nb
                   channels)                                                          channels)



        Global average pooling along                                       Global average pooling along
                temporal axis                                                      temporal axis


        Block 2 : Conv1D + LeakyRelu                                        Block 2 : Conv1D + LeakyRelu
       (3 times) + residual connection                                    (3 times) + residual connection


        Block 1 : Conv1D + LeakyRelu                                        Block 1 : Conv1D + LeakyRelu
       (3 times) + residual connection                                    (3 times) + residual connection



        Bottom sequential embedding
                                                                            Top sequential embedding
      (Batch size, Nb channels, seq. length
                                                                      (Batch size, Nb channels, seq. length top)
                     bottom)


Figure 8: ResNet architecture on our unsupervised representation. It is important to note that in
this case, the Resnet model takes as input the vectors of the representation and not the indices. This
allows the model to take into account the distance between the centroids.

Procedure to train the ResNet on representation. For the choice of the representation, we take the
same representation as for the logistic regression. Then, we split the initial training data into training
(70%) and validation (30%). For this training, we choose the following two hyperparameters:

       • weight decay (research in a grid of 15 values between 10−6 and 10−1 )
       • Number of epochs (research in a grid of 10 values between 50 and 500).

The validation dataset allows us to select the right hyperparameters. One notice that no hyperpa-
rameters research is done on the architecture itself. The ResNet model aims to show that it is easy
to improve the accuracy by using a non-linear model on the representation.


                                                        19
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


A.5   A DDITIONAL RESULTS FOR INTERPRETABILITY : P OWER C ONS DATASET

This dataset contains the individual household electric power consumption for one day. The sam-
pling rate is 10 minutes, so the time series is 144 long. Time series are divided into two classes:
class 1 stands for the warm season and class 2 for the cold season.


                    Warm season                                        Cold season



                         Figure 9: Overview of an instance for each class.

After applying our procedure, we obtain two representations where the bottom codebook length is 18
(downscaling by 23 ) and the top codebook length is 3 (downscaling by 23 ). The reconstruction loss
is around 0.06 pointwise. In Figure 10, we see the decomposition between the different frequency
levels.


Figure 10: Bottom/Top decomposition for an instance. In the bottom plot, the blue curve stands
for the initial time series, and the red curve stands for the reconstructed time series.

Once the unigrams and bigrams of the representations are extracted, we train a penalized logistic
regression. The Figure 11 shows the coefficients of this logistic regression. Unlike the use-case 4.2,
the top-level features seem to be discriminating for the classification problem.


                                                 20
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Figure 11: Logistic regression coefficients. Intercept is 2.27. Top three features are bigram ’9 7’,
unigram ’26’ and unigram ’1’ for the top level, their coefficient are respectively -2.17, 1.91, -1.76.
The dotted line represents the boundary between the features from the codebook bottom and features
from the codebook top.

Now let’s look at the two most discriminating unigrams in detail. They are both extracted from the
top codebook.


Figure 12: Decoded unigram ’26’ at third position (which is the case most of the time in our
setting)

In Figure 12, we see that the pattern favorably characterizing the ’cold season’ class shows a high
power consumption in the evening.


Figure 13: Decoded unigram ’1’ at second position (which is the case most of the time in our
setting)

In Figure 13, we see that the pattern favorably characterizing the ’warm season’ class shows a low
power consumption during the middle of the day.


                                                 21
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


A.6   A DDITIONAL RESULTS FOR TRANSFER LEARNING

For the transfer Section 4.3, the transfer allows us to greatly improve our results where we were not
very efficient before. Table 8 shows how the transfer allows us to improve on these datasets.


Table 8: Results for the above datasets benefiting from the transfer and comparison with 1-NN
methods. Bold accuracies stand for best accuracies.

                                                                                             1-NN
                                           Ours    Ours (transfer)                1-NN
   Datasets                                                              Random              DTW
                                           + LR        + LR                        ED
                                                                                            (w=100)
   MiddlePhalanxTW                          0.49              0.57         0.29      0.51      0.51
   MiddlePhalanxOutlineCorrect              0.70              0.74         0.57      0.77      0.70
   MiddlePhalanxOutlineAgeGroup             0.49              0.62         0.57      0.52      0.50
   DistalPhalanxOutlineAgeGroup             0.68              0.77         0.47      0.63      0.77
   DistalPhalanxTW                          0.57              0.63         0.30      0.63      0.59
   DistalPhalanxOutlineCorrect              0.75              0.75         0.58      0.72      0.72
   ProximalPhalanxOutlineAgeGroup           0.83              0.86         0.49      0.79      0.80
   ProximalPhalanxTW                        0.76              0.80         0.35      0.71      0.76
   ProximalPhalanxOutlineCorrect            0.82              0.82         0.68      0.81      0.78
   PhalangesOutlinesCorrect                 0.79              0.79         0.61      0.76      0.73

Table 9 presents transfer results for other time series of length 720.


Table 9: Transfer on time series 720 time steps long. Columns indicate the source datasets whose
unsupervised architectures are re-used. Rows indicate the target datasets. Bold accuracies stand for
the best results for each target dataset. Underlined accuracies stand for the result without transfer.

       Target datasets    Computers      RefriDevices    ScreenType       SmallKA      LargeKA
       Computers              0.77               0.63          0.71           0.60         0.67
       RefriDevices           0.47               0.47          0.48           0.46         0.48
       ScreenType             0.53               0.46          0.49           0.38         0.42
       SmallKA                0.69               0.67          0.61           0.70         0.71
       LargeKA                0.78               0.73          0.71           0.67         0.77


                                                   22
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


A.7    U NSUPERVISED ARCHITECTURE VISUALIZATION

                                           Vector                           Top sequential
                                         Quantization                        embedding


                          ...
                      ....
     Top                                                                                               Codebook top
   encoding
    ouput



               Convolutionnal


                                                                g
                                                               in
                                                               pl
                Encoder Top                                                    Decoder


                                                          am
                                                           s
                                                        Up
                                                                                 Top
                       ...
                   ....


    Bottom
   encoding
    output
                                        Convolutionnal                     Mean Operator
                                            Layer


                                                    Vector                     Decoder                Reconstruction
              Convolutionnal                      Quantization
                                                                               Bottom
              Encoder Bottom


                                                                                                      Codebook bottom
                                                                          Bottom sequential
                                                                             embedding


                                Figure 14: Unsupervised architecture details


A.8    C OMPUTE RECEPTIVES FIELDS REGIONS

With our model, it is very useful to be able to calculate the receptive fields and in particular the
receptive field regions relative to an element (or a region) of the representation. The formulas have
been computed by Araujo et al. (2019):

                                            L
                                            Y                  L
                                                               X                           l−1
                                                                                           Y
                                  v0 = vL         si −               (1 + pl − kl )              si
                                            i=1                l=1                         i=1

                                                    L
                                                    Y                    L
                                                                         X          l−1
                                                                                    Y
                                       u0 = uL                 si −            pl         si
                                                    i=1                  l=1        i=1

Where :

        • v0 stands for the left-most coordinates of the receptive field in the intial time series
        • u0 stands for the right-most coordinates of the receptive field in the intial time series
        • vL stands for the left-most coordinates in the representation
        • uL stands for the left-right coordinates in the representation
        • kl stands for the kernel size at depth l
        • sl stands for the stride at depth l
        • pl stands for the padding at depth l
        • L stands for the depth of the network


                                                                    23
