Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


C ONDITIONAL I NVARIANCES FOR C ONFORMER I N -
VARIANT P ROTEIN R EPRESENTATIONS

 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review
                                              A BSTRACT
         Representation learning for proteins is an emerging area in geometric deep learn-
         ing. Recent works have factored in both the relational (atomic bonds) and the
         geometric aspects (atomic positions) of the task, notably bringing together graph
         neural networks (GNNs) with neural networks for point clouds. The equivariances
         and invariances to geometric transformations (group actions such as rotations and
         translations) so far treat large molecules as rigid structures. However, in many
         important settings, proteins can co-exist as an ensemble of multiple stable con-
         formations. The conformations of a protein, however, cannot be described as
         input-independent transformations of the protein: Two proteins may require differ-
         ent sets of transformations in order to describe their set of viable conformations.
         To address this limitation, we introduce the concept of conditional transformations
         (CT). CT can capture protein structure, while respecting the constraints on dihedral
         (torsion) angles and steric repulsions between atoms. We then introduce a Markov
         chain Monte Carlo framework to learn representations that are invariant to these
         conditional transformations. Our results show that endowing existing baseline
         models with these conditional transformations helps improve their performance
         without sacrificing computational efficiency.


1    I NTRODUCTION
The literature on geometric deep learning has achieved much success with neural networks that
explicitly model equivariances (or invariances) to group transformations (Cohen & Welling, 2016;
Maron et al., 2018; Kondor & Trivedi, 2018; Finzi et al., 2020). Among applications to physical sci-
ences, group equivariant graph neural networks and transformers have specifically found applications
to small molecules, as well as large molecules (e.g. proteins) with tremendous success (Klicpera
et al., 2020; Anderson et al., 2019; Fuchs et al., 2020; Hutchinson et al., 2021; Satorras et al., 2021;
Batzner et al., 2021). Specifically, machine learning for proteins (and 3D macromolecular structures
in general) is a rapidly growing application area in geometric deep learning, (Bronstein et al., 2021;
Gerken et al., 2021). Traditionally, proteins have been modeled using standard 3D CNNs (Karimi
et al., 2019; Pagès et al., 2019), graph neural networks (GNNs) (Kipf & Welling, 2016; Hamilton
et al., 2017), and transformers (Vaswani et al., 2017). More recently, several works Jing et al. (2020;
2021); Jumper et al. (2021); Hermosilla et al. (2021) have enriched the above models with neural
networks that are equivariant (invariant) to transformations from the Euclidean and rotation groups.
While equivariance (invariance) to the transformations in these groups are necessary properties for
the model, unfortunately, they are limited to only capture rigid transformations of the input object.
However, these models may not yet account for all invariances of the input pertinent to the downstream
task. And the transformations they are invariant to do not depend on the input. For instance, invariance
to the Euclidean group restricts the protein representation to act as if the protein were a rigid structure,
regardless of the protein under consideration. However, treating proteins as rigid structures may
not be optimal for many downstream tasks. And different proteins may have different types of
conformations (protein 3D structures with flexible side chains) (Harder et al., 2010; Gainza et al.,
2012; Miao & Cao, 2016) . The existing rigid body assumption in protein representations may hurt
these methods in datasets & downstream tasks that require protein representations to be invariant to a
specific set of protein conformations. For example, for most proteins, regardless of their side chain
conformation (as long as viable) under consideration – their protein fold class/ other scalar properties
remain the same, their mutation (in)stability remains unaltered, protein ligand binding affinity (apart
from changes at the ligand binding site) remain the same, etc.
In light of this limitation of current methods, a question naturally arises: Is it possible to learn
conformer-invariant protein representations?


                                                     1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023
                                                                                        SC6                      SC5


                         Side Chain
                           Atoms
                                                                                  SC3                   SC2


                                                                                              SC1                SC4


                                                      }
                   N          C         C         O

                                                          Backbone Atoms
                                                                                              C
                                        O


                 Single amino acid in a protein                                Just the alpha carbon and the side chain atom


Figure 1: Magnified image of side chain of a single generic amino acid (here, with 6 atoms in the side chain) in
a protein molecule. A protein molecule typically contains tens to hundreds of amino acids
Our Approach: We propose a representation method where the set of symmetries in the task are
input-dependent, which we denote conditional invariances. For our specific application, we model
every protein as a directed forest, where every amino acid forms a directed tree. We leverage the
constructed directed forest of the protein to sample viable protein conformations (where viability is
checked with Protein structure validation tools such as Molprobity (Davis et al., 2007; Chen et al.,
2010)), which is additionally coupled with a Markov chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) framework to
create data augmentations to train the neural network to learn conformer invariant representations.
Our contributions can be summarized as follows:
• We provide guiding principles for defining conditional invariant representations as inductive biases,
  which serves as a generalization of group invariant neural networks.
• We then provide a principled strategy to sample conformations for any given protein from the
  support of its protein conformer distribution (which consists of all its viable protein conformations)
  which captures their true flexibility. Viable conformations respect domain specific constraints
  such as those on dihedral angles, steric repulsions, among others. This is particularly useful in the
  scenario when the set of viable transformations is different across different proteins.
• Further, we develop an MCMC-based learning framework which guides the sampling of protein
  conformations such that the (asymptotic empirical) average representation obtained by all viable
  conformations of a protein are identical.
• Finally, we perform experimental evaluation of our proposal, where endowing baseline models with
  our proposed strategy (via an implicit data augmentation scheme) shows noticeable improvements
  on multiple different classification and regression tasks on proteins.

2    C ONDITIONAL I NVARIANCES FOR P ROTEINS
The symmetry of an object is the set of transformations that leaves the object invariant. The notion
of symmetries, expressed through the action of a group on functions defined on some domain, has
served as a fundamental concept of geometric deep learning. In this section, we start by defining
the concept of input-dependent conditional symmetries and then proceed to specifically tailor these
conditional symmetries that are both computationally efficient and useful for representing protein
conformations. Some group theoretic preliminaries are presented in the Appendix A.2.
Definition 2.1 (Conditionally symmetric-invariant functions). A function f : Ω → R, is said to be
conditionally symmetric-invariant if
                                            f (tx · x) = f (x)       , ∀tx ∈ Sx , ∀x ∈ Ω,
where Sx is a set of transformations unique to element x and tx : Ω → Ω.

It is easy to see that conditionally invariant functions are a generalization of group invariant functions
where Sx ≡ G ∀x ∈ Ω where G is a group. The above definition is motivated by the fact that
representations for proteins may not necessarily be limited to be invariant just to group actions, but to
a more general set of protein specific transformations. We detail this motivation next.
A protein molecule is composed of amino acids (say n amino acids), where each atom in the protein
belongs to one amino acid ∈ {1, . . . , n}. Excluding the hydrogen atoms, every amino acid contains
four atoms known as the backbone atoms (see Figure 1), and other atoms which belong to the side
chain. Traditionally, protein structures are solved by X-ray crystallography or cryo-EM and the
obtained structure is normally considered a unique 3D conformation of the molecule. Molecules
available via the Protein Data Bank (Berman et al., 2000) generally include only unique sets of
coordinates to demonstrate the 3D structures, which lead to the unique answer as ‘gold standard’ in
structure prediction, such as protein structure prediction competitions - CASP (Kryshtafovych et al.,
2019). Under these assumptions protein side-chain conformations are usually assumed to be clustered
into rotamers, which are rigid conformations represented by discrete side-chain dihedral angles.


                                                                     2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


However, works over the past decade (Harder et al., 2010; Gainza et al., 2012; Miao & Cao, 2016)
have observed that — while the backbone atoms of all n amino acids in a protein molecule together
(i.e. 4n atoms) form a rigid structure, its side chains can exhibit flexible (continuous and discrete)
conformations beyond clustered rotamers. The underlying goal of our work is to capture this inherent
flexibility of proteins and to ensure different conformers of the same protein get identical represen-
tations (More details – Appendix A.10). The above problem of capturing protein conformations is
further compounded by the fact that protein conformations are often times unique to the protein - i.e.
conformations exhibited by a protein are input (protein) specific. The desiderata, therefore is a model
which outputs conformation invariant representations when the conformations (symmetries) exhibited
by a protein varies across proteins when access to only a single protein conformer is available.
We denote a protein as a tuple p = (V, Xs , Xp ) (data from pdb files) where V is the set of nodes
(every atom is a node) in the protein, Xs ∈ Rm×d , d ≥ 1 is the scalar atom feature matrix associated
with the atoms, Xp ∈ Rm×3 (where m denotes the number of atoms in the protein) are the positional
coordinates associated with the atoms in the protein. Without loss of generality, we number the nodes
in V = {1, . . . , m} following the same ordering of the rows in Xs , Xp .
Definition 2.2 (Rigid Backbone Protein Conformations). For an m-atom protein p with atom posi-
tional coordinates Xp ∈ Rm×3 (recall that by definition p contains information about Xp ), where
Cp ⊂ Rm×3 denotes the set of viable conformations of p, which keeps the positional coordinates
associated with the backbone fixed. We use Tp ⊂ Rm×3×3 (where a 3x3 matrix is associated with
every single atom) to denote the set of non-isometric transformations of p, which yield the set Cp
i.e. ∀cp ∈ Cp , ∃tp ∈ Tp , s.t. for an atom with index i ∈ {1, . . . , m}, the new position of atom i is
Xp [i]tp [i]T = cp [i], Xp [i] ∈ R1×3 , tp [i] ∈ R3×3 .

Tp forms a set of transformations which acts on the protein atomic coordinates via matrix multiplica-
tion. Two elements of Tp (with corresponding matrices of individual atoms and then aggregating for
the protein as a whole) may or may not combine via matrix multiplication (as the binary operation) to
result in another element of Tp i.e. matrix multiplication is not necessarily closed in Tp . A concrete
example of the non group structure of protein conformations is provided in Appendix A.3.
Unfortunately, sampling transformations from Tp to obtain viable protein conformations is an
unattainable task, since this would entail first sampling a transformation from Rm×3×3 and then
verifying if the transformation is viable (and the vast majority of transformations are not viable). We
will address this issue using an MCMC method - which is then combined with MCGD training of
the neural network (Sun et al., 2018) to learn conformation invariant protein representations where
different viable conformations are obtained via MCMC are used in every batch. Markov Chain
Gradient Descent (MCGD) is a variant of Stochastic Gradient Descent (SGD), where the samples
are drawn from the trajectory of a Markov Chain. We note that, while there have been prior Monte
Carlo and MCMC based techniques for sampling protein conformations (Boomsma et al., 2013;
Irbäck & Mohanty, 2006; Vitalis & Pappu, 2009), the overarching goals of the existing MCMC
methods are significantly different compared to ours. The existing methods define a distribution
over the conformations (based on the properties of the bonds, etc.) and then sample highly probable
conformations from this distribution. Our method, is much simpler and only requires that the chain
being used is ergodic and is invariant to the actual form of the distribution. Therefore, we devise a
simple chain whose transitions are easier to sample and don’t require us to compute conditionals of
an energy based model. However, we also note that the existing Markov chains can be used as drop-in
replacements to sample conformations as part of our framework. Before specifying our MCMC
procedure, we specify the invariance requirements for learning protein representations.
A symmetric-invariant function for proteins (per Definition 2.1), should be invariant to (i) transfor-
mations which change its atomic coordinates to any of its rigid backbone conformations in Cp (ii)
transformations which change the atomic coordinates of all its atoms via rigid body transformations
— group actions such as rotations/ translations (iii) a combination of the two above which transforms
it into one of its viable conformations and is then further acted upon by rigid body transformations.

3    O BTAINING V IABLE C ONFORMATIONS
Before we describe our MCMC procedure to sample atomic coordinates from the set of rigid backbone
conformations , we need a way to sample from the local neighborhood of a conformation.


                                                   3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023

                                                        1


                                              2                    4


                                                  3            5



Figure 2: Directed tree corresponding to a set with 5 points which exhibits conditional invariances. Our proposed
model (not limited to proteins), for example, allows node 2 and its descendants to transform its coordinates
                                                   (g ·~
                                                       a)
about node 1 (its parent) upon actions from group G2 1 , g1 ∈ G1 . In practice, for protein molecules we use
                     (·,·)
G1 = SO(3) and Gi = SO(3)∀i 6= 1. We note that in protein molecules not all transformations about a
node would be allowed due to steric repulsions between atoms as well as potential overlaps of atoms.

3.1   A SIMPLE PROTEIN CONFORMATION SAMPLING STRATEGY
Akin to Irbäck & Mohanty (2006), to efficiently sample a candidate conformation from Cp , we will
follow a multi-step approach: First, we (i) construct a directed tree for every amino acid in the protein
to capture the inherent flexibility in protein structures. Then, we (ii) leverage a directed forest of the
protein (described next) to transform its atomic coordinates and check for viability.

Part 1. Directed forest construction. Using the input protein molecule, we construct a directed
forest using the following three step procedure:
1. Each amino acid in the protein gets its own directed tree. The atoms in the amino acid’s backbone
   form the base (root) nodes (i.e., there can be multiple base nodes in every amino acid). This is
   illustrated as node 1 in Figure 2’s tree. The set of base nodes of all the amino acids in the protein
   are jointly referred to as the base nodes of the protein (or equivalently of the directed forest).
2. The atoms adjacent to the amino acid’s backbone via a covalent bond become their immediate
   children in the tree. For example, the node SC1 forms the child of αC in the Figure 1.
3. The other covalent bonds of the children establish the grandchildren of the root, and so on, until
   all the atoms in the amino acid are a part of the tree. For example, SC2 and SC3 become the
   children of the node SC1 in the directed tree constructed for Figure 1.

Figure 2 is an illustration of some directed tree constructed with the above procedure, where node
1 is the root node, with nodes 2, 4 as its children and so on. It is important to note that, the above
procedure ensures that in the constructed tree, each (non-root) node has a single parent and may have
arbitrarily many children. Further, cycles/rings which are present in the molecule are broken on the
basis of bond length, i.e., larger bonds are chosen before smaller bonds. Ties between same-length
bonds are broken arbitrarily. While multiple directed forests can be created for a given protein since
bonds of equal length are broken arbitrarily, in our implementation, given a protein, the tree is fixed
because the directed forest for every protein is created exactly once (in the preprocessing step) -
where the ties are broken deterministically based on their ordering in the “pdb file".
Next, we shall look at how the atomic coordinates are transformed using the directed tree.
Part 2. Conditional transformations of atomic coordinates. Let Xp be the available input
atomic coordinates of the protein. To obtain a new candidate protein conformation (say Xp0 ∈ Rm×3 ),
we sample uniformly, one of the directed trees from the forest. Next, we transform the atomic
coordinates of the subset of atoms in this directed tree. This set is denoted by A ⊂ V . That is, in the
candidate conformation, Xp0 [i] = Xp [i], ∀i ∈ V \ A — or equivalently tp [i] = I, ∀i ∈ V \ A.
Starting with the root node, we use breadth first search to traverse the directed tree and update all the
descendants of the node currently being considered. For the backbone atoms, we leave Xp [i] = Xp0 [i]
(or equivalently tp [i] = I), i.e., atomic coordinates are unchanged for backbone atoms. Next, we use
pointed sets to describe approximate transformations on a given protein through a directed tree .
Definition 3.1 (Pointed sets). A pointed set is an ordered pair (X, x0 ), where X is a set and x0 ∈ X
is called the basepoint.

For instance, let Mi = {Xp [j] : j ∈ Ni }, where Ni is the set containing i and all its descendants in
its directed tree. Then, (Mi , Xp [i]) is a pointed set.


                                                       4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                                        (g ·X [◦])
Let the parent of node i be denoted by ◦ and let Gi ◦ p          (in practice, SO(3)) be the group from
                      (g ·X [◦])
which actions gi ∈ Gi ◦ p are sampled uniformly — that can transform the positional coordinates
of node i and its descendants about its parents in the directed tree, where g◦ · Xp [◦] is the transformed
atomic coordinates of the parent of node i (we use BFS - so a top down approach). In the case of the
root node (for example 1 in Figure 2), the actions are just drawn from Groot (or G1 in Figure 2).
The associated transformations of the atomic coordinates of the atoms in Ni can be given by the
mapping hi : (Mi , Xp [i]) → (R|Ni |×3 , g◦ · Xp [◦] + gi · (Xp [i] − Xp [◦])) where the coordinates of
node j ∈ Ni are updated as:
                           Xp0 [j] ← g◦ · Xp [◦] + gi · (Xp [j] − Xp [◦])                           (1)
If the node j 6= i, its coordinates, i.e., Xp0 [j] can be further updated as we traverse the tree. When
  (g ·X [◦])
Gi ◦ p     = SO(3) ∀i ∈ V , every node in the directed tree can be rotated about its parents as
shown in Figure 3 (Appendix A.4) - which is the side chain of the amino acid shown in Figure 1.

Algorithm 1 Sampling a viable conformation of cp
 1: Input: Conformation cp of protein p
 2: Obtain the directed forest corresponding to the protein with n directed trees where n is the
    number of amino acids in the protein.
 3: repeat
 4:   Sample y ∼ UNIF({1, 2, · · · , n}) and obtain the corresponding directed tree
 5:   Traverse through directed tree via BFS and update atomic coordinates via Equation (1) to
      obtain c0p a candidate conformation of cp — where group actions are always sampled uniformly
      from SO(3).
 6:   Check if c0p is a valid protein conformation via protein structure validation tools
 7: until c0p is a valid conformation
 8: Return: c0p , a valid conformation of cp

However, each candidate Xp0 obtained via the above transformation process may not belong to Cp .
To that end protein structural validation tools may be used to check the validity of these candidates.
Molprobity (Davis et al., 2007; Chen et al., 2010; Williams et al., 2018) is such a tool,which outputs
scores corresponding to different metrics (such as number of dihedral (torsion) angles outside the
allowed threshold, number of atom-atom clashes arising due to steric repulsions, etc) which can
be compared with the originally provided conformation Xp . Note, that while Molprobity is not
perfect and we may end up developing models more invariant than just to viable conformations,
alternatively (more precise) tools including those which allow for the evaluation of molecular force-
fields, can be used to check validity. Additionally, the goal of this work is not to use Molprobity/
other protein structure validation tools as a part of generative models and a more invariant model
does not necessarily affect performance on unseen but valid protein test data.
Our algorithm to sample viable conformations is summarized in Algorithm 1. The repeat-loop
proposes a conformation in the neighborhood of the current conformation cp which is only accepted
when the proposed conformation c0p is a valid conformation. As such it is an acceptance-rejection
sampling algorithm. We will see later that the actual sampling probability distribution is not required
to be known by our procedure. Our MCMC procedure defined next only requires Algorithm 1 to
follow certain conditions which we argue it follows.
3.2 S AMPLING C ONFORMERS VIA MCMC
                                                                                            (0)
We now describe the MCMC procedure that, starting at any conformer configuration cp ∈ Cp we
will, in steady state, sample conformations according to a unique stationary distribution which depends
on the protein p, where Cp is the set of all viable conformations of p as defined in Definition 2.2.
To that end we first define the transition kernel of the Markov chain. Algorithm 1 samples a
conformation c0p in the neighborhood of a given conformation cp using a directed forest. The
neighborhood N (cp ) of the conformation cp is loosely defined as the set of all possible conformations
c0p which may result from running Algorithm 1 with cp as input. We denote the probability distribution
induced by Algorithm 1 as the transition kernel κ(c0p |cp ) which has support N (cp ).
Definition 3.2 (Conformer Sampling Markov Chain (CSMC) Φp ). We define the conformer sampling
Markov chain Φp as a time-homogenous Markov chain over the state space Cp with transition kernel


                                                    5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


κ as defined above, where Cp is the set of valid conformations associated with given protein p as
defined in Definition 2.2.
The consistency of our learning procedure does not depend on the precise definition of κ. However,
our procedure relies on the fact that any conformer c0p ∈ Cp can be sampled by κ in a finite number
of steps, starting from a conformer cp . We use this fact to show that the chain Φp converges to a
unique stationary distribution regardless of the initial conformer. (All proofs in Appendix A.5).
Proposition 3.3. Given the CSMC Φp from Definition 3.2 whose transitions are governed by κ which
is implicitly defined by Algorithm 1, for any pair of conformers cp , c0p ∈ Cp , there exists τp < ∞,
                                τ                          τ
independent of cp , such that PΦpp (cp , c0p ) > 0, where PΦpp is the τp step transition probability.

Next, we show the existence of a unique steady state distribution of our Markov chain.
Proposition 3.4. The CSMC Φp defined in Definition 3.2 is uniformly ergodic if Proposition 3.3 is
satisfied. Specifically there exists a unique steady state distribution πp such that for all cp ∈ Cp ,
   n
kPΦ  p
       (cp , ·) − πp (·)k ≤ C Rn , where C < ∞ and R < 1 are constants that depend on Φp , PΦn
                                                                                               p
                                                                                                 is the
n step transition probability and k · k is the `1 norm.
Given that we now have the ability to draw samples from a Markov chain which achieves a unique
stationary distribution πp on Cp , we shall leverage this next, in our learning framework to learn
conformer invariant representations of proteins.
4    L EARNING F RAMEWORK
We shall employ a learning strategy, where we use the viable conformations obtained via the Markov
chain to learn a function which outputs conformer invariant representations.
Let D = {(xj , yj )}Nj=1 be the input data (where we have a single conformer for every protein in
the dataset). We shall consider a single data point (xj , yj ) henceforth, where xj = (V, Xs , Xp ) is
the input protein. We consider a supervised learning setting where yj is the associated target. We
consider both classification and regression tasks.
Let Cj = {cji } be the set of viable conformations of protein xj . We only consider viable confor-
mations which defer only in the atomic coordinates matrix Xp . For a given protein xj , we shall use
xji to denote protein xj but with Xp of the original protein modified by cji , and use Sj = {xji } to
denote the set of all viable xji i.e. the state space.
Let f : Ω → Rd , d > 0 be any function with learnable parameters θf , (for e.g. any neural
network model such as 3D CNN, GNN, Transformer, LSTM, etc.) which takes a protein (in the
form (V, Xs , Xp )) as input and outputs protein representations. The function f need not necessarily
output conformer invariant representations of the protein xj . Then, a simple way to obtain conformer
invariant representations of protein xj (apart from using trivial functions such as a constant function
or function independent of Xp ) is computing its expected value over all its viable conformations. We
shall denote f to denote a function which outputs conformer invariant representations of a protein.
                                                  f                  f
                                         f (xj ; θ ) = EX∼πj [f (X; θ )]                                (2)
where πj (·) is the steady state distribution of the Markov chain associated with the protein xj . As
such, f (xj ; θf ) = f (x0j ; θf ) for any viable protein conformation x0j ∈ Sj . Subsequently, to learn an
optimal f (which we denote by f ? ), we wish to minimize the loss, defined as follows:
                                             N
                                         1 X
                      L(D; θf , θρ ) =         L̂(yi , ρ(f (xj ; θf ); θρ ))
                                         N j=1
                                                N                k
                                             1 X              1X
                                    = lim          L̂(yi , ρ(       f (xij ; θf ); θρ ))               (3)
                                         k→∞ N                k
                                               j=1              i=1

where L̂ is a convex loss function e.g. cross entropy loss, ρ is some differentiable function with
                                                  Pk
parameters θρ (in practice, an MLP) and lim k1 i=1 f (xij ; θf ) can be employed as an asymp-
                                                 k→∞
totically unbiased and consistent estimate of f where xij is the ith sample from the Markov chain
corresponding to the protein xj


                                                       6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Since Equation (3) is computationally intractable, we employ a surrogate for the loss given by:
                                              N     k
                                           1 X1X
                      J(D; θf , θρ ) = lim             L̂(yi , ρ(f (xkj ; θf ); θρ ))                (4)
                                       k→∞ N     k
                                             j=1   i=1

Observe that in Equation (4), the expectation over the conformations is now outside the L̂ and ρ func-
tions while still remaining conformation invariant (however, the optimal parameters corresponding to
minimizing J are different from minimizing L). Following (Murphy et al., 2019b;a), we note that,
when ρ is the identity function, Equation (4) serves as an upper bound for Equation (3) via Jensen’s
inequality. However, learning representations by averaging over multiple conformations (in training)
is still computationally expensive (back-prop and high variance issues). Next, we show how MCGD
(Sun et al., 2018) can be leveraged to make this tractable (more details in Appendix A.10).
Making the case for simplicity, we next show convergence properties using the full batch setting. Note
that is procedure and proofs are equally applicable in the mini-batch setting with minor modifications.
Full-batch training:                   We consider the data as a single batch B                       =
{(x1 , y1 ), ..., (xj , yj ), ..., (xN , yN )} and for a data point (xj , yj ), denote the corresponding
steady state distributions of the corresponding Markov chains using πj and the state space as Sj .
We denote all learnable parameters of ρ ◦ f as θ ≡ (θf , θρ ) and consider θ ∈ Θ ⊆ Rm , m > 0 such
that the function ρ ◦ f may be non-convex for some values of θ.
We consider a sequence of step sizes (γk )∞
                                          k=0 which satisfy:
                              X                X
                                   γk = +∞,        ln k · γk2 < +∞                                   (5)
                                   k                k

and follow a gradient scheme where parameters are updated as:
                                       θk = θk−1 − γk Zk , k > 0                                     (6)
                  N
                                                f       ρ
where Zk = N1           ∇θ L̂(yj , ρ(f (xk−1                )) and xk−1 is the k − 1th sample from the
                  P
                                         j   ; θk−1 ); θk−1         j
                  j=1
Markov chain corresponding to the data point (xj , yj ) and employ the Markov chain gradient descent
procedure (Sun et al., 2018) where the loss in epoch k, k > 0 of training is obtained by
                                      N
                                   1 X                        f       ρ
                             Jˆk =       L̂(yj , ρ(f (xk−1
                                                       j   ; θk−1 ); θk−1 )).
                                   N j=1

and minimizes the surrogate loss given in Equation (4) when k is sufficiently large so that the Markov
chain has converged to its unique steady state distribution.
Next, we list the set of assumptions we make to ensure convergence of our conformer invariant
MCGD procedure.
Assumption 4.1. We make the following assumptions:
      1. For any θ ∈ Θ and xkj ∈ Sj , the function f is differentiable ∀j
      2. supθ∈Θ,xkj ∈Sj {||∇θ ρ ◦ f (xkj )||} < +∞ i.e. the gradients are bounded.
      3. ∀xkj ∈ Sj , ∀θ1 , θ2 ∈ Θ, ||∇θ1 ρ ◦ f (xkj ) − ∇θ2 ρ ◦ f (xkj )|| < L||θ1 − θ2 || for some L ≥ 0
         i.e., the gradients are L−Lipschitz.
      4. Exkj ∼πj [∇θ ρ ◦ f (xkj )] = ∇θ Exkj ∼πj [ρ ◦ f (xkj )]

Next, we formally state the convergence of our optimization procedure to optimal parameters θ?
which yield conformer invariant protein representations.
Proposition 4.2. Let the step sizes satisfy (5) and the function parameters θ be updated as (6) and
Assumption 4.1 hold, then the MCGD optimization enjoys properties of almost sure convergence to
the optimal θ.

The use of Markov chain gradient descent procedure to optimize the conformer invariant learning
procedure optimizes the objective J in Equation (4), and thus has the following implication on how
outputs should be calculated at inference time:

                                                    7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023
Table 1: GNN(GCN), GVP-GNN, E(N) GNN - Baseline vs Conformation Invariant Strategies for multiple
different tasks on proteins from the ATOM3D dataset. Corresponding to the metric, ↑ indicates that higher is
better, while ↓ indicates that lower is better. Bold values indicate best results for a given row. The values for
GNN were obtained from Townshend et al. (2020) and for the GVP-GNN from Jing et al. (2021). Gray colored
cells indicates that the augmented model outperforms the baseline model.

                                            MCMC                            MCMC                             MCMC
                           Baseline        Augmented        Baseline       Augmented        Baseline        Augmented
    Task   Metric
                         (GNN[GCN])          GNN          (GVP GNN)        GVP-GNN        (E(N) GNN)        E(N) GNN
                                            (Ours)                          (Ours)                            (Ours)
    PSR    Global Rs ↑   0.755 ± 0.004   0.761 ± 0.004   0.845 ± 0.004   0.852± 0.006    0.827 ± 0.004   0.852 ± 0.004
    LEP    AUROC ↑       0.740 ± 0.010   0.672 ± 0.012   0.628 ± 0.055   0.704 ± 0.039   0.677 ± 0.014   0.714 ± 0.005
    LBA    RMSE ↓        1.570 ± 0.025   1.519 ± 0.022   1.594 ± 0.073   1.435 ± 0.007   1.392 ± 0.001   1.384 ± 0.011
    MSP    AUROC ↑       0.621 ± 0.009   0.662 ± 0.008   0.680 ± 0.015   0.857 ± 0.049   0.652 ± 0.006   0.843 ± 0.037

Inference time: We estimate f using an empirical average of f evaluated over conformations (in
practice, average final layer [before softmax] representations) visited by the Markov chain :
                                                                k
                                         ˆ          f    1X        (i)
                                         f k (xj ; θ ) =       f (xj ; θf ) ,                                       (7)
                                                         k i=1
           (i)
where xj is the ith state visited by the Markov chain started at xj . Since the Markov chain has a
                                    ˆ
unique steady state distribution, f k (xj ; θf ) is both asymptotically unbiased and consistent. That is
     ˆ              a.s.
 lim f k (xj ; θf ) = f (xj ; θf ).
k→∞

5      R ESULTS
We evaluate our proposed augmentation procedure on multiple different tasks from the ATOM3D
dataset (Townshend et al., 2020). Results are provided in Table 1.
TASKS ON ATOM 3D DATASETS
ATOM3D (Townshend et al., 2020) is a unified collection of datasets concerning the 3D structure of
proteins. These datasets are specifically designed to provide a benchmark for ML methods which
operate on 3D molecular structure, and represent a variety of important structural, functional, and
engineering tasks. As part of our evaluation, we perform the (a) Protein Structure Ranking (PSR)
(b) Ligand Efficacy Prediction (LEP) (c) Protein Mutation Stability Prediction (MSP) (d) Ligand
Binding Affinity (LBA). We describe each of the tasks in detail in Appendix A.7. For all the datasets
and tasks we report the same metrics as proposed by the authors in Townshend et al. (2020).
M ODEL , BASELINES AND D ISCUSSION
We endow the vector gated GVP-GNN model (Jing et al., 2021), a GNN using GCN (Kipf & Welling,
2016) layers and the E(n) GNN Satorras et al. (2021) with conditional transformations from our
proposed MCMC method. It is important to note that when the positions of the atoms are altered the
protein graph which are inputs to the base encoders are changed appropriately in every epoch. As
an ablation study, we also provide a strategy where all the transformations are created from “gold
standard" Xp rather than via the MCMC method, i.e., the MCMC is restarted at every epoch during
training in the Appendix.
Looking at Table 1, we note that models augmented with our proposed conformer invariance frame-
work, in general, outperforms the baseline models in multiple tasks for which conformer invariance
is a requirement. In the LEP task, the proposed addition outperforms the baseline models for the
E(n) GNN and the GVP-GNN, but not for the GNN(GCN). The LEP result for the GNN(GCN) is an
oddity here, where a GNN which doesn’t explicitly incorporate any atomic positional information
outperforms all other models with information about atomic coordinates.
Additional results and ablation studies are presented in Appendix A.9.
C OMPUTATIONAL C OMPLEXITY & S CALABILITY:
The directed forest for every protein is computed only once as a preprocessing step (a fixed ≈ 5-10
minutes per dataset). At every epoch, for a given protein, we select only one among all its constituent
amino acids & perform a sequence of 3 × 3 matrix multiplications to obtain a new conformer. If k
denotes the number of atoms in the side chain of an amino acid, and height of a directed tree is in the
order of log(k), the computational complexity to obtain a conformation is O(k log k) (where k ≈ 15


                                                            8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


in avg in our datasets), & this can be run in parallel for all proteins in a mini-batch. Molprobity (run
in parallel again, currently runs externally on a web server via a command line call) adds 2s delay per
minibatch (we could reduce to milliseconds if we integrated Molprobity into our code). The rejection
rate from Molprobity is also very small (less than 1 reject in average across 100 molprobity calls). As
an example, training (100 epochs) GVP-GNN - MSP requires ≈ 45 min, and LBA requires ≈ 34
min. In both cases our method requires an additional 4 min overhead. A complete training time table
(on
6 aRNvidia
        ELATEDTeslaW V100
                       ORKGPU) for all models & datasets can be found in Appendix A.11.
Here, we present a high level summary of works related to ours. A more detailed comparison to the
works mentioned below and others) are presented in Appendix A.6.
Group Equivariant Neural Networks: Group equivariant and invariant neural networks (Cohen
& Welling, 2016; Lenssen et al., 2018; Kondor & Trivedi, 2018; Finzi et al., 2020; Hutchinson
et al., 2021; Fuchs et al., 2020; 2021; Dehmamy et al., 2020) help capture discrete and continuous
symmetries of elements (e.g. images) by introducing group theoretic constraints as inductive biases
in the neural network. While group equivariant neural network capture global symmetries, local
symmetries of manifold spaces can be captured via gauge equivariant networks (Cohen et al., 2019;
De Haan et al., 2020). (Lenssen et al., 2018; Gerken et al., 2021; Bronstein et al., 2021) provide a
complete review of the theoretical aspects and applications of group equivariant neural networks.
Graph Neural Networks: Graph Neural Networks (Kipf & Welling, 2016; Hamilton et al., 2017;
Battaglia et al., 2018; Xu et al., 2018) have gained renewed focus over the past few years and have
found applications in recommender systems, biology, chemistry, and many other real world problems
which can be formulated as graphs and currently serve as the state of the art in majority of node and
graph classification/ regression tasks. Graph neural networks work on the principles of permutation
equivariance/ invariances (also groups) and have exploited a message passing framework to learn
powerful and expressive representations of nodes/ graphs.
Group Equivariant Graph Neural Networks: These networks combine continuous symmetries
(lie groups) with permutation equivariances and has found applications with resounding success on
small molecules (Anderson et al., 2019; Klicpera et al., 2020; Satorras et al., 2021; Batzner et al.,
2021) which exhibit rigid body characteristics. Employing (Farina & Slade, 2021), would make
the neural network excessively invariant and allow the protein to be more flexible (allows unviable
conformations) than it truly is. More recently, they have also been applied to learning representations
of proteins, which is discussed below.
Monte Carlo and MCMC Methods for Sampling Protein Conformations: There has been a lot
of prior work – (Boomsma et al., 2013; Olsson et al., 2013; Antonov et al., 2016; Irbäck & Mohanty,
2006; Vitalis & Pappu, 2009) which sample protein conformations by either defining/inheriting
a distribution over the conformations (majorly based on the properties of the bonds, etc.) These
methods can seamlessly be plugged into our framework as long as the MCMC is ergodic.
Neural Networks for Representation Learning of Proteins: Protein representation has gained a
lot of attention especially with the tremendous successes of Alphafold and Alphafold2. A variety of
neural network architectures including 3D CNNs, LSTM’s and Transformers (treating the protein as a
sequence) as well as graph neural networks have been employed to exploit the rigid body symmetries
of proteins (Karimi et al., 2019; Pagès et al., 2019; Ingraham et al., 2019; Strokach et al., 2020;
Baldassarre et al., 2021; Hermosilla et al., 2021; Jing et al., 2020; 2021).
Generative Models: Conformation generation models (Mansimov et al., 2019; Simm et al., 2020;
Ganea et al., 2021; Xu et al., 2021b;a; Shi et al., 2021; Luo et al., 2021) have also gained attention
recently with the goal to predict 3d structure of molecules given their 2d structure - our objective in
this work is very different, but can be used to improve predictions of the aforementioned models.
7    C ONCLUSIONS
This work addresses the limitations of current protein representation learning methods which are
unable to learn conformer invariant representations — and hence unable to capture the inherent
flexibility present in protein side chains pertinent to many downstream tasks. To address these, we
introduced conditional transformations to capture protein structure, while respecting the restrictions
posed by constraints on dihedral (torsion) angles and steric repulsions between atoms. Subsequently,
we introduced a Markov chain Monte Carlo based framework to learn representations that are invariant
to these conditional transformations.


                                                   9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


R EFERENCES
Brandon Anderson, Truong-Son Hy, and Risi Kondor. Cormorant: Covariant molecular neural
  networks. arXiv preprint arXiv:1906.04015, 2019.
Lubomir D Antonov, Simon Olsson, Wouter Boomsma, and Thomas Hamelryck. Bayesian inference
  of protein ensembles from saxs data. Physical Chemistry Chemical Physics, 18(8):5832–5838,
  2016.
Federico Baldassarre, David Menéndez Hurtado, Arne Elofsson, and Hossein Azizpour. Graphqa:
  protein model quality assessment using graph convolutional networks. Bioinformatics, 37(3):
  360–366, 2021.
Peter W Battaglia, Jessica B Hamrick, Victor Bapst, Alvaro Sanchez-Gonzalez, Vinicius Zambaldi,
  Mateusz Malinowski, Andrea Tacchetti, David Raposo, Adam Santoro, Ryan Faulkner, et al.
  Relational inductive biases, deep learning, and graph networks. arXiv preprint arXiv:1806.01261,
  2018.
Simon Batzner, Tess E Smidt, Lixin Sun, Jonathan P Mailoa, Mordechai Kornbluth, Nicola Molinari,
  and Boris Kozinsky. Se (3)-equivariant graph neural networks for data-efficient and accurate
  interatomic potentials. arXiv preprint arXiv:2101.03164, 2021.
Helen M Berman, John Westbrook, Zukang Feng, Gary Gilliland, Talapady N Bhat, Helge Weissig,
  Ilya N Shindyalov, and Philip E Bourne. The protein data bank. Nucleic acids research, 28(1):
  235–242, 2000.
Wouter Boomsma, Jes Frellsen, Tim Harder, Sandro Bottaro, Kristoffer E Johansson, Pengfei
 Tian, Kasper Stovgaard, Christian Andreetta, Simon Olsson, Jan B Valentin, et al. Phaistos: A
 framework for markov chain monte carlo simulation and inference of protein structure. Journal of
 computational chemistry, 34(19):1697–1705, 2013.
Michael M Bronstein, Joan Bruna, Taco Cohen, and Petar Veličković. Geometric deep learning:
 Grids, groups, graphs, geodesics, and gauges. arXiv preprint arXiv:2104.13478, 2021.
Vincent B Chen, W Bryan Arendall, Jeffrey J Headd, Daniel A Keedy, Robert M Immormino,
  Gary J Kapral, Laura W Murray, Jane S Richardson, and David C Richardson. Molprobity:
  all-atom structure validation for macromolecular crystallography. Acta Crystallographica Section
  D: Biological Crystallography, 66(1):12–21, 2010.
Taco Cohen and Max Welling. Group equivariant convolutional networks. In International conference
  on machine learning, pp. 2990–2999. PMLR, 2016.
Taco Cohen, Maurice Weiler, Berkay Kicanaoglu, and Max Welling. Gauge equivariant convolutional
  networks and the icosahedral cnn. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 1321–
  1330. PMLR, 2019.
Ian W Davis, Andrew Leaver-Fay, Vincent B Chen, Jeremy N Block, Gary J Kapral, Xueyi Wang,
  Laura W Murray, W Bryan Arendall III, Jack Snoeyink, Jane S Richardson, et al. Molprobity:
  all-atom contacts and structure validation for proteins and nucleic acids. Nucleic acids research,
  35(suppl_2):W375–W383, 2007.
Pim De Haan, Maurice Weiler, Taco Cohen, and Max Welling. Gauge equivariant mesh cnns:
  Anisotropic convolutions on geometric graphs. arXiv preprint arXiv:2003.05425, 2020.
Nima Dehmamy, Yanchen Liu, Robin Walters, and Rose Yu. Lie algebra convolutional neural
  networks with automatic symmetry extraction. 2020.
Francesco Farina and Emma Slade. Symmetry-driven graph neural networks. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2105.14058, 2021.
Marc Finzi, Samuel Stanton, Pavel Izmailov, and Andrew Gordon Wilson. Generalizing convolutional
 neural networks for equivariance to lie groups on arbitrary continuous data. In International
 Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 3165–3176. PMLR, 2020.


                                                10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Richard A Friesner, Jay L Banks, Robert B Murphy, Thomas A Halgren, Jasna J Klicic, Daniel T
  Mainz, Matthew P Repasky, Eric H Knoll, Mee Shelley, Jason K Perry, et al. Glide: a new approach
  for rapid, accurate docking and scoring. 1. method and assessment of docking accuracy. Journal of
  medicinal chemistry, 47(7):1739–1749, 2004.

Fabian B Fuchs, Daniel E Worrall, Volker Fischer, and Max Welling. Se (3)-transformers: 3d
  roto-translation equivariant attention networks. arXiv preprint arXiv:2006.10503, 2020.

Fabian B Fuchs, Edward Wagstaff, Justas Dauparas, and Ingmar Posner. Iterative se (3)-transformers.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2102.13419, 2021.

VL Fushchich and RZ Zhdanov. Conditional symmetry and reduction of partial differential equations.
 Ukrainian Mathematical Journal, 44(7):875–886, 1992.

Pablo Gainza, Kyle E Roberts, and Bruce R Donald. Protein design using continuous rotamers. PLoS
  computational biology, 8(1):e1002335, 2012.

Octavian Ganea, Lagnajit Pattanaik, Connor Coley, Regina Barzilay, Klavs Jensen, William Green,
  and Tommi Jaakkola. Geomol: Torsional geometric generation of molecular 3d conformer
  ensembles. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 34, 2021.

Jan E Gerken, Jimmy Aronsson, Oscar Carlsson, Hampus Linander, Fredrik Ohlsson, Christoffer
  Petersson, and Daniel Persson. Geometric deep learning and equivariant neural networks. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2105.13926, 2021.

William L Hamilton, Rex Ying, and Jure Leskovec. Inductive representation learning on large graphs.
 In Proceedings of the 31st International Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems,
 pp. 1025–1035, 2017.

Tim Harder, Wouter Boomsma, Martin Paluszewski, Jes Frellsen, Kristoffer E Johansson, and Thomas
  Hamelryck. Beyond rotamers: a generative, probabilistic model of side chains in proteins. BMC
  bioinformatics, 11(1):1–13, 2010.

Pedro Hermosilla, Marco Schäfer, Matej Lang, Gloria Fackelmann, Pere-Pau Vázquez, Barbora
  Kozlikova, Michael Krone, Tobias Ritschel, and Timo Ropinski. Intrinsic-extrinsic convolution
  and pooling for learning on 3d protein structures. In International Conference on Learning
  Representations, 2021.

Weihua Hu, Matthias Fey, Marinka Zitnik, Yuxiao Dong, Hongyu Ren, Bowen Liu, Michele Catasta,
 and Jure Leskovec. Open graph benchmark: Datasets for machine learning on graphs. Advances in
 neural information processing systems, 33:22118–22133, 2020.

Michael J Hutchinson, Charline Le Lan, Sheheryar Zaidi, Emilien Dupont, Yee Whye Teh, and
 Hyunjik Kim. Lietransformer: equivariant self-attention for lie groups. In International Conference
 on Machine Learning, pp. 4533–4543. PMLR, 2021.

John Ingraham, Vikas K Garg, Regina Barzilay, and Tommi Jaakkola. Generative models for
  graph-based protein design. 2019.

Anders Irbäck and Sandipan Mohanty. Profasi: a monte carlo simulation package for protein folding
  and aggregation. Journal of computational chemistry, 27(13):1548–1555, 2006.

Justina Jankauskaitė, Brian Jiménez-García, Justas Dapkūnas, Juan Fernández-Recio, and Iain H
  Moal. Skempi 2.0: an updated benchmark of changes in protein–protein binding energy, kinetics
  and thermodynamics upon mutation. Bioinformatics, 35(3):462–469, 2019.

Wengong Jin, Regina Barzilay, and Tommi Jaakkola. Junction tree variational autoencoder for
 molecular graph generation. In International conference on machine learning, pp. 2323–2332.
 PMLR, 2018.

Bowen Jing, Stephan Eismann, Patricia Suriana, Raphael JL Townshend, and Ron Dror. Learning
  from protein structure with geometric vector perceptrons. arXiv preprint arXiv:2009.01411, 2020.


                                                11
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Bowen Jing, Stephan Eismann, Pratham N Soni, and Ron O Dror. Equivariant graph neural networks
  for 3d macromolecular structure. arXiv preprint arXiv:2106.03843, 2021.
Anthony Joseph. The theory of conditional invariance. i. Proceedings of the Royal Society of London.
  Series A. Mathematical and Physical Sciences, 305(1482):405–427, 1968.
John Jumper, Richard Evans, Alexander Pritzel, Tim Green, Michael Figurnov, Olaf Ronneberger,
  Kathryn Tunyasuvunakool, Russ Bates, Augustin Žídek, Anna Potapenko, et al. Highly accurate
  protein structure prediction with alphafold. Nature, pp. 1, 2021.
Olav Kallenberg. Foundations of modern probability. Springer Science & Business Media, 2006.
Mostafa Karimi, Di Wu, Zhangyang Wang, and Yang Shen. Deepaffinity: interpretable deep
 learning of compound–protein affinity through unified recurrent and convolutional neural networks.
 Bioinformatics, 35(18):3329–3338, 2019.
Thomas N Kipf and Max Welling. Semi-supervised classification with graph convolutional networks.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:1609.02907, 2016.
Johannes Klicpera, Janek Groß, and Stephan Günnemann. Directional message passing for molecular
  graphs. arXiv preprint arXiv:2003.03123, 2020.
Risi Kondor and Shubhendu Trivedi. On the generalization of equivariance and convolution in neural
  networks to the action of compact groups. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp.
  2747–2755. PMLR, 2018.
Andriy Kryshtafovych, Torsten Schwede, Maya Topf, Krzysztof Fidelis, and John Moult. Critical
  assessment of methods of protein structure prediction (casp)—round xiii. Proteins: Structure,
 Function, and Bioinformatics, 87(12):1011–1020, 2019.
Jan Eric Lenssen, Matthias Fey, and Pascal Libuschewski. Group equivariant capsule networks. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:1806.05086, 2018.
Zhihai Liu, Yan Li, Li Han, Jie Li, Jie Liu, Zhixiong Zhao, Wei Nie, Yuchen Liu, and Renxiao Wang.
  Pdb-wide collection of binding data: current status of the pdbbind database. Bioinformatics, 31(3):
  405–412, 2015.
Shitong Luo, Chence Shi, Minkai Xu, and Jian Tang. Predicting molecular conformation via dynamic
  graph score matching. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 34, 2021.
Elman Mansimov, Omar Mahmood, Seokho Kang, and Kyunghyun Cho. Molecular geometry
  prediction using a deep generative graph neural network. Scientific reports, 9(1):1–13, 2019.
Haggai Maron, Heli Ben-Hamu, Nadav Shamir, and Yaron Lipman. Invariant and equivariant graph
  networks. arXiv preprint arXiv:1812.09902, 2018.
Jonathan Masci, Davide Boscaini, Michael Bronstein, and Pierre Vandergheynst. Geodesic con-
  volutional neural networks on riemannian manifolds. In Proceedings of the IEEE international
  conference on computer vision workshops, pp. 37–45, 2015.
Sean P Meyn and Richard L Tweedie. Markov chains and stochastic stability. Springer Science &
  Business Media, 2012.
Zhichao Miao and Yang Cao. Quantifying side-chain conformational variations in protein structure.
  Scientific reports, 6(1):1–10, 2016.
Christopher Morris, Nils M Kriege, Franka Bause, Kristian Kersting, Petra Mutzel, and Marion
  Neumann. Tudataset: A collection of benchmark datasets for learning with graphs. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2007.08663, 2020.
Ryan Murphy, Balasubramaniam Srinivasan, Vinayak Rao, and Bruno Ribeiro. Relational pooling for
  graph representations. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 4663–4673. PMLR,
  2019a.


                                                12
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Ryan L. Murphy, Balasubramaniam Srinivasan, Vinayak Rao, and Bruno Ribeiro. Janossy pooling:
  Learning deep permutation-invariant functions for variable-size inputs. In International Confer-
  ence on Learning Representations, 2019b. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=
  BJluy2RcFm.
Simon Olsson, Jes Frellsen, Wouter Boomsma, Kanti V Mardia, and Thomas Hamelryck. Inference
  of structure ensembles of flexible biomolecules from sparse, averaged data. PloS one, 8(11):
  e79439, 2013.
Peter J Olver and Evgenii M Vorob’ev. Nonclassical and conditional symmetries. CRC handbook of
  Lie group analysis of differential equations, 3:291–328, 1996.
Guillaume Pagès, Benoit Charmettant, and Sergei Grudinin. Protein model quality assessment using
  3d oriented convolutional neural networks. Bioinformatics, 35(18):3313–3319, 2019.
Victor Garcia Satorras, Emiel Hoogeboom, and Max Welling. E (n) equivariant graph neural networks.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2102.09844, 2021.
Chence Shi, Shitong Luo, Minkai Xu, and Jian Tang. Learning gradient fields for molecular
  conformation generation. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 9558–9568.
  PMLR, 2021.
Gregor NC Simm, Robert Pinsler, Gábor Csányi, and José Miguel Hernández-Lobato. Symmetry-
  aware actor-critic for 3d molecular design. arXiv preprint arXiv:2011.12747, 2020.
Alexey Strokach, David Becerra, Carles Corbi-Verge, Albert Perez-Riba, and Philip M Kim. Fast and
  flexible protein design using deep graph neural networks. Cell Systems, 11(4):402–411, 2020.
Tao Sun, Yuejiao Sun, and Wotao Yin. On markov chain gradient descent. Advances in neural
  information processing systems, 31, 2018.
Jonathan Taylor, Allan D Jepson, and Kiriakos N Kutulakos. Non-rigid structure from locally-rigid
  motion. In 2010 IEEE Computer Society Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition,
  pp. 2761–2768. IEEE, 2010.
Raphael JL Townshend, Martin Vögele, Patricia Suriana, Alexander Derry, Alexander Powers,
  Yianni Laloudakis, Sidhika Balachandar, Brandon Anderson, Stephan Eismann, Risi Kondor, et al.
  Atom3d: Tasks on molecules in three dimensions. arXiv preprint arXiv:2012.04035, 2020.
Ashish Vaswani, Noam Shazeer, Niki Parmar, Jakob Uszkoreit, Llion Jones, Aidan N Gomez, Łukasz
  Kaiser, and Illia Polosukhin. Attention is all you need. In Advances in neural information
  processing systems, pp. 5998–6008, 2017.
Andreas Vitalis and Rohit V Pappu. Methods for monte carlo simulations of biomacromolecules.
 Annual reports in computational chemistry, 5:49–76, 2009.
Renxiao Wang, Xueliang Fang, Yipin Lu, and Shaomeng Wang. The pdbbind database: Collection of
  binding affinities for protein- ligand complexes with known three-dimensional structures. Journal
  of medicinal chemistry, 47(12):2977–2980, 2004.
Christopher J Williams, Jeffrey J Headd, Nigel W Moriarty, Michael G Prisant, Lizbeth L Videau,
  Lindsay N Deis, Vishal Verma, Daniel A Keedy, Bradley J Hintze, Vincent B Chen, et al. Molpro-
  bity: More and better reference data for improved all-atom structure validation. Protein Science,
  27(1):293–315, 2018.
Keyulu Xu, Weihua Hu, Jure Leskovec, and Stefanie Jegelka. How powerful are graph neural
  networks? arXiv preprint arXiv:1810.00826, 2018.
Minkai Xu, Shitong Luo, Yoshua Bengio, Jian Peng, and Jian Tang. Learning neural generative
 dynamics for molecular conformation generation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2102.10240, 2021a.
Minkai Xu, Wujie Wang, Shitong Luo, Chence Shi, Yoshua Bengio, Rafael Gomez-Bombarelli,
 and Jian Tang. An end-to-end framework for molecular conformation generation via bilevel
 programming. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 11537–11547. PMLR,
 2021b.


                                                13
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


A     A PPENDIX
A.1   C OMMONLY USED ACRONYMS IN THE PAPER
      1. G - group
      2. Sx - Set of transformations unique to element x
      3. tx - Transformation action which transforms the element x
      4. m - Number of atoms in the protein under consideration
      5. n - Number of amino acids in the protein under consideration
      6. Xs - Matrix of Scalar features associated with atoms in the protein p
      7. Xp - Matrix of atomic coordinates associated with atoms in the protein p
      8. Cp - Set of conformations of protein p
      9. SO(3) - Group of all rotations in 3D space


A.2   G ROUP T HEORY P RELIMINARIES

Definition A.1 (Group). A group is a set G equipped with a binary operation · : G × G → G obeying
the following axioms:

       • for all g1 , g2 ∈ G, g1 · g2 ∈ G (closure).
       • for all g1 , g2 , g3 ∈ G, g1 · (g2 · g3 ) = (g1 · g2 ) · g3 (associativity).
       • there is a unique e ∈ G such that e · g = g · e = g for all g ∈ G (identity).
       • for all g ∈ G there exists g −1 ∈ G such that g · g −1 = g −1 · g = e (inverse).
Definition A.2 (Group invariant functions). Let G be a group acting on vector space V . We say that
a function f : V → R is G-invariant if f (g · x) = f (x) ∀x ∈ V, g ∈ G.
Definition A.3 ((Left) Group Action). For a group G with identity element e, and X is a set, a (left)
group action α of G on X is a function α : G × X → X that satisfies the following two conditions:

      1. Identity: α(e, x) = x, ∀x ∈ X
      2. Compatibility: α(g, α(h, x)) = α(gh, x)

We will use a short hand of g · x for α(g, x) when the action being considered is clear from context.

A.3   E XAMPLE DEMONSTRATING NON GROUP STRUCTURE OF A SET OF PROTEIN
      CONFORMATIONS

Consider X to be a protein with n atoms and m amino acids and let the set of viable conformations of
X as {X1 , X2 , . . . Xi , . . . Xp }. Let X1 be the conformation available in our dataset.

In each step of the transition, only a few atoms (<< n) (atoms in a single amino acid of
the entire protein- where the protein is made up of multiple hundreds of amino acids (m) in general)
are subjected to an action from the SO(3) group here. The positions of all other atoms (outside that
amino acid) in the side chain remain unaltered. So, in the Rn×3×3 matrix – most of the 3x3 entries
are the identity matrix of 3 dimension.

Let T1i ∈ Rn×3×3 where i ∈ {1, 2, . . . , p} be the transformation which yields conformation
Xi from X1 .

Now consider T12 (subscript of 1 since we start conformation X1 ) which takes X1 to X2
and T13 which takes X1 to X3 where T12 and T13 , do not act on the same amino acid in the protein.
Now, however, consider the case where performing T12 and T13 (or the other way around) sequentially
would result in a case where atoms in two different amino acids would overlap (or come too


                                                      14
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


close to each other causing steric repulsion) - therefore resulting in a non viable conformation
i.e. a composition of T12 and T13 acting on X1 , would not be present in the set of all allowed
transformations T1 = {T11 , . . . T1i , . . . T1p }. Therefore the set T1 is not closed and doesn’t form a
group.

Also for two different conformations X1 and X2 , their allowed transformation sets ST1 , T2
                                                                                                p
will not be identical (in the above example T13 6∈ T2 ). It also easy to construct a case where i=1 Ti
is not a group and all actions from this group acting on any given Xi will not necessarily result in
viable/ valid conformation.

A.4    F LEXIBILITY ALLOWED BY OUR PROPOSED MODEL

Our proposed model allows every node in the directed tree to be rotated about its parents. For
example, for the side chain shown in Figure 1 (Main Paper), the allowed flexibility is Figure 3.

                                          SC6                           SC5
                                  R6
                                                                         R5
                                    SC3                         SC2
                                             R3                          R4
                                                SC1        R2           SC4



                                                      R1
                                                C



Figure 3: Maximum flexibility allowed by our candidate sampling process when the group associated with
every node in the tree is SO(3) (the special orthogonal group in 3 dimensions). While not candidate is likely to
be accepted such a candidate generation process provides the flexibility for every node to be rotated about its
immediate parent while preserving bond lengths.


A.5    P ROOFS OF P ROPOSITIONS

First, we restate and prove Proposition 3.3.
Proposition A.4. Given the CSMC Φp from Definition 3.2 whose transitions are governed by κ which
is implicitly defined by Algorithm 1 as described above. For any pair of conformers cp , c0p ∈ Cp , there
                                                  τ                        τ
exists τp < ∞, independent of cp , such that PΦpp (cp , c0p ) > 0, where PΦpp is the τp step transition
probability.

Proof. Proof by construction. We prove the proposition by showing that one can construct a path
  (1)               (t)                   (i)              (i+1) (i)
(cp = cp , . . . , cp = c0p ) such that cp ∈ Cp and κ(cp        |cp ) > 0, for all 0 < i < t, and t ≤ Tp .
                                0
The trivial case where cp ≡ cp is proved since every group contains the identity element — sampling
the identity element for every node in the directed tree yields the same conformation. Since we
consider only non backbone transforming conformations, for the non trivial case, a maximum of
m − 4n atoms can differ in positions between any two conformations - where m is the number of
atoms in the protein and n is the the number of amino acids in the protein n. Both m, n are finite
and we are dealing with continuous conformers (and continuous group actions about every node —
groups are closed under their associated binary action, and SO(3) is path connected). So we can
traverse between conformers (until we reach the desired conformer) sequentially in a finite number
of steps, by using the constructed directed forest - selecting a amino acid (which doesn’t violate the
viability), fixing the positions of all other amino acids in the protein and rotating the side chain atoms
in a single conformer to the final desired state. While this process may result in some side chains


                                                       15
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


being visited multiple times (due to viability constraints), considering continuous conformers and the
SO(3) group (which is path connected) ensures we will never reach a state of deadlock. The second
condition is satisfied because every group action has an inverse and we only use transformations from
SO(3) for every node in the directed trees.

Next, we restate and and prove Proposition 3.4
Proposition A.5. The CSMC Φp defined in Definition 3.2 is uniformly ergodic if Proposition 3.3
is satisfied. Specifically there exists a unique steady state distribution πp such that for all cp ∈ Cp ,
    n
kPΦ   p
        (cp , ·) − πp (·)k ≤ C Rn , where C < ∞ and R < 1 are constants that depend on Φp , PΦ  n
                                                                                                  p
                                                                                                    is the
n step transition probability and k · k is the `1 norm.

Proof. By Proposition 3.3, Φp satisfies Doeblin’s condition as defined in page 396 of Meyn &
                                                      T
Tweedie (2012) which states that for cp , c0p ∈ Cp , PΦpp (cp , c0p ) >   for some   > 0 1 . The uniform
ergodicity then holds due to Theorems 16.2.3 and 16.2.1 from Meyn & Tweedie (2012).

Next, we restate and prove Proposition 4.2. We also restate the required assumptions for the
proposition.
Assumption A.6. We make the following assumptions:

      1. For any θ ∈ Θ and xkj ∈ Sj , the function f is differentiable ∀j

      2. supθ∈Θ,xkj ∈Sj {||∇θ ρ ◦ f (xkj )||} < +∞ i.e. the gradients are bounded.

      3. ∀xkj ∈ Sj , ∀θ1 , θ2 ∈ Θ, ||∇θ1 ρ ◦ f (xkj ) − ∇θ2 ρ ◦ f (xkj )|| < L||θ1 − θ2 || for some L ≥ 0
         i.e., the gradients are L−Lipschitz.
      4. Exkj ∼πj [∇θ ρ ◦ f (xkj )] = ∇θ Exkj ∼πj [ρ ◦ f (xkj )]
Proposition A.7. Let the step sizes satisfy (5) and the function parameters θ be updated as (6) and
Assumption 4.1 hold, then the MCGD optimization enjoys properties of almost sure convergence to
the optimal θ.

Proof. Given that each protein has an associated time homogeneous Markov Chain with a unique
steady state, independent of other proteins, the set of proteins in a mini-batch also form a Markov
chain with a unique steady state. We then leverage Corollary 2 (Page 12) of Sun et al. (2018) along
with Proposition 4.2 to ensure almost sure convergence to the optimal θ.

A.6    E XTENDED R ELATED W ORK

Here, we elaborate on the related works section in Section 6

Group Equivariant and Invariant Neural Networks: Group equivariant and invariant neu-
ral networks (Cohen & Welling, 2016; Lenssen et al., 2018; Kondor & Trivedi, 2018; Finzi et al.,
2020; Hutchinson et al., 2021; Fuchs et al., 2020; 2021; Dehmamy et al., 2020) help capture discrete
and continuous groups symmetries of elements (e.g. images, point clouds). In this work, we learn
representations which are invariant to symmetries which are not just groups, but to input dependent
sets of transformations. To the best of our knowledge, our work is the first to consider conditional
(input dependent) invariances.
Prior works on learning invariant models have leveraged Monte Carlo procedures (Finzi et al.,
2020; Murphy et al., 2019b) to learn to be invariant to transformations of the input. Alternatively,
our work constructs a Markov Chain with a unique steady state and leverages MCGD (Sun et al.,
2018) to make it computationally tractable. Secondly, the aformentioned approaches are limited to
being invariant to transformations from any specified Lie group with a surjective exponential map/
permutation group, while our work is not limited to groups. Thirdly, our theory ensures that every
example/ object in the dataset can have a different set of input dependent, conditional transformations
   1
     We note that this is a simplified version of the actual statement which is defined on the σ-algebra over Cp
denoted by σ(Cp ). Our proof holds when c0p ∈ σ(Cp )


                                                      16
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


- and in fact can be seen as a generalization of the above works. In fact, the ablation study that we
perform (Results provided in Appendix A.9 - Table 4) uses a Monte Carlo estimator and our MCMC
procedure yields better performance than the Monte Carlo estimator.
While group equivariant neural network capture global symmetries, local symmetries of manifold
spaces can be captured via gauge equivariant networks (Cohen et al., 2019; De Haan et al., 2020).
Gauge symmetries require the manifold to be smooth – which is not the case for proteins. Moreover,
different proteins have different sets of viable conformations, which would not be able to captured by
standard gauge equivariant neural networks.
(Lenssen et al., 2018; Gerken et al., 2021; Bronstein et al., 2021) provide a complete review of the
theoretical aspects and a wide variety of applications of group equivariant neural networks. A more
comprehensive theoretical analysis of input dependent conditionally invariant neural networks is
planned for future work.

Graph Neural Networks: Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) (Kipf & Welling, 2016; Hamilton et al.,
2017; Battaglia et al., 2018; Xu et al., 2018) have gained renewed focus over the past few years and
have found applications in recommender systems, biology, chemistry, and many other real world
problems which can be formulated as graphs and currently serve as the state of the art in majority of
node and graph classification/ regression tasks. Graph neural networks work on the principles of
permutation equivariance/ invariances (Murphy et al., 2019a) (also groups) and have exploited a
message passing framework to learn powerful and expressive representations of nodes/ graphs.
Both molecular graphs (both small molecules and macromolecules) as well as graphs based on
intra molecular distances have been used with GNNs, to achieve state of the art for many molecular
datasets and tasks (Hu et al., 2020; Morris et al., 2020). Here, we leverage three graph based neural
networks as baselines for our model.

Group Equivariant Graph Neural Networks:                 Group Equivariant GNNs combine contin-
uous symmetries (lie groups such as SE(3), E(3), SO(3)) with permutation equivariances and has
found applications with resounding success on small and large molecules (Anderson et al., 2019;
Klicpera et al., 2020; Satorras et al., 2021; Batzner et al., 2021).
However, the methods are only able to capture rigid body characteristics of molecules and while
capturing the above lie group symmetries is also able to capture input depedent transformations.
Employing (Farina & Slade, 2021), would make the neural network excessively invariant and allow
the protein to be more flexible (allows unviable conformations) than it truly is. More recently, they
have also been applied to learning representations of proteins, which is discussed below.

Monte Carlo and MCMC Methods for Sampling Protein Conformations:                              There has
been a lot of prior work – (Boomsma et al., 2013; Olsson et al., 2013; Antonov et al., 2016; Irbäck &
Mohanty, 2006; Vitalis & Pappu, 2009) which sample protein conformations by internal coordinate
transformations. However, The goals of the existing MCMC methods are significantly different
compared to ours. The existing methods define/inherit a distribution over the conformations (majorly
based on the properties of the bonds, etc.) and then aim to sample highly probable conformations
from this distribution. Our method, is much simpler and only requires that the chain being used is
ergodic and is invariant to the actual form of the distribution. We note that the existing Markov chains
can seamlessly be used as drop-in replacements to sample conformations as part of our framework
as long as the MCMC is ergodic. We consider studying the impact of different MCMC methods
(which sample from different distributions) and their influence on the performance in different tasks
as important future work.

Neural Networks for Representation Learning of Proteins:                  Protein representation has
gained a lot of attention especially with the tremendous successes of Alphafold and Alphafold2. A
variety of neural network architectures including 3D CNNs, LSTM’s and Transformers (treating the
protein as a sequence) as well as graph neural networks have been employed to exploit the rigid body
symmetries of proteins (Karimi et al., 2019; Pagès et al., 2019; Ingraham et al., 2019; Strokach et al.,
2020; Baldassarre et al., 2021; Hermosilla et al., 2021; Jing et al., 2020; 2021).
In this work, while we use GNNs and Group Invariant GNNs as a part of the model, we note that we
can equally replace them with CNNs, LSTMs, Transformers and other models used for proteins
without any change in the underlying theory.

Tree Construction Method for Molecules: Jin et al. (2018), in their work JTVAE, propose


                                                  17
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


- a procedure to construct tree for molecules. We note that JTVAE is a more general purpose approach
 for constructing trees from molecules and may not be the best suited for proteins where the backbone
 atoms are largely observed (experimentally) to be rigid.

Generative Models:          Protein conformation generation models (Mansimov et al., 2019;
Simm et al., 2020; Ganea et al., 2021; Xu et al., 2021b;a; Shi et al., 2021; Luo et al., 2021) have
also recently gained attend where the goal of the model is to predict 3d structure of molecules given
input 2d structure - our objective in this work is completely different, but can be used to improve
predictions of the aforementioned models.
While our model is explicitly not a generative model, our framework can be leveraged towards
generative modeling with the help of tools such as noise outsourcing (Chapter 6) (Kallenberg, 2006)
and we see this as important future work.

Non-Rigid Body Dynamics: Non-Rigid Body Dynamics of objects has long been studied
both by physicists and in the fields of computer vision to understand and capture the geometric
deformations of objects (Taylor et al., 2010; Masci et al., 2015). To the best of our knowledge, there
exists no prior work in deep learning which captures the non rigidity of protein molecules (which
cannot be modeled as C k manifolds). As important future work, we would like to study the impact of
leveraging input dependent conditional invariances for modeling other geometric objects (which are
C k manifolds) as well as images and robotics (e.g. the symmetries for a humanoid is different from
that of a tractor).
Unrelated Work with similar names: Non classical and conditional symmetries of solutions to
ODE’s, PDE’s have been discussed in the past - these works while they share a similar title, have
very little in common as we are not dealing with jet spaces or manifolds (Joseph, 1968; Fushchich &
Zhdanov, 1992; Olver & Vorob’ev, 1996).

A.7    D ETAILS ABOUT DATASETS AND TASKS

In this section, we describe briefly each of the datasets (and their associated tasks). Information about
the splits and license information is provided in Table 2.
PSR: This task utilizes data from the structural models submitted to the Critical Assessment of
Structure Prediction competition (CASP - Kryshtafovych et al. (2019) - a blind protein structure
prediction competition) to rank protein structures from the experimentally determined structure of
the protein. The problem is formulated as a regression task, where we predict the global distance test
of each structural model from the experimentally determined structure. As prescribed by the dataset
authors, the dataset is split by competition years.
MSP: The goal of this task is to identify mutations that stabilize a protein’s interactions which forms
an important step towards the design of new proteins. This task is significant as probing mutations
experimentally techniques are labor-intensive. Atom3D (Townshend et al., 2020) derives this dataset
by collecting single-point mutations from the SKEMPI database (Jankauskaitė et al., 2019) and
model each mutation into the structure to produce a mutated structure. The learning problem is then
formulated as a binary classification task where the goal is to predict whether the stability of the
complex increases as a result of the mutation. We employ the same splits as suggested by the dataset
authors wherein the protein complexes are split such that no protein in the test dataset has more than
30% sequence identity with any protein in the training dataset.
LBA: This task deals with the problem of predicting the strength (affinity) of a candidate drug
molecule’s interaction with a target protein. The dataset is constructed using the PDBBind database
(Wang et al., 2004; Liu et al., 2015), a curated database containing protein-ligand complexes from the
PDB and their corresponding binding strengths (affinities). The task is formulated as a regression
task with the goal to predict pK = − log10 (K), where K is the binding affinity in Molar units. The
splits are created such that no protein in the test dataset has more than 30% sequence identity with
any protein in the training dataset.
LEP: The shape of protein impacts whether a protein is in an on or off state which plays an important
role in predicting the shape a protein will favor during drug design.This dataset is obtained by curating
proteins from several families with both “active" and “inactive" state structures, and model in 527
small molecules with known activating or inactivating function using the program Glide (Friesner


                                                   18
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


et al., 2004). The task is formulated as a binary classification task where the goal is to predict whether
a molecule bound to the structures will be an activator of the protein’s function or not. We use the
same split as recommended by the ATOM3D authors.

                                         Table 2: Summary of the datasets

 Task    # Train   # Val    # Test             Original Source                                License
 MSP       2864       937     247    SKEMPI (Jankauskaitė et al., 2019)             Creative Commons CC-BY
                                                                            Creative Commons NonCommercial-NoDerivs
 LBA       3563       448     452          PDBBlind (Wang et al., 2004)
                                                                                         (CC-BY-NC-ND)
 LEP       304      110       104            PDB (Berman et al., 2000)               Creative Commons CC-BY
 PSR     25400     2800     16099      CASP (Kryshtafovych et al., 2019)             Creative Commons CC-BY



A.8     E XPERIMENTAL S ETUP

The code for the baseline models (GVP-GNN (Jing et al., 2021), E(N) GNN (Satorras et al., 2021)
and GNN(GCN) (Townshend et al., 2020; Kipf & Welling, 2016)) were used as provided by the
authors (licenses as dictated by the code authors). Our conformer invariance implementation is in
PyTorch using Python 3.8. We also leverage networkx to create the directed forests. For all three
models we tune the hyperparameters – learning rate (∈ {0.1, 0.01, 0.001, 0.0001}) and mini batch
size (∈ {4, 8, 16, 32, 64}). For the E(n) GNN model - since there have been no previous models for
the aforementioned protein tasks - we also tune the number of GNN layers (∈ {4, 5, 6, 7}) as a hyper
parameter. The experiments were all performed on Tesla V100 GPU’s. For more details refer to the
code provided.

A.9     A DDITIONAL R ESULTS

In Table 3, we present the results, including additional datasets and tasks, than presented in the main
paper. In the LEP task, the proposed addition outperforms the baseline models for the E(n) GNN
and the GVP-GNN, but not for the GNN(GCN). The LEP result for the GNN(GCN) is an oddity
here, where a GNN which doesn’t incorporate any rigid body transformations outperforms all other
models.
In Table 4, we present an ablation study, where we provide a strategy where all the transformations are
created from “gold standard" Xp rather than via the MCMC method, i.e., the MCMC is restarted at
every epoch during training. From the table, we note that the MCMC method tends to outperform the
non MCMC method, which can be attributed to the guarantees it provides to the learning framework.

Table 3: GNN(GCN), GVP-GNN, E(N) GNN - Baseline vs Conformation Invariant Strategies for
multiple different tasks on proteins from the ATOM3D dataset. Corresponding to the metric, ↑
indicates that higher is better, while ↓ indicates that lower is better. Bold values indicate best results
for a given row. The values for GNN were obtained from Townshend et al. (2020) and for the GVP-
GNN from Jing et al. (2021). Gray colored cells indicates that the augmented model outperforms the
baseline model.

                                            MCMC                              MCMC                             MCMC
                          Baseline         Augmented        Baseline         Augmented        Baseline        Augmented
 Task   Metric
                        (GNN[GCN])           GNN          (GVP GNN)          GVP-GNN        (E(N) GNN)        E(N) GNN
                                            (Ours)                            (Ours)                            (Ours)
 PSR    Global Rs ↑    0.755 ± 0.004     0.761 ± 0.004   0.845 ± 0.004     0.852± 0.006    0.827 ± 0.004   0.852 ± 0.004
 LEP    AUROC ↑        0.740 ± 0.010     0.672 ± 0.012   0.628 ± 0.055     0.704 ± 0.039   0.677 ± 0.014   0.714 ± 0.005
 LBA    RMSE ↓         1.570 ± 0.025     1.519 ± 0.022   1.594 ± 0.073     1.435 ± 0.007   1.392 ± 0.001   1.384 ± 0.011
 MSP    AUROC ↑        0.621 ± 0.009     0.662 ± 0.008   0.680 ± 0.015     0.857 ± 0.049   0.652 ± 0.006   0.843 ± 0.037



A.10     C ASE AGAINST USING AVERAGE REPRESENTATIONS IN TRAINING AND FOR REQUIRING
         A SINGLE INVARIANT REPRESENTATION

The case for the requirement of a single conformer invariant representations – can be seen from the
fact that different protein conformations, say X1 , X2 of the same protein X, may be seen during


                                                            19
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Table 4: GVP-GNN, GNN (GCN) - Baseline vs Ablation vs Conformation Invariant Strategies for
four different tasks on proteins from the ATOM3D (Townshend et al., 2020) dataset. Corresponding to
the metric, ↑ indicates that higher is better, while ↓ indicates that lower is better. Bold values indicate
best results for a given row. Gray colored cells indicates that the augmented model outperforms the
baseline model.

                                                     Non MCMC         MCMC                                     Non MCMC           MCMC
                               Baseline                                                  Baseline
                                                     Augmented       Augmented                                 Augmented         Augmented
 Task    Metric              (GVP GNN)                                                    (GNN)
                                                     GVP-GNN         GVP-GNN                                      GNN               GNN
                           Jing et al. (2021)                                      Townshend et al. (2020)
                                                      (Ablation)       (Ours)                                   (Ablation)         (Ours)
 PSR     Global Rs ↑         0.845 ± 0.004       0.806 ± 0.011     0.852± 0.006               0.755 ± 0.004   0.766 ± 0.001    0.761 ± 0.004
 LEP     AUROC ↑             0.628 ± 0.055       0.739 ± 0.060     0.704 ± 0.039              0.740 ± 0.010   0.657 ± 0.008    0.672 ± 0.012
 LBA     RMSE ↓              1.594 ± 0.073       1.635 ± 0.007     1.435 ± 0.007              1.570 ± 0.025   1.520 ± 0.022    1.519 ± 0.022
 MSP     AUROC ↑             0.680 ± 0.015       0.799 ± 0.016     0.857 ± 0.049              0.621 ± 0.009   0.610 ± 0.021    0.662 ± 0.008



train and test phases. Without conformer invariant representations - this may lead to different
representations and therefore different predictions for the same protein (bad).

One may argue, that an approximate conformer invariant neural network can be learned by
averaging representations of multiple Monte Carlo conformations during training. However, this is
computationally expensive as this would need to back-propagate and update parameters for multiple
conformations for every protein in every epoch – bad as this leads to an exponential overhead. On
the other hand, our procedure with MCGD, in every epoch uses only one conformation from our
Markov Chain and still ensures convergence to optimal parameters. It is important to note that,
during inference we still do average representations over multiple conformations (from our Markov
chain) to output conformer invariant representations - which again due to MCGD training procedure
and the unique steady state of our Markov Chain, ensures confomer invariant representations are
achieved – which yield better performance than current state of the art on multiple datasets and tasks.
As stated in the main paper, our framework can work well with other Markov chains as well. We
chose the proposed chain purely because it is simpler than the existing methods (in that it doesn’t
require a distribution over conformations to be assumed) and as such is easier to sample from.

A.11      T RAINING T IME

In Table 5, we present the training time (for 100 epochs) for each of the baseline models as well as
well for models with our proposed conformer invariance framework addition. From the table, we note
that, on an average the increase in training time over 100 epochs is ≈ 3-4 minutes which is negligible
in comparison to the training time (without the proposed framework addition).

Table 5: Training Time (in minutes for 100 epochs – rounded to closest integer) - GNN(GCN),
GVP-GNN, E(N) GNN - Baseline vs Conformation Invariant Strategies for multiple different tasks
on proteins from the ATOM3D dataset. Lower is better.

                                         MCMC                                       MCMC                                       MCMC
              Baseline                  Augmented               Baseline           Augmented             Baseline             Augmented
  Task
            (GNN[GCN])                    GNN                 (GVP GNN)            GVP-GNN             (E(N) GNN)             E(N) GNN
                                         (Ours)                                     (Ours)                                      (Ours)
  PSR              184                          190                1112                1118                   485                 492
  LEP                  6                         8                    8                   9                   10                  11
  LBA              26                           28                   34                  38                   59                  62
  MSP              58                           61                   45                  49                   125                 128


                                                                          20
