Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


K NOWLEDGE -G ROUNDED R EINFORCEMENT L EARN -
ING

 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                             A BSTRACT

         Receiving knowledge, abiding by laws, and being aware of regulations are common
         behaviors in human society. Bearing in mind that reinforcement learning (RL)
         algorithms benefit from mimicking humanity, in this work, we propose that an
         RL agent can act on external guidance in both its learning process and model
         deployment, making the agent more socially acceptable. We introduce the concept,
         Knowledge-Grounded RL (KGRL), with a formal definition that an agent learns to
         follow external guidelines and develop its own policy. Moving towards the goal of
         KGRL, we propose a novel actor model with an embedding-based attention mecha-
         nism that can attend to either a learnable internal policy or external knowledge. The
         proposed method is orthogonal to training algorithms, and the external knowledge
         can be flexibly recomposed, rearranged, and reused in both training and inference
         stages. Through experiments on tasks with discrete and continuous action space,
         our KGRL agent is shown to be more sample efficient and generalizable, and it has
         flexibly rearrangeable knowledge embeddings and interpretable behaviors.


1    I NTRODUCTION

Incorporating external guidance into learning is a commonly seen behavior among humans. We can
speed up our learning process by referring to useful suggestions. At the same time, we beware of
external regulations for safe and ethical reasons. On top of following external guidance, we humans
can learn our own strategies to complete a task. We can also arbitrarily recompose, rearrange, and
reuse those strategies and external guidelines to solve a new task and adapt to environmental changes.
Imitating human behaviors has been shown to benefit reinforcement learning (RL) (Billard et al.,
2016; Sutton and Barto, 2018; Zhang et al., 2019). However, how an RL agent can achieve the above
capabilities remains challenging.
Different approaches have been proposed to develop some of these abilities. One branch of previous
work in RL has studied how an agent can learn from demonstrations provided externally as examples
of completing a task (Ross et al., 2011; Rajeswaran et al., 2017; Duan et al., 2017; Nair et al., 2018;
Goecks et al., 2019; Ding et al., 2019). Another branch of previous research has investigated how an
agent can learn reusable policies. This branch of research includes (1) transferring knowledge among
tasks with similar difficulty (Parisotto et al., 2015; Yin and Pan, 2017; Gupta et al., 2018a; Liu et al.,
2019; Tao et al., 2021) and (2) learning multiple reusable skills to solve a complex task in a divide-
and-conquer manner (Bacon et al., 2017; Frans et al., 2017; Nachum et al., 2018a; Eysenbach et al.,
2018; Kim et al., 2021; Tseng et al., 2021). These methods allow an agent to learn a new task with
fewer training samples. However, demonstrations are too task-specific to be reused in a new task, and
incorporating external guidelines from different sources into existing knowledge-reuse frameworks is
not straightforward. Moreover, current learning-from-demonstration and knowledge-reuse approaches
lack the flexibility to rearrange and recompose different demonstrations or knowledge, so they cannot
dynamically adapt to environmental changes.
In this work, we introduce Knowledge Grounded Reinforcement Learning (KGRL), a novel problem
with the following goal: An RL agent can learn its own policy (knowledge) while referring to external
knowledge. Meanwhile, all knowledge can be arbitrarily recomposed, rearranged, and reused anytime
in the learning and inference stages. A KGRL problem simultaneously considers the following three
questions: (1) How can an agent follow a set of external knowledge from different sources? (2) How
can an agent efficiently learn new knowledge by referring to external ones? (3) What is a proper


                                                    1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


representation of knowledge such that an agent can dynamically recompose, rearrange, and reuse
knowledge in both the learning process and model deployment?
To address the challenges in KGRL, we propose a simple yet effective actor model with an embedding-
based attention mechanism. This model is orthogonal to training algorithms and easy to implement.
In this model, each external-knowledge policy is paired with one learnable embedding. An internal-
knowledge policy, which the agent learns by itself, is also paired with one learnable embedding.
Then another learnable query embedding performs an attention mechanism by attending to each
knowledge embedding and then decides which knowledge to follow. With this attention mechanism,
the agent can learn new skills by following a set of external guidance. In addition, the knowledge
and query embeddings design disentangles each knowledge from the selection mechanism, so a set
of knowledge can be dynamically recomposed or rearranged. Finally, all knowledge policies are
encoded into a joint embedding space, so they can be reused once their embeddings are appropriately
learned.
We evaluate our proposed KGRL method for grid navigation and robotic manipulation tasks. The
results demonstrate that our method answers all the questions considered in KGRL. In analyses, we
show that the proposed approach achieves sample efficiency, generalizability, compositionality, and
incrementality, which are the four essential components of efficient learning (Kaelbling, 2020). At
the same time, our method also enables behavior interpretability because of the embedding-based
attention mechanism.
Our contributions are:

       • We introduce KGRL, a novel RL problem addressing how an agent can repeatedly refer to
         an arbitrary set of external knowledge for learning new skills.
       • We propose a novel actor model that achieves the goals of KGRL and is orthogonal to
         training algorithms.
       • We demonstrate in the experiments that our KGRL method satisfies the four properties of
         efficient learning (Kaelbling, 2020) and learns interpretable strategies.

2    R ELATED W ORK
Several lines of research in RL have studied how an agent can incorporate external demonstrations/reg-
ulations into learning or learn reusable policies. Here we summarize the differences between their
research goals and the ones in the KGRL formulation.

Learning from demonstrations/external strategies. Providing expert demonstrations or external
strategies to an RL agent is a popular way to incorporate external guidance into learning. Demonstra-
tions are (sub-)optimal examples of completing a task and represented as state-action pairs; external
strategies are (sub-)optimal policies that are represented in a specific form, e.g., fuzzy logic. Previous
work has leveraged demonstrations or external strategies by introducing them into the policy-update
steps of RL (Hester et al., 2017; Rajeswaran et al., 2017; Vecerik et al., 2017; Nair et al., 2018;
Pfeiffer et al., 2018; Goecks et al., 2019; Kartal et al., 2019; Zhang et al., 2020; 2021) or performing
imitation learning (IL) (Abbeel and Ng, 2004; Ross et al., 2011; Ho and Ermon, 2016; Duan et al.,
2017; Peng et al., 2018a;b; Ding et al., 2019). Learning from demonstrations (LfD) and IL require
sufficient number of optimal demonstrations, which are difficult to collect, to achieve sample-efficient
learning. Moreover, those demonstrations are task-dependent and can hardly be reused in other tasks.
Compared to LfD and IL, learning from external strategies, including KGRL, can achieve efficient
learning by referring to highly imperfect knowledge. Also, KGRL can incorporate general knowledge
that is not necessary task-related. Finally, our KGRL approach learns a uniform representation
of knowledge in different forms, so it supports flexible recomposition/rearrangement/reuse of an
arbitrary set of knowledge. These abilities are not all achievable by previous work in this direction.

Safe RL. Other than demonstrations, regulations are also essential guidance that can help an agent
achieve effective learning. Safe RL, which incorporates safety regulations (constraints) into learning
and inference stages, has gained more attention over the past decade. Current research in safe RL
mainly includes safety in learning through (1) jointly optimizing the expected return and safe-related
cost (Ammar et al., 2015; Achiam et al., 2017; Chow et al., 2018; Stooke et al., 2020; Ding et al.,


                                                    2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


2021) and (2) restricting exploration in a safe space (Garcia and Fernández, 2012; Berkenkamp
et al., 2017; Alshiekh et al., 2018; Cheng et al., 2019; Thananjeyan et al., 2021; Liu et al., 2022).
The constraints in safe RL can be softly or strictly imposed, where the former aims to decrease the
number of safety violations, and the latter prohibits any of them in both learning and inference stages.
Compared to KGRL, safe RL usually does not consider reusing the safety constraints in a new task or
dynamically adjusting regulations according to the environmental changes.

Knowledge transfer and meta-RL. How an agent can transfer previously learned knowledge to a
new task is a well-recognized challenge. Several studies have focused on transferring the knowledge
learned in a single task to a multi-task policy (Parisotto et al., 2015; Rusu et al., 2015; Yin and Pan,
2017; Xu et al., 2020; Tao et al., 2021). On the other hand, a line of research in meta-RL investigates
how to quickly adapt the knowledge learned in multiple tasks to a new one (Finn et al., 2017; Gupta
et al., 2018a;b; Nagabandi et al., 2018; Liu et al., 2019). These two research directions do not enable
incorporating external guidance from different sources into learning, so their transferred knowledge
is limited to the one learned among similar environments (Glatt et al., 2016). In addition, they require
extensive amount of training data before a set of knowledge can be reused in a new task. Compared
to previous work in knowledge transfer and meta-RL, KGRL allows an agent to follow and reuse an
arbitrary set of knowledge obtained from different sources in a new task, and these sources can be
very different from the new task. Moreover, our KGRL approach does not require a separate process,
such as policy distillation (Rusu et al., 2015), or numerous training samples collected from multiple
environments to learn transferable knowledge.

Hierarchical RL (HRL). Other than transferring knowledge among tasks with similar difficulty,
another popular line of research, HRL, aims to decompose a complex task into a hierarchy of subtasks
and learn a reusable skill for each subtask. Previous research in HRL has focused on learning a
hierarchy of a complex task (Dayan and Hinton, 1992; Sutton et al., 1999; Kulkarni et al., 2016; Levy
et al., 2017; Nachum et al., 2018b; Jiang et al., 2019), discovering options/subtasks/subgoals (Stolle
and Precup, 2002; Bacon et al., 2017; Vezhnevets et al., 2017; Nachum et al., 2018a; Riemer et al.,
2018; Eysenbach et al., 2018; Khetarpal and Precup, 2019; Zhang and Whiteson, 2019; Kim et al.,
2021), and transferring learned skills among different tasks (Konidaris and Barto, 2006; Frans et al.,
2017; Tessler et al., 2017; Peng et al., 2019; Qureshi et al., 2019; Tseng et al., 2021). Compared to
the skills in HRL, knowledge in KGRL can be partially contained in, be more complex than, or even
has little to do with the task. That is, it is not limited to a skill that solves a subtask. This property
enables flexibility of providing knowledge and improves exploration in an unseen environment. In
addition, a skill in HRL is usually assigned with a fixed index or a task-dependant subgoal, making
an agent difficult to dynamically recompose or rearrange skills in learning or inference stages. On the
other hand, our KGRL method disentangles knowledge representation from the high-level selection
mechanism of a task, making an agent able to dynamically adapt to environmental changes anytime.

Program-guided RL. Similar to HRL, program-guided RL also decomposes a complex task into
subtasks and learns subpolicies for them. However, instead of learning a hierarchy of the task,
program-guided RL guides an agent to complete a task with a program, which explicitly specifies the
flow of executing the subtasks given the environmental conditions (Sun et al., 2019; Brooks et al.,
2021; Trivedi et al., 2021; Yang et al., 2021; Zhao et al., 2021). This guidance requires a structured
and unambiguous hierarchy of a task and is more task-dependent compared to knowledge in KGRL.
Moreover, to reuse a previously learned subpolicy, program-guided RL needs to first generate a
new program with a new control flow, hence lacking the flexibility to dynamically recompose and
rearrange subpolicies.


3    KGRL P ROBLEM F ORMULATION

In this section, we formally define the problem formulation of Knowledge-Grounded Reinforcement
Learning (KGRL). We consider the family of discrete-time finite-horizon Markov Decision Processes
(MDPs) with knowledge guidance for an environment. Such an MDP is formulated as a tuple
(S, A, T , G, R, ρ, γ), where S is the state space, A is the action space, T : S × A × S → R is the
transition probability distribution, G is the knowledge set, R is the reward function, ρ is the initial
state distribution, and γ is the discount factor.


                                                    3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023



                                    action (at)

                Actor
                                                                         Environment

                                                                ......
                        kin   u

                Inner Actor       Knowledge   Knowledge   Knowledge
                     ,               (g1)        (g2)        (g3)
                                                                             state (st)



                    Figure 1: The proposed model architecture of a KGRL agent.


Each element in the knowledge set, g ∈ G, can be general knowledge, such as commonsense,
suggestion, guideline, principle, specification, rule, or restriction, described as a knowledge mapping
πg : S → A. This mapping represents the low-level execution strategy of each knowledge and can
be in any form, such as a hand-crafted rule, fuzzy logic, or a neural network, as long as it outputs an
action given a state. In our experiments, we focus on g being suggestions in the form of hand-crafted
rules or neural networks. This is because flexible recomposition/rearrangement of a set of suggestions
is fundamental to efficient learning but is currently not achievable by existing methods. Moving
forward, this setup can lay a foundation to incorporate a more extensive knowledge set.
The goal of a KGRL agent is to maximize the expected rewards and develop the following attributes:
(1) The agent learns its own knowledge by referring to external one. (2) The agent can recompose/re-
arrange/reuse knowledge in training and inference stages as well as new environments. (3) The
agent’s behaviors are interpretable in terms of which knowledge it refers to at each time step.

4     P ROPOSED A PPROACH
We propose a novel actor model for KGRL with the concept inspired by the self-attention mecha-
nism (Vaswani et al., 2017). The actor model includes an inner actor and a set of external knowledge
mappings, {πg1 , πg2 , . . . , πgn }. The actor architecture is illustrated in Figure 1. The idea behind
this design is that the actor will decide to follow an external guidance or its own policy given a state
st ∈ S at the t-th time step. This dynamic decision making should eventually lead the agent to receive
higher accumulated rewards based on the reward function R. Moreover, for the external knowledge
set to be arbitrarily recomposed/rearranged and deployed without further training, each knowledge
should be represented in a form that is order-invariant, and the knowledge-selection mechanism
should be independent from which set of knowledge is used during training. In the following sections,
we introduce the detailed design of each component in the proposed actor model.

4.1   ACTOR M ODEL A RCHITECTURE

External Knowledge. An important property of a KGRL policy is the flexibility of knowledge
recomposition/rearrangement/reusability during training and testing phases. To obtain this flexibility,
we propose a uniform representation for each knowledge so that the components of a knowledge
set is order-invariant. We assign a learnable key (embedding) for each external knowledge mapping,
which is a dk -dimensional vector denoted as kgj ∈ Rdk , for j = 1, 2, . . . , n. Note that the knowledge
key kgj represents the entire knowledge mapping πgj instead of each state-action pair suggested by
this mapping, so kgj does not depend on states or actions. Since each knowledge is encoded as an
independent key, which lies in a joint embedding space, one can change the number of knowledge
by adding/removing keys to/from the space to adapt to the dynamical changes in an environment.
Meanwhile, one can also combine knowledge keys from different tasks in a new learning/evaluation
process.

Inner Actor. An external knowledge set may not contain policies that can directly solve a specific
task, so an agent needs to be capable of developing its own strategies. Therefore, we add an inner actor


                                                   4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


in the actor model of KGRL. An inner actor contains two learnable function approximators ϕin and
ϕk . Given a state st , the function approximator ϕin predicts an inner policy, πin = ϕin (st ) : S → A,
and ϕk generates an inner key, kin = ϕk (st ) ∈ Rdk . The inner policy serves the same purpose as a
policy in regular RL, which represents the strategy that an agent learns by itself through interactions
with the environment. Similar to an external knowledge mapping πgi , the inner policy πin can be
viewed as the internal knowledge mapping with a paired learnable inner key kin . Note that unlike an
external knowledge key, the inner key varies according to a given state, because the inner strategy
will change as the agent learns from more experiences over time.

Query. Given the external and internal knowledge mappings, an agent needs to decide which knowl-
edge to refer to. Importantly, this selection mechanism should be disentangled from a knowledge
set to support its flexible recomposition/rearrangement ability. That is, an agent should still be able
to select a proper knowledge mapping when a different knowledge set is provided. To achieve this
goal, we use an attention mechanism to query knowledge. This attention mechanism is implemented
by adding another learnable function approximator ϕu that generates a query vector, denoted as
u = ϕu (st ) ∈ Rdk , given a state st . The query will be attended to the keys to calculate the weights
for each knowledge mapping. Note that the proposed model predicts the query and keys separately
instead of directly predicting the weight for each guidance. In this way, we disentangle the selection
component (the query) from the knowledge set (the keys). The following section describes how we
compute the weights.

4.2   ACTION P REDICTION

Attentions. We compute the attention of the query u over the inner keys and external knowledge
keys by their dot products. The results become the weights for the inner and external guidance:
                                            win = u · kin ,
                                                                                                    (1)
                                            wgj = u · kgj .
If win is larger, then the agent is more likely to adopt the inner policy. On the other hand, if wgj is
larger, then the agent is more likely to follow the guidance from the j-th external knowledge.

Final Policy. A straightforward way to describe the final policy given the weights win and wgj and
their corresponding knowledge mappings πin and πgj , for j = 1, 2, . . . , n, is
                                  at ∼ π(·|st ),                                                    (2)
                                                            n
                                                            X
                             π(·|st ) = win πin (·|st ) +         wgj πgj (·|st ),                  (3)
                                                            j=1

which is a weighted sum of each strategy. We apply equation (3) to environments with a discrete
action space, where each knowledge mapping predicts a probability vector. However, we found that
in environments with a continuous action space, taking actions sampled from equation (3) will guide
an agent to complete a task less efficiently.
We explain by a simple example why computing a weighted sum is
a less favorable choice when integrating multiple knowledge map-                      Goal
pings in a continuous action space. Figure 2 shows a 2D environment
where an agent navigates to avoid the obstacle and reach the goal.                   KG1+KG2
The agent is provided with two knowledge mappings. Their sug-
                                                                                             KG2
gested actions at the current time step are plotted as an arrow in
orange and blue respectively, and their weights are both 0.5. The
                                                                             KG1
weighted sum of these two action candidates is plotted as a green                    Agent
arrow, which guides the agent to go directly into the obstacle. This
example demonstrates that a weighted sum of multiple actions in a
continuous action space can lose critical information contained in Figure 2: An example of incor-
individual actions and lead to worse behaviors. Hence, we instead porating multiple actions by a
sample only one action candidate according to the weights.             weighted sum. It shows that
                                                                       a weighted sum of actions can
To sample an action suggested by one of the knowledge mappings lead the agent to go into the
while making the entire actor model differentiable, we first sample an obstacle (the gray wall).


                                                    5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Algorithm 1: Knowledge-Guided Reinforcement Learning (KGRL) with Our Actor Model
Input: environment E with MDP (S, A, T , G, R, ρ, γ)
Input: external knowledge mappings πg1 , πg2 , ..., πgn
initialize kgj for j = 1, 2, ..., n
initialize ϕin , ϕk , ϕu
for each time step do
     Generate kg1 , . . . , kgn , kin , πin , u
     Compute win , wg1 , . . . , wgn according to equation (1)
     Sample an action at ∼ π(·|st ) according to equations (2)
     Apply at and observe a new state and reward st+1 , rt from E
     Update ϕin , ϕk , ϕu , kg1 , . . . , kgn by any RL algorithm
return ϕin , ϕk , ϕu , kg1 , . . . , kgn


element from the set {in, g1 , g2 , . . . , gn } according to the weights
{win , wg1 , wg2 , . . . , wgn } using Gumbel softmax (Jang et al., 2016):
                          e ∼ gumbel_softmax(win , wg1 , wg2 , ..., wgn ) .                       (4)
Then given a state st , an action is sampled from the knowledge mapping πe (·|s) using the reparame-
terization trick, where ϕe can be one of {ϕin , ϕg1 , . . . , ϕgn } according to the sampled e.

4.3   L EARNING A LGORITHMS

The proposed actor model can be end-to-end learned with any existing RL algorithm, and the
implementation is simple. Algorithm 1 describes our proposed KGRL algorithm.

5     E XPERIMENTS
We validate the proposed KGRL actor model on two sets of widely used environments with different
properties: MiniGrid (Chevalier-Boisvert et al., 2018) and OpenAI-Robotics (Plappert et al., 2018).
Through experiments on these environments, we answer the following four questions: (1) Can our
KGRL agent learn effective new knowledge by referring to an arbitrary set of external guidance? (2)
Can the knowledge policies and their learned embeddings be recomposed, rearranged, and reused to
solve a new task? (3) Is our KGRL method sample efficient and generalizable? (4) Does our KGRL
agent learn interpretable behaviors? The implementation details can be found in Appendix.

Baselines. We compare our KGRL method with the following baselines that incorporate external
guidance in different ways. (1) Behavior cloning (BC): An agent follows only the external knowledge
to solve a task. The results of this strategy can be seen as the upper bound of BC, where the
demonstration data is generated by applying the external knowledge. (2) RL: An agent learns a policy
from scratch by RL. No external guidance is incorporated. (3) RL+BC: An agent learns a policy by
RL with BC signals provided from external knowledge. We follow the method proposed in Nair et al.
(2018) to incorporate BC losses into RL.

5.1   M INIGRID

Environments. We evaluate all methods in the following MiniGrid environments with discrete
action space and sparse rewards: Empty-5x5, Empty-Random-5x5, Empty-16x16, Unlock, DoorKey-
5x5, and DoorKey-8x8. Among them, DoorKey are the environments that an agent needs to pick up a
key, open a door, and then reach a goal, which can use the skills learned in Unlock (pick up a key and
open a door) and Empty (reach a goal). We choose these environments to study if our method can
recompose/reuse previously learned knowledge. The observation space of these environments is the
directed first person view with a range of 5x5 grid, and the action space has seven discrete actions.

Setup. We compare BC and Proximal Policy Optimization algorithm (Schulman et al., 2017) under
RL (PPO), RL+BC (PPO-BC), and KGRL (PPO-KGRL) formulations. In PPO-KGRL, we use the


                                                    6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                   PPO                            PPO-KGRL(all)                      PPO                               PPO-KGRL(all)                        PPO                                   PPO-KGRL(all)
                   PPO-BC                         BC                                 PPO-BC                            BC                                   PPO-BC                                BC
                   PPO-KGRL(KG3)                                                     PPO-KGRL(KG3)                                                          PPO-KGRL(KG3)
                                                                           1.0

         0.8                                                               0.8                                                                  0.8

         0.6                                                               0.6                                                                  0.6
Reward


                                                                  Reward


                                                                                                                                       Reward
         0.4                                                               0.4                                                                  0.4

         0.2                                                               0.2                                                                  0.2

         0.0                                                               0.0                                                                  0.0
               0        20000        40000     60000     80000                   0        20000       40000         60000     80000                   0     100000 200000 300000 400000 500000 600000 700000 800000
                                   Timesteps                                                         Timesteps                                                                 Timesteps
                      (a) Empty-5x5                                              (b) Empty-Random-5x5                                                          (c) Empty-16x16
                   PPO                          PPO-KGRL(KG1)                        PPO                         PPO-KGRL(KG1+KG2)                          PPO                            PPO-KGRL(KG1+KG2)
                   PPO-BC                       PPO-KGRL(KG2)                        PPO-BC                      PPO-KGRL(KG3)                              PPO-BC                         PPO-KGRL(KG3)
                   PPO-KGRL(KG1+KG2)            BC                                   PPO-KGRL(all)               BC                                         PPO-KGRL(all)                  BC
                   PPO-KGRL(all)
                                                                           0.8                                                                  0.8
         0.8
                                                                           0.6                                                                  0.6

                                                                  Reward


                                                                                                                                       Reward
         0.6
Reward


                                                                           0.4                                                                  0.4
         0.4

         0.2                                                               0.2                                                                  0.2

         0.0                                                               0.0                                                                  0.0
               0    50000   100000 150000 200000 250000 300000                   0        20000       40000         60000     80000                   0.0       0.5      1.0       1.5      2.0      2.5      3.0
                                   Timesteps                                                         Timesteps                                                                 Timesteps                       1e6

                            (d) Unlock                                                 (e) DoorKey-5x5                                                         (f) DoorKey-8x8

Figure 3: The learning curves of different agents in MiniGrid environments. Our KGRL method
achieves better sample efficiency in most of the environments. Also, adding redundant knowledge in
the proposed model does not affect the performance.



inner actor model same as the actor model of PPO and add the learnable inner key, knowledge keys,
and query. We define three simple knowledge policies for the MiniGrid environments. (KG1) pick
up a key: if there is a key in the observation, “go in the direction” of the key; if the key is just in front
of the agent, pick up the key. (KG2) open a door: if there is a door in the observation, “go in the
direction” of the door; if the door is just in front of the agent, open the door. (KG3) reach a goal: if
there is a goal in the observation, “go in the direction” of the goal.


Results. Figure 3 shows the training results of the baseline methods and PPO-KGRL with different
knowledge combinations. In most of the environments, PPO-KGRL achieves significantly better
sample efficiency given sub-optimal knowledge. Also in general, the improvement is larger when
the task is more complex (Empty < Unlock < DoorKey). Note that PPO does not show any success
in DoorKey-8x8 within three million steps. However, we found that in Empty-16x16, our KGRL
agent learns more quickly at the beginning but slows down its progress over time. The reason might
be that Empty-16x16 requires only exploration instead of other skills, so the agent cannot benefit
too much by following external guidance. Moreover, in a small environment such as DoorKey-5x5,
the advantages of providing external knowledge is difficult to demonstrate due to extra learnable
parameters in our actor model.
We also study the effects of different knowl-
edge combinations for PPO-KGRL. In Un-
lock, we found that KG2 is more helpful than          1        2   3  4

KG1; in DoorKey-8x8, KG3 is more help-                                              Step 6:        Step 15:
                                                                                pick up the key open the door
ful than KG1+KG2. We conjecture that the
knowledge which directly helps receive the
rewards guides an agent more effectively in
these environments. Also, as shown in Fig-
ure 3(a-d), adding redundant knowledge will                                        Step 22:        Step 29:
                                                             Steps              search for goal reach the goal
not affect the performance. This observation
demonstrates the benefit of disentangling the Figure 4: The interpretation of the agent’s behaviors.
knowledge embeddings and query, thus in- The left image shows the (unnormalized) weights for
creasing the flexibility of providing external each knowledge.
guidance.


                                                                                                     7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Policy Interpretation. Figure 4 shows that our KGRL method learns interpretable agent behaviors.
The weight changes indicate that in a DoorKey-8x8 environment, the agent chooses to sequentially
“pick up the key”, “open the door”, “search for the goal”, and “reach the goal”. Note that the attention
to the inner policy does not disappear throughout the entire episode. This shows that the inner policy
helps an agent explore the environment.

Analysis of Generalizability. To test the generalizability of PPO and PPO-KGRL, we train an agent
in an empty environment with a fixed goal (Empty) and evaluate the agent in an empty environment
with a randomized goal (Empty-Random). This experimental design verifies whether the agent
memorizes the goal position or really understands how to find the goal. As shown in the left column
of Table 1, the returns of PPO-KGRL achieve an average of 0.94 and a minimum of 0.77. This is
much closer to the upper bound, which is the average return of a PPO-KGRL agent trained on the
Empty-Random environment.

      Init. Env.          Empty                          DoorKey-5x5                                           DoorKey-8x8
      Test Env.      Empty-Random        Empty           Empty-Random                    Unlock                        Unlock
      PPO               0.92 (0.71)    0.55 (0.05)        0.79 (0.03)                    0.43 (0)                   0 (0)
      PPO-KGRL          0.94 (0.77)    0.88 (0.55)        0.90 (0.55)                    0.54 (0)                  0.85 (0)
      Upper Bound       0.95 (0.84)    0.93 (0.87)        0.95 (0.84)                  0.94 (0.84)               0.94 (0.84)

Table 1: Zero-shot evaluations on three environments (Empty, Empty-Random, Unlock) of RL agents
trained on an initial environment (Empty and DoorKey) using PPO or PPO-KGRL algorithms. The
average and minimal returns are shown for each evaluation. Our KGRL method is more generalizable
and effective in transferring previously learned knowledge.


Analysis of Reusing, Recomposing, and Rearranging Knowl-
edge. For our KGRL method, we verify if the external and                                      PPO                 PPO-KGRL(Unlock+KG3)
                                                                                              PPO-KGRL(all)       PPO-KGRL(Unlock+Empty)
internal knowledge policies and their embeddings can be reused                   1.0

by the following two sets of experiments: (1) zero-shot transfer-                0.8

ring the knowledge policies and embeddings to a simpler task                     0.6
                                                                        Reward


and (2) initializing the external guidance by those knowledge                    0.4
policies and embeddings when learning a more complex task.
                                                                                 0.2
The second set of experiments also verifies if the knowledge
                                                                                 0.0
policies and embeddings can be recomposed and rearranged.                               0.0     0.5     1.0      1.5      2.0   2.5   3.0
                                                                                                              Timesteps                1e6

In the first set of experiments, we zero-shot evaluate an agent
trained in DoorKey environments on Empty, Empty-Random,                 Figure 5: The knowledge reusabil-
and Unlock environments. The four columns on the right side             ity experiments on MiniGrid-
of Table 1 show the average and minimal returns. We found               DoorKey-8x8. Our KGRL method
that an agent trained with PPO-KGRL significantly outperforms           further improve sample efficiency
the one trained with PPO in all environments. These results             by reusing previously learned
demonstrate that our KGRL policies have better reusability.             knowledge.

In the second set of experiments, we train three PPO-KGRL agents with external knowledge being:

      1. all: KG1 + KG2 + KG3. This set of knowledge is the same one used in Figure 3.
      2. Unlock (reused) + KG3: the inner knowledge policy and embeddings learned in Unlock +
         KG3. This set of knowledge recomposes and rearranges the first set of knowledge.
      3. Unlock (reused) + Empty (reused): the inner knowledge policy and embeddings learned
         in Unlock + the ones learned in Empty-Random. This set of knowledge recomposes and
         rearranges the second set of knowledge.

Figure 5 shows the training results of PPO and PPO-KGRL with different sets of external knowledge.
The two KGRL agents that reuse previously learned knowledge perform better than PPO and PPO-
KGRL(all). Also surprisingly, we found that the number of samples required by PPO-KGRL that
reuses the Unlock knowledge plus the one required by learning the Unlock knowledge is even less
than the one required by PPO-KGRL(all), which learns with KG1+KG2+KG3. These results indicate


                                                     8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


               1.0                                                                  1.0                                                           1.0                                                 1.0

                                                                                    0.8                                                           0.9                                                 0.9
               0.8


Success Rate


                                                                     Success Rate


                                                                                                                                   Success Rate


                                                                                                                                                                                       Success Rate
                                                                                                                                                  0.8                                                 0.8
                                                                                    0.6                           BC
               0.6
                                                                                                                  SAC                             0.7                                                 0.7
                                                      BC                            0.4                           SAC-BC                                                                                      SAC
               0.4                                                                                                                                0.6
                                                      SAC                                                         SAC-KGRL-all                                 SAC                                    0.6     SAC-KGRL(all)
                                                      SAC-BC                        0.2                           SAC-KGRL-KG1                                                                                SAC-KGRL(KG1)
                                                                                                                                                  0.5
               0.2
                                                      SAC-KGRL                                                    SAC-KGRL-KG2                                 SAC-KGRL                               0.5     SAC-KGRL(KG2)
                                                                                    0.0                                                           0.4
                     6000 8000 10000 12000 14000 16000 18000 20000                        0.0   0.2   0.4   0.6       0.8   1.0                          0.2   0.4   0.6   0.8   1.0                          0.5     1.0     1.5
                                  Timesteps                                                           Timesteps              1e6                    Range of Goal (in ratio)                            Range of Goal (in ratio)

                           (a) Reach.                                                     (b) Pick-And-Place.                                           (a) Reach.                       (b) Pick-And-Place.

     Figure 6: The learning curves of different agents in Ope-                                                                          Figure 7: Results of the policy trained
     nAI robotic environments. Our KGRL method leads to                                                                                 on 0.1x the original goal range. Our
     better sample efficiency and stability in both environ-                                                                            KGRL method is less affected by the
     ments.                                                                                                                             changes in the environment.

that with the abilities to flexibly reuse, recompose, and rearrange knowledge, our KGRL method can
further enhance the training efficiency.

5.2                  ROBOTICS

Environments. We also verify the proposed KGRL approach in the following OpenAI robotic
environments with a continuous action space and sparse rewards: Reach and Pick-And-Place. Both
environments contain a task of reaching a randomly sampled goal. Similar to the MiniGrid envi-
ronments, these two tasks can demonstrate the ability of our KGRL method reusing, recomposing,
and rearranging previously learned knowledge when solving a new task. An observation of these
environments includes the position and velocity of the end-effector and object (if it exists) and
the position of the goal. An action of these environments contains the position variation of the
end-effector and the distance between the two fingers.

Setup. We compare BC and the soft actor-critic (Haarnoja et al., 2018) algorithm with hindsight
experience replay (Andrychowicz et al., 2017) under RL (SAC), RL+BC (SAC-BC), and KGRL
(SAC-KGRL) formulations. In SAC-KGRL, we add the learnable inner key, knowledge keys, and
query on top of the actor model of SAC. We define the following two external knowledge policies for
the OpenAI robotic environments, where pee ∈ R3 is the position of the end-effector and pobj ∈ R3
is the position of the object. (KG1) move straightly to the goal: if ∥pee − pobj ∥2 < ε, move straightly
to the goal with the gripper closed; otherwise, stay unmoved. Note that there is no object in Reach,
so ε is set to infinity in this environment, and KG1 always guides the agent towards the goal. (KG2,
for Pick-And-Place only) move straightly to the object: if ∥pee − pobj ∥2 ≥ ε, move straightly to
the object with the gripper opened; otherwise, stay unmoved.

Results. Figure 6 shows the training results of Reach and Pick-And-Place. In both environments,
SAC-KGRL requires less samples to succeed and shows more stability. Compared to SAC-BC,
our method better utilizes external guidance regardless of its quality. Moreover, the success of
SAC-KGRL in Pick-And-Place demonstrates that our KGRL agent can learn an effective strategy
given sub-optimal knowledge. We also study the effects of different knowledge combinations in
Pick-And-Place. The learning curves indicate that using both KG1 and KG2 leads to slightly better
sample efficiency than using only one of them, but there is no significant difference among the three
combinations.

Analysis of Generalizability. We analyze if our KGRL policies are more generalizable by training
in both environments with a smaller goal range and testing with larger goal ranges. The training
goal range is 0.1 times smaller than the original one, and the testing goal ranges are the original one
multiplied by 0.1 to 1. Figure 7 shows the generalizability results. The success rate of SAC and
SAC-KGRL agents both decreases as the testing goal range increases, but the SAC-KGRL agent in
Reach and the SAC-KGRL(all) agent in Pick-And-Place are less affected by the changes, especially
when the goal ranges are larger. These results suggest that an KGRL agent has more potential to
generalize to unseen environments.


                                                                                                                  9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023



         Environment           Reach                                Pick-And-Place
         Knowledge       All   IA       KG1      All    IA + KG1     IA + KG2        IA   KG1 + KG2
         Success Rate     1     1        1      0.99         0.99       0.99     0.99        0.05

Table 2: Evaluation results of removing part of the knowledge set of our KGRL policies (IA: inner
actor, All: IA + all KGs). Our proposed method enables the inner actor to mimic the strategies of
external knowledge, and it may become a more powerful piece of new knowledge.


Analysis of Knowledge Control Flexibility. We demonstrate the flexibility of our method re-
composing and rearranging knowledge by removing part of the knowledge set during evaluation.
We evaluate Reach with the policies learned by SAC-KGRL and Pick-And-Place with the policies
learned by SAC-KGRL(all). Table 2 shows the testing results of both tasks after removing part of
the knowledge set. The learned inner actors in both environments achieve high success rate without
the external guidance, indicating that a KGRL agent learns to not only follow the guidance but also
mimic its strategy. This imitation process allows an agent to develop an inner policy that outperforms
external strategies, and itself can then become new knowledge useful for solving other tasks.

         Model                  SAC          SAC-KGRL-all       SAC-KGRL-KG1         SAC-KGRL-KG2
         100k Training Steps     0.24            0.56                0.25                 0.48
         200k Training Steps     0.61            0.99                0.99                 0.98
         Best                     0.8              1                   1                    1

Table 3: Zero-shot transfer results of Pick-And-Place policies to Reach. Our proposed method is
more effective and efficient in reusing learned knowledge.

Analysis of Knowledge Reusability. To demonstrate that our KGRL method enables better knowl-
edge reusability, we apply zero-shot transfer from the learned Pick-And-Place policies to Reach.
Note that the observation spaces of Reach and Pick-And-Place are different since there is no object
in Reach. Hence, we apply zeros as the object’s relative position and velocity in Reach to unify
their observation spaces. Table 3 shows the success rate of different Pick-And-Place policies applied
to Reach. The results indicate that SAC-KGRL is more efficient in reusing knowledge since the
transfers are mostly successful after only 200k training steps.

6    C ONCLUSION AND D ISCUSSION

In this work, we introduce KGRL, a novel RL problem discussing how an agent can follow an arbitrary
set of external guidance and learn its own policy. Also, the agent should be able to repeatedly reuse
previously learned knowledge and dynamically recompose and rearrange knowledge to adapt to
environmental changes. To address these challenges, we propose a simple yet effective actor model
that performs an embedding-based attention mechanism. The experimental results show that the
proposed model achieves the goal of KGRL. Our KGRL algorithm also satisfies the four properties
of efficient learning (Kaelbling, 2020) and learns interpretable agent behaviors.
This work serves as an initial effort for the ultimate goal of KGRL, which is to automatically
collect a large group of knowledge from different sources, such as books, the Internet, or previous
training processes. This group of knowledge can be shared among multiple environments/tasks
and continuously expanded, and a wide variety of artificial agents can use it as their guidance.
Moving forward, the following research directions in KGRL are worth exploring: (1) incorporating
restrictions that should be strictly followed during the learning and inference stages, (2) composing
knowledge with different state and action spaces, and (3) dealing with more complex relationships
among different knowledge, such as conditional dependence and conflicts. We hope this work can
motivate future research in KGRL.

R EFERENCES
Pieter Abbeel and Andrew Y Ng. Apprenticeship learning via inverse reinforcement learning. In Proceedings of
   the twenty-first international conference on Machine learning, page 1, 2004.


                                                        10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Joshua Achiam, David Held, Aviv Tamar, and Pieter Abbeel. Constrained policy optimization. In International
   conference on machine learning, pages 22–31. PMLR, 2017.
Mohammed Alshiekh, Roderick Bloem, Rüdiger Ehlers, Bettina Könighofer, Scott Niekum, and Ufuk Topcu.
 Safe reinforcement learning via shielding. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence,
 volume 32, 2018.
Haitham Bou Ammar, Rasul Tutunov, and Eric Eaton. Safe policy search for lifelong reinforcement learning
  with sublinear regret. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pages 2361–2369. PMLR, 2015.
Marcin Andrychowicz, Filip Wolski, Alex Ray, Jonas Schneider, Rachel Fong, Peter Welinder, Bob McGrew,
 Josh Tobin, OpenAI Pieter Abbeel, and Wojciech Zaremba. Hindsight experience replay. Advances in neural
 information processing systems, 30, 2017.
Pierre-Luc Bacon, Jean Harb, and Doina Precup. The option-critic architecture. In Proceedings of the AAAI
   Conference on Artificial Intelligence, volume 31, 2017.
Felix Berkenkamp, Matteo Turchetta, Angela Schoellig, and Andreas Krause. Safe model-based reinforcement
  learning with stability guarantees. Advances in neural information processing systems, 30, 2017.
Aude G Billard, Sylvain Calinon, and Rüdiger Dillmann. Learning from humans. Springer handbook of robotics,
  pages 1995–2014, 2016.
Ethan Brooks, Janarthanan Rajendran, Richard L Lewis, and Satinder Singh. Reinforcement learning of implicit
  and explicit control flow instructions. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pages 1082–1091.
  PMLR, 2021.
Richard Cheng, Gábor Orosz, Richard M Murray, and Joel W Burdick. End-to-end safe reinforcement learning
  through barrier functions for safety-critical continuous control tasks. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference
  on Artificial Intelligence, volume 33, pages 3387–3395, 2019.
Maxime Chevalier-Boisvert, Lucas Willems, and Suman Pal. Minimalistic gridworld environment for openai
 gym. https://github.com/maximecb/gym-minigrid, 2018.
Yinlam Chow, Ofir Nachum, Edgar Duenez-Guzman, and Mohammad Ghavamzadeh. A lyapunov-based
  approach to safe reinforcement learning. Advances in neural information processing systems, 31, 2018.
Peter Dayan and Geoffrey E Hinton. Feudal reinforcement learning. Advances in neural information processing
  systems, 5, 1992.
Dongsheng Ding, Xiaohan Wei, Zhuoran Yang, Zhaoran Wang, and Mihailo Jovanovic. Provably efficient safe
  exploration via primal-dual policy optimization. In International Conference on Artificial Intelligence and
  Statistics, pages 3304–3312. PMLR, 2021.
Yiming Ding, Carlos Florensa, Pieter Abbeel, and Mariano Phielipp. Goal-conditioned imitation learning.
  Advances in neural information processing systems, 32, 2019.
Yan Duan, Marcin Andrychowicz, Bradly Stadie, OpenAI Jonathan Ho, Jonas Schneider, Ilya Sutskever, Pieter
  Abbeel, and Wojciech Zaremba. One-shot imitation learning. Advances in neural information processing
  systems, 30, 2017.
Benjamin Eysenbach, Abhishek Gupta, Julian Ibarz, and Sergey Levine. Diversity is all you need: Learning
  skills without a reward function. arXiv preprint arXiv:1802.06070, 2018.
Chelsea Finn, Pieter Abbeel, and Sergey Levine. Model-agnostic meta-learning for fast adaptation of deep
  networks. In ICML, 2017.
Kevin Frans, Jonathan Ho, Xi Chen, Pieter Abbeel, and John Schulman. Meta learning shared hierarchies. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:1710.09767, 2017.
Javier Garcia and Fernando Fernández. Safe exploration of state and action spaces in reinforcement learning.
  Journal of Artificial Intelligence Research, 45:515–564, 2012.
Ruben Glatt, Felipe Leno Da Silva, and Anna Helena Reali Costa. Towards knowledge transfer in deep
  reinforcement learning. In 2016 5th Brazilian Conference on Intelligent Systems (BRACIS), pages 91–96.
  IEEE, 2016.
Vinicius G Goecks, Gregory M Gremillion, Vernon J Lawhern, John Valasek, and Nicholas R Waytowich.
  Integrating behavior cloning and reinforcement learning for improved performance in dense and sparse reward
  environments. arXiv preprint arXiv:1910.04281, 2019.


                                                     11
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Abhishek Gupta, Benjamin Eysenbach, Chelsea Finn, and Sergey Levine. Unsupervised meta-learning for
  reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:1806.04640, 2018a.
Abhishek Gupta, Russell Mendonca, YuXuan Liu, Pieter Abbeel, and Sergey Levine. Meta-reinforcement
  learning of structured exploration strategies. Advances in neural information processing systems, 31, 2018b.
Tuomas Haarnoja, Aurick Zhou, Pieter Abbeel, and Sergey Levine. Soft actor-critic: Off-policy maximum
  entropy deep reinforcement learning with a stochastic actor. In ICML, 2018.
Todd Hester, Matej Vecerik, Olivier Pietquin, Marc Lanctot, Tom Schaul, Bilal Piot, Andrew Sendonaris, Gabriel
  Dulac-Arnold, Ian Osband, John Agapiou, et al. Learning from demonstrations for real world reinforcement
  learning. 2017.
Jonathan Ho and Stefano Ermon. Generative adversarial imitation learning. Advances in neural information
  processing systems, 29, 2016.
Eric Jang, Shixiang Gu, and Ben Poole. Categorical reparameterization with gumbel-softmax. arXiv preprint
   arXiv:1611.01144, 2016.
Yiding Jiang, Shixiang Shane Gu, Kevin P Murphy, and Chelsea Finn. Language as an abstraction for hierarchical
  deep reinforcement learning. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 32, 2019.
Leslie Pack Kaelbling. The foundation of efficient robot learning. Science, 369(6506):915–916, 2020.
Bilal Kartal, Pablo Hernandez-Leal, and Matthew E Taylor. Action guidance with mcts for deep reinforce-
   ment learning. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Interactive Digital
  Entertainment, volume 15, pages 153–159, 2019.
Khimya Khetarpal and Doina Precup. Learning options with interest functions. In Proceedings of the AAAI
  Conference on Artificial Intelligence, volume 33, pages 9955–9956, 2019.
Jaekyeom Kim, Seohong Park, and Gunhee Kim. Unsupervised skill discovery with bottleneck option learning.
   arXiv preprint arXiv:2106.14305, 2021.
George Konidaris and Andrew Barto. Autonomous shaping: Knowledge transfer in reinforcement learning. In
  Proceedings of the 23rd international conference on Machine learning, pages 489–496, 2006.
Tejas D Kulkarni, Karthik Narasimhan, Ardavan Saeedi, and Josh Tenenbaum. Hierarchical deep reinforcement
   learning: Integrating temporal abstraction and intrinsic motivation. Advances in neural information processing
   systems, 29, 2016.
Andrew Levy, George Konidaris, Robert Platt, and Kate Saenko. Learning multi-level hierarchies with hindsight.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:1712.00948, 2017.
Hao Liu, Richard Socher, and Caiming Xiong. Taming maml: Efficient unbiased meta-reinforcement learning.
  In International conference on machine learning, pages 4061–4071. PMLR, 2019.
Puze Liu, Davide Tateo, Haitham Bou Ammar, and Jan Peters. Robot reinforcement learning on the constraint
  manifold. In Conference on Robot Learning, pages 1357–1366. PMLR, 2022.
Ofir Nachum, Shixiang Gu, Honglak Lee, and Sergey Levine. Near-optimal representation learning for
  hierarchical reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:1810.01257, 2018a.
Ofir Nachum, Shixiang Shane Gu, Honglak Lee, and Sergey Levine. Data-efficient hierarchical reinforcement
  learning. Advances in neural information processing systems, 31, 2018b.
Anusha Nagabandi, Ignasi Clavera, Simin Liu, Ronald S Fearing, Pieter Abbeel, Sergey Levine, and Chelsea
  Finn. Learning to adapt in dynamic, real-world environments through meta-reinforcement learning. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:1803.11347, 2018.
Ashvin Nair, Bob McGrew, Marcin Andrychowicz, Wojciech Zaremba, and Pieter Abbeel. Overcoming
  exploration in reinforcement learning with demonstrations. In 2018 IEEE international conference on robotics
  and automation (ICRA), pages 6292–6299. IEEE, 2018.
Emilio Parisotto, Jimmy Lei Ba, and Ruslan Salakhutdinov. Actor-mimic: Deep multitask and transfer reinforce-
  ment learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:1511.06342, 2015.
Adam Paszke, Sam Gross, Francisco Massa, Adam Lerer, James Bradbury, Gregory Chanan, Trevor Killeen,
  Zeming Lin, Natalia Gimelshein, Luca Antiga, et al. Pytorch: An imperative style, high-performance deep
  learning library. Advances in neural information processing systems, 32, 2019.


                                                      12
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Xue Bin Peng, Pieter Abbeel, Sergey Levine, and Michiel Van de Panne. Deepmimic: Example-guided deep
  reinforcement learning of physics-based character skills. ACM Transactions On Graphics (TOG), 37(4):1–14,
  2018a.
Xue Bin Peng, Angjoo Kanazawa, Sam Toyer, Pieter Abbeel, and Sergey Levine. Variational discriminator
  bottleneck: Improving imitation learning, inverse rl, and gans by constraining information flow. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:1810.00821, 2018b.
Xue Bin Peng, Michael Chang, Grace Zhang, Pieter Abbeel, and Sergey Levine. Mcp: Learning composable
  hierarchical control with multiplicative compositional policies. Advances in Neural Information Processing
  Systems, 32, 2019.
Mark Pfeiffer, Samarth Shukla, Matteo Turchetta, Cesar Cadena, Andreas Krause, Roland Siegwart, and
 Juan Nieto. Reinforced imitation: Sample efficient deep reinforcement learning for mapless navigation by
 leveraging prior demonstrations. IEEE Robotics and Automation Letters, 3(4):4423–4430, 2018.
Matthias Plappert, Marcin Andrychowicz, Alex Ray, Bob McGrew, Bowen Baker, Glenn Powell, Jonas Schneider,
  Josh Tobin, Maciek Chociej, Peter Welinder, et al. Multi-goal reinforcement learning: Challenging robotics
  environments and request for research. arXiv preprint arXiv:1802.09464, 2018.
Ahmed H Qureshi, Jacob J Johnson, Yuzhe Qin, Taylor Henderson, Byron Boots, and Michael C Yip. Composing
  task-agnostic policies with deep reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:1905.10681, 2019.
Antonin Raffin, Ashley Hill, Adam Gleave, Anssi Kanervisto, Maximilian Ernestus, and Noah Dormann. Stable-
  baselines3: Reliable reinforcement learning implementations. Journal of Machine Learning Research, 22
  (268):1–8, 2021. URL http://jmlr.org/papers/v22/20-1364.html.
Aravind Rajeswaran, Vikash Kumar, Abhishek Gupta, Giulia Vezzani, John Schulman, Emanuel Todorov, and
  Sergey Levine. Learning complex dexterous manipulation with deep reinforcement learning and demonstra-
  tions. arXiv preprint arXiv:1709.10087, 2017.
Matthew Riemer, Miao Liu, and Gerald Tesauro. Learning abstract options. Advances in neural information
 processing systems, 31, 2018.
Stéphane Ross, Geoffrey Gordon, and Drew Bagnell. A reduction of imitation learning and structured prediction
   to no-regret online learning. In Proceedings of the fourteenth international conference on artificial intelligence
   and statistics, pages 627–635. JMLR Workshop and Conference Proceedings, 2011.
Andrei A Rusu, Sergio Gomez Colmenarejo, Caglar Gulcehre, Guillaume Desjardins, James Kirkpatrick, Razvan
  Pascanu, Volodymyr Mnih, Koray Kavukcuoglu, and Raia Hadsell. Policy distillation. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:1511.06295, 2015.
John Schulman, Filip Wolski, Prafulla Dhariwal, Alec Radford, and Oleg Klimov. Proximal policy optimization
  algorithms. arXiv preprint arXiv:1707.06347, 2017.
Martin Stolle and Doina Precup. Learning options in reinforcement learning. In International Symposium on
 abstraction, reformulation, and approximation, pages 212–223. Springer, 2002.
Adam Stooke, Joshua Achiam, and Pieter Abbeel. Responsive safety in reinforcement learning by pid lagrangian
  methods. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pages 9133–9143. PMLR, 2020.
Shao-Hua Sun, Te-Lin Wu, and Joseph J Lim. Program guided agent. In International Conference on Learning
  Representations, 2019.
Richard S Sutton and Andrew G Barto. Reinforcement learning: An introduction. MIT press, 2018.
Richard S Sutton, Doina Precup, and Satinder Singh. Between mdps and semi-mdps: A framework for temporal
  abstraction in reinforcement learning. Artificial intelligence, 112(1-2):181–211, 1999.
Yunzhe Tao, Sahika Genc, Jonathan Chung, Tao Sun, and Sunil Mallya. Repaint: Knowledge transfer in deep
  reinforcement learning. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pages 10141–10152. PMLR,
  2021.
Chen Tessler, Shahar Givony, Tom Zahavy, Daniel Mankowitz, and Shie Mannor. A deep hierarchical approach
  to lifelong learning in minecraft. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, volume 31,
  2017.
Brijen Thananjeyan, Ashwin Balakrishna, Suraj Nair, Michael Luo, Krishnan Srinivasan, Minho Hwang,
  Joseph E Gonzalez, Julian Ibarz, Chelsea Finn, and Ken Goldberg. Recovery rl: Safe reinforcement learning
  with learned recovery zones. IEEE Robotics and Automation Letters, 6(3):4915–4922, 2021.


                                                        13
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Dweep Trivedi, Jesse Zhang, Shao-Hua Sun, and Joseph J Lim. Learning to synthesize programs as interpretable
  and generalizable policies. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 34:25146–25163, 2021.

Wei-Cheng Tseng, Jin-Siang Lin, Yao-Min Feng, and Min Sun. Toward robust long range policy transfer. In
 Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, volume 35, pages 9958–9966, 2021.

Ashish Vaswani, Noam Shazeer, Niki Parmar, Jakob Uszkoreit, Llion Jones, Aidan N Gomez, Lukasz Kaiser,
  and Illia Polosukhin. Attention is all you need. In NIPS, 2017.

Mel Vecerik, Todd Hester, Jonathan Scholz, Fumin Wang, Olivier Pietquin, Bilal Piot, Nicolas Heess, Thomas
 Rothörl, Thomas Lampe, and Martin Riedmiller. Leveraging demonstrations for deep reinforcement learning
 on robotics problems with sparse rewards. arXiv preprint arXiv:1707.08817, 2017.

Alexander Sasha Vezhnevets, Simon Osindero, Tom Schaul, Nicolas Heess, Max Jaderberg, David Silver, and
  Koray Kavukcuoglu. Feudal networks for hierarchical reinforcement learning. In International Conference
  on Machine Learning, pages 3540–3549. PMLR, 2017.

Zhiyuan Xu, Kun Wu, Zhengping Che, Jian Tang, and Jieping Ye. Knowledge transfer in multi-task deep
  reinforcement learning for continuous control. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 33:
  15146–15155, 2020.

Yichen Yang, Jeevana Priya Inala, Osbert Bastani, Yewen Pu, Armando Solar-Lezama, and Martin Rinard.
  Program synthesis guided reinforcement learning for partially observed environments. Advances in Neural
  Information Processing Systems, 34, 2021.

Haiyan Yin and Sinno Jialin Pan. Knowledge transfer for deep reinforcement learning with hierarchical
  experience replay. In Thirty-First AAAI conference on artificial intelligence, 2017.

Peng Zhang, Jianye Hao, Weixun Wang, Hongyao Tang, Yi Ma, Yihai Duan, and Yan Zheng. Kogun: accelerating
  deep reinforcement learning via integrating human suboptimal knowledge. arXiv preprint arXiv:2002.07418,
  2020.

Ruohan Zhang, Faraz Torabi, Lin Guan, Dana H Ballard, and Peter Stone. Leveraging human guidance for deep
  reinforcement learning tasks. arXiv preprint arXiv:1909.09906, 2019.

Shangtong Zhang and Shimon Whiteson. Dac: The double actor-critic architecture for learning options. Advances
  in Neural Information Processing Systems, 32, 2019.

Yichuan Zhang, Junkai Ren, Junxiang Li, Qiang Fang, and Xin Xu. Deep q-learning with explainable and
  transferable domain rules. In International Conference on Intelligent Computing, pages 259–273. Springer,
  2021.

Zelin Zhao, Karan Samel, Binghong Chen, et al. Proto: Program-guided transformer for program-guided tasks.
  Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 34, 2021.


                                                     14
     Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


     A     E XPERIMENTAL D ETAILS

     A.1     M INI G RID E NVIRONMENTS

     A.1.1     E NVIRONMENTAL D ETAILS
     The environmental details can be found at https://github.com/maximecb/gym-minigrid.

     A.1.2     P REDEFINED K NOWLEDGE
     KG1, KG2, and KG3 for MiniGrid environments are hand-crafted rules that output a probability vector given a
     state. We provide our code of defining the rules here.
 1   agent_pos = (obs.image.shape[1]//2, obs.image.shape[2]-1)
 2   expert_actions = torch.zeros((obs.image.shape[0], len(expert_rules), len(actions)), device=’cuda:0’)
 3   img = obs.image[:,:,:,0]
 4
 5   def convert_pos_to_dir_actions(rule_id, start, goals, ids_to_remove=None):
 6       img_id_meet_condition = goals[:,0][(start[0] < goals[:,1]).int().nonzero()]
 7       expert_actions[img_id_meet_condition,rule_id,actions["Right"]] = 1
 8       img_id_meet_condition = goals[:,0][(start[0] > goals[:,1]).int().nonzero()]
 9       expert_actions[img_id_meet_condition,rule_id,actions["Left"]] = 1
10       img_id_meet_condition = goals[:,0][(start[1] > goals[:,2]).int().nonzero()]
11       expert_actions[img_id_meet_condition,rule_id,actions["Forward"]] = 1
12       if ids_to_remove is not None:
13           expert_actions[ids_to_remove,rule_id,actions["Right"]] = 0
14           expert_actions[ids_to_remove,rule_id,actions["Left"]] = 0
15           expert_actions[ids_to_remove,rule_id,actions["Forward"]] = 0
16
17   # KG1: pick up a key, id=5
18   if "get the key" in expert_rules:
19       rule_id = expert_rules.index("get the key")
20       key_pos = (img == 5).nonzero()
21       img_id_meet_condition = key_pos[:,0][((key_pos[:,1] == \
22               agent_pos[0]).int() * (key_pos[:,2] == agent_pos[1]-1).int()).nonzero()]
23       expert_actions[img_id_meet_condition,rule_id,actions["Pickup"]] = 1
24       convert_pos_to_dir_actions(rule_id, agent_pos, key_pos, ids_to_remove=img_id_meet_condition)
25
26   # KG2: open a door, id=4
27   if "open the door" in expert_rules:
28       rule_id = expert_rules.index("open the door")
29       door_pos = (img == 4).nonzero()
30       img_id_meet_condition = door_pos[:,0][((door_pos[:,1] == \
31               agent_pos[0]).int() * (door_pos[:,2] == agent_pos[1]-1).int()).nonzero()]
32       expert_actions[img_id_meet_condition,rule_id,actions["Toggle"]] = 1
33       convert_pos_to_dir_actions(rule_id, agent_pos, door_pos, ids_to_remove=img_id_meet_condition)
34
35   # KG3: reach a goal, id=8
36   if "go to the goal" in expert_rules:
37       rule_id = expert_rules.index("go to the goal")
38       goal_pos = (img == 8).nonzero()
39       convert_pos_to_dir_actions(rule_id, agent_pos, goal_pos)


     A.1.3     M ODEL A RCHITECTURE
     We use the same model architecture for all the six environments. Each external knowledge embedding is
     generated by the PyTorch Paszke et al. (2019) module, nn.Embedding, with dk = 8. The inner actor network,
     ϕin , is a 3-layer convolutional neural network followed by a 1-layer multi-layer perceptron (MLP). Its detailed
     architecture can be found in https://github.com/lcswillems/rl-starter-files. The inner
     key and query networks, ϕk and ϕu , share the same MLP layer with ϕin , and each of them is followed by Tanh
     activation and an output layer with the dimension being dk .

     A.1.4     BASELINE A LGORITHMS
     BC. Since KG1, KG2, and KG3 are not in conflict with one another, we can combine these three knowledge
     mappings (KG1+KG2+KG3). The results of BC is obtained by applying KG1+KG2+KG3 in all environments.

     PPO-BC. The external knowledge policy KG1+KG2+KG3 can generate demonstrations to guide an agent.
     With this policy, we add the following BC loss to the objective of PPO:

                                           LBC = cBC DKL (π(s)||πKG (s)),                                           (5)

     where cBC ∈ R is the coefficient of this loss, DKL (·||·) calculates the KL divergence, π(·) is the policy learned
     by an agent, and πKG (·) is the external knowledge policy. We set cBC = 10−3 for all environments.


                                                            15
   Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


   A.1.5     H YPERPARAMETERS
   Each training trial in Section 5.1 is run with 5 different random seeds, and we report the average performance
   of the 5 trained agents for analyses. For the underlying PPO algorithm, we follow the implementation of
   https://github.com/lcswillems/rl-starter-files with unchanged hyperparameters.

   A.2     O PENAI ROBOTIC E NVIRONMENTS

   A.2.1     E NVIRONMENTAL D ETAILS
  A state st in unmodified Reach, where st ∈ R10 , contains the position and velocity of the end-effector, the
  distance between the two grippers, and their velocity. A state st in Pick-And-Place, where st ∈ R25 , contains
  the same information as that in Reach, the position, rotation, and velocity of the object, and the relative position
  between the object and the end-effector. In modified Reach, which is used in the analysis of knowledge
  reusability, a state st , where st ∈ R25 , contains the same information as that in Pick-And-Place, but the object’s
  information, except its relative position, is set to 0.
  An action at in all environments, where at ∈ R4 , contains the position variation of the end-effector and the
  distance between the two grippers.

   A.2.2     P REDEFINED K NOWLEDGE
   KG1 and KG2 for OpenAI robotic environments are hand-crafted rules that output a mean and standard deviation
   of an action given a state. We set ε to be 0.03 for Pick-And-Place and the log standard deviation to be -1 for both
   environments. We provide our code of defining the rules here. Note that we will apply the softmax function to
   an output to make it a probability vector.
 1 if env_type == ’reach’:
 2     kg_num = 1
 3
 4     kg_mean_actions = th.zeros([batch_size, kg_num, action_dim])
 5     #Reach, KG1, move straightly to the goal
 6     kg_mean_actions[:,0,:3] = desired_goal - current_grip_pos
 7
 8 elif env_type == ’pick_and_place’:
 9     kg_num = 2
10
11     kg_mean_actions = th.zeros([batch_size, kg_num, action_dim])
12
13     rel_pos, g_state = obs[’observation’][:,6:9], obs[’observation’][:,9].unsqueeze(1)
14     rel_pos_norm = th.linalg.norm(rel_pos, dim=-1, keepdim=True) #batch size x 1
15
16     #Pick-And-Place, KG2, move straightly to the object
17     kg_mean_actions[:,0,:3] = rel_pos * (rel_pos_norm >= 0.03).int()
18     kg_mean_actions[:,0,-1] = (1. * (rel_pos_norm >= 0.03).int() + g_state * (rel_pos_norm < 0.03).int())[:,0]
19
20     #Pick-And-Place, KG1, move straightly to the goal
21     kg_mean_actions[:,1,:3] = (desired_goal - current_grip_pos) * (rel_pos_norm < 0.03).int()
22     kg_mean_actions[:,1,-1] = (-1. * (rel_pos_norm < 0.03).int() + g_state * (rel_pos_norm >= 0.03).int())
         [:,0]
23
24 kg_log_std = th.ones([batch_size, kg_num, action_dim]) * -1



   A.2.3     BASELINE A LGORITHMS
  BC. Since KG1 and KG2 are not in conflict with each another, we can combine these two knowledge mappings
  (KG1+KG2). The results of BC is obtained by applying KG1+KG2 in both environments.

   SAC-BC. The external knowledge policy KG1+KG2 can generate demonstrations to guide an agent. We use
  this policy to collect demonstration data with 2 × 105 steps for Reach and 106 steps for Pick-And-Place. Then
  we follow the method proposed in Nair et al. (2018) to train an agent. The demonstration batch size is set to be
  128 for both environments. The coefficient of the BC loss is set to be 10−3 for both environments. Note that
  we only apply this loss to the mean of the policy’s output, and the standard deviation is not learned with any
  supervised signal.

   A.2.4     M ODEL A RCHITECTURE
   Each external knowledge embedding is generated by the PyTorch module, nn.Embedding, with dk = 4 for
   both Reach and Pick-And-Place. The inner actor network, ϕin , is an MLP for both tasks. ϕin in Reach is with
   two hidden layers and a hidden size of 64 units, and that in Pick-And-Place is with three hidden layers and a
   hidden size of 512 units. The critic network, ϕc , is with the same architecture as that of ϕin . The inner key
   network, ϕk , is an MLP for both tasks. Different from the inner key network in MiniGrid environments, ϕk in


                                                          16
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


OpenAI robotic environments does not share layers with ϕin . ϕk in Reach is with one hidden layer and a hidden
size of 32 units, and that in Pick-And-Place is with two hidden layers and a hidden size of 64 units. The query
network, ϕu , is with the same architecture as that of ϕk . All hidden layers in ϕin , ϕc , ϕk , and ϕu are followed
by ReLU activation.

A.2.5     H YPERPARAMETERS
Each training trial in Section 5.2 is run with 5 different random seeds, and each testing trial is run with 100
different random initializations. For the underlying SAC algorithm in Section 5.2, we follow the implementation
of Stable-Baselines3 (SB3) Raffin et al. (2021). The training timesteps for Reach and Pick-And-Place are 20K
and 1M respectively. The learning rates are 10−3 and 5 × 10−4 respectively. The batch sizes are 256 and 2048
respectively. The sizes of the replay buffer are both 1M. The discount factors γ are both 0.95. The temperature
of entropy is adjusted automatically in both environments as described in Haarnoja et al. (2018).


                                                        17
