Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


G ENE FACE : G ENERALIZED AND H IGH -F IDELITY
AUDIO -D RIVEN 3D TALKING FACE S YNTHESIS
 Zhenhui Ye1∗, Ziyue Jiang1∗, Yi Ren2 , Jinglin Liu1 , JinZheng He1 , Zhou Zhao1†
 1
  School of Computer Science and Technology, Zhejiang University
 {zhenhuiye,jiangziyue,jinglinliu,jinzhenghe,zhaozhou}@zju.edu.cn
 2
  ByteDance
 ren.yi@bytedance.com



                                             A BSTRACT

           Generating photo-realistic video portraits with arbitrary speech audio is a crucial
           problem in film-making and virtual reality. Recently, several works explore the
           usage of neural radiance field (NeRF) in this task to improve 3D realness and im-
           age fidelity. However, the generalizability of previous NeRF-based methods to
           out-of-domain audio is limited by the small scale of training data. In this work,
           we propose GeneFace, a generalized and high-fidelity NeRF-based talking face
           generation method, which can generate natural results corresponding to various
           out-of-domain audio. Specifically, we learn a variational motion generator on a
           large lip-reading corpus, and introduce a domain adaptative post-net to calibrate
           the result. Moreover, we learn a NeRF-based renderer conditioned on the pre-
           dicted facial motion. A head-aware torso-NeRF is proposed to eliminate the head-
           torso separation problem. Extensive experiments show that our method achieves
           more generalized and high-fidelity talking face generation compared to previous
           methods1 .


1        I NTRODUCTION
Audio-driven face video synthesis is an important and challenging problem with several applications
such as digital humans, virtual reality (VR), and online meetings. Over the past few years, the com-
munity has exploited Generative Adversarial Networks (GAN) as the neural renderer and promoted
the frontier from only predicting the lip movement (Prajwal et al., 2020; Chen et al., 2019) to gener-
ating the whole face (Zhou et al., 2021; Lu et al., 2021). However, GAN-based renderers suffer from
several limitations such as unstable training, mode collapse, difficulty in modelling delicate details
(Suwajanakorn et al., 2017; Thies et al., 2020), and fixed static head pose (Pham et al., 2017; Taylor
et al., 2017; Cudeiro et al., 2019). Recently, Neural Radiance Field (NeRF) (Mildenhall et al., 2020)
has been explored in talking face generation. Compared with GAN-based rendering techniques,
NeRF renderers could preserve more details and provide better 3D naturalness since it models a
continuous 3D scene in the hidden space.
Recent NeRF-based works (Guo et al., 2021; Liu et al., 2022; Yao et al., 2022) manage to learn
an end-to-end audio-driven talking face system with only a few-minutes-long video. However, the
current end-to-end framework is faced with two challenges. 1) The first challenge is the weak gen-
eralizability due to the small scale of training data, which only consists of about thousands-many
audio-image pairs. This deficiency of training data makes the trained model not robust to out-of-
domain (OOD) audio in many applications (such as cross-lingual (Guo et al., 2021; Liu et al., 2022)
or singing voice). 2) The second challenge is the so-called “mean face” problem. Note that the au-
dio to its corresponding facial motion is a one-to-many mapping, which means the same audio input
may have several correct motion patterns. Learning such a mapping with a regression-based model
     ∗
       Authors contribute equally to this work.
     †
       Corresponding author
     1
       Video samples and source code are available at https://geneface.github.io


                                                   1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


leads to over-smoothing and blurry results (Ren et al., 2021); specifically, for some complicated
audio with several potential outputs, it tends to generate an image with a half-opened and blurry
mouth, which leads to unsatisfying image quality and bad lip-synchronization. To summarize, the
current NeRF-based methods are challenged with the weak generalizability problem due to the lack
of audio-to-motion training data and the “mean face” results due to the one-to-many mapping.
In this work, we develop a talking face generation system called GeneFace to address these two
challenges. To handle the weak generalizability problem, we devise an audio-to-motion model to
predict the 3D facial landmark given the input audio. We utilize hundreds of hours of audio-motion
pairs from a large-scale lip reading dataset (Afouras et al., 2018) to learn a robust mapping. As
for the “mean face” problem, instead of using the regression-based model, we adopt a variational
auto-encoder (VAE) with a flow-based prior as the architecture of the audio-to-motion model, which
helps generate accurate and expressive facial motions. However, due to the domain shift between
the generated landmarks (in the multi-speaker domain) and the training set of NeRF (in the target
person domain), we found that the NeRF-based renderer fails to generate high-fidelity frames given
the predicted landmarks. Therefore, a domain adaptation process is proposed to rig the predicted
landmarks into the target person’s distribution. To summarize, our system consists of three stages:

1 Audio-to-motion. We present a variational motion generator to generate accurate and expressive
  facial landmark given the input audio.
2 Motion domain adaptation. To overcome the domain shift, we propose a semi-supervised ad-
  versarial training pipeline to train a domain adaptative post-net, which refines the predicted 3D
  landmark from the multi-speaker domain into the target person domain.
3 Motion-to-image. We design a NeRF-based renderer to render high-fidelity frames conditioned
  on the predicted 3D landmark.

The main contributions of this paper are summarized as follows:
• We present a three-stage framework that enables the NeRF-based talking face system to enjoy
  the large-scale lip-reading corpus and achieve high generalizability to various OOD audio. We
  propose an adversarial domain adaptation pipeline to bridge the domain gap between the large
  corpus and the target person video.
• We are the first work that analyzes the “mean face” problem induced by the one-to-many audio-
  to-motion mapping in the talking face generation task. To handle this problem, we design a varia-
  tional motion generator to generate accurate facial landmarks with rich details and expressiveness.
• Experiments show that our GeneFace outperforms other state-of-the-art GAN-based and NeRF-
  based baselines from the perspective of objective and subjective metrics.

2    R ELATED W ORK
Our approach is a 3D talking face system that utilizes a generative model to predict the 3DMM-
based motion representation given the driving audio and employs a neural radiance field to render
the corresponding images of a human head. It is related to recent approaches to audio-driven talking
head generation and scene representation networks for the human portrait.

Audio-driven Talking Head Generation With the progress of audio synthesis technology (Ye
et al., 2022; Huang et al., 2022a;b;c) and generative models(Zhang et al., 2022; 2023), generating
talking faces in line with input audio has attracted much attention of the computer vision community.
Earlier works focus on synthesizing the lip motions on a static facial image (Jamaludin et al., 2019;
Tony Ezzat & Poggio, 2002; Vougioukas et al., 2020). Then the frontier is promoted to synthesize the
full head (Yu et al., 2020; Zhou et al., 2019; 2020). However, free pose control is not feasible in these
methods due to the lack of 3D modeling. With the development of 3D face reconstruction techniques
(Deng et al., 2019), many works explore extracting 3D Morphable Model (3DMM) (Paysan et al.,
2009) from the monocular video to represent the facial movement (Tero Karras & Lehtinen, 2017;
Yi et al., 2020) in the talking face system, which is named as model-based methods. With 3DMM,
a coarse 3D face mesh M can be represented as an affine model of facial expression and identity
code:
                                        M = M + Bid i + Bexp e,                                       (1)


                                                   2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


               HuBERT
    Driving    Features
    Audio


                                                          Conv 1D
              Flow-based Enhanced WaveNet-


                                                                         ReLU
𝑧~𝑁 0,1                                                                              +


                                                                    BN
                          Latent
                 Prior           like Decoder Generated                                   Refined               Rendered
                                              Landmark                                   Landmark                 Head
                                                                                xN                  Head-NeRF              Torso-NeRF
                                                                                                                                        Rendered
                                                                                                                                         Frame
              Variational Motion Generator         Domain Adaptative Post-net                           3DMM NeRF Renderer


               Figure 1: The inference process of GeneFace. BN denotes batch normalization.


where M is the average face shape; Bid and Bexp are the PCA bases of identity and expression; i
and e are known as identity and expression codes.
By modeling the 3D geometry with 3DMM, the model-based works manage to manipulate the head
pose and facial movement. However, 3DMM could only define a coarse 3D mesh of the human
head, and delicate details (such as hair, wrinkle, teeth, etc.) are ignored. It raises challenges for
GAN-based methods to obtain realistic results. Recent advances in neural rendering have created
a prospect: instead of refining the geometry of 3DMM or adding more personalized attributes as
auxiliary conditions for GAN-based renderers, we could leave these delicate details to be modeled
implicitly by the hidden space of the neural radiance field.


Neural Radiance Field for Rendering Face The recent proposed neural radiance field (NeRF)
(Mildenhall et al., 2020; Kellnhofer et al., 2021; Pumarola et al., 2021; Sitzmann et al., 2019) has
attracted much attention in the human portrait rendering field since it could render high-fidelity
images with rich details such as hair and wrinkles. For instance, Sitzmann et al. (2019) presents a
compositional NeRF for generating each part of the upper body. Gafni et al. (2021) and Pumarola
et al. (2021) propose pose-expression-conditioned dynamic NeRFs for modeling the dynamics of
a human face. Chan et al. (2022) proposes a hybrid explicit–implicit tri-plane representation to
achieve fast and geometry-aware human face rendering. Hong et al. (2022) proposes a real-time
NeRF-based parametric head model.
Several works have also applied NeRF in the audio-driven talking face generation task. Zhang et al.
(2021) devises an implicit pose code to modularize audio-visual representations. Guo et al. (2021)
first presents an end-to-end audio-driven NeRF to generate face images conditioned on Deepspeech
(Hannun et al., 2014) audio features. Recently, Liu et al. (2022) proposed a semantic-aware dynamic
ray sampling module to improve the sample efficiency and design a torso deformation module to
stabilize the large-scale non-rigid torso motions. Yao et al. (2022) introduces two disentangled
representations (eye and mouth) to provide improved conditions for NeRF. To achieve few-shot
training, Shen et al. (2022) conditions the face radiance field on 2D reference images to learn the
face prior, thus greatly reducing the required data scale (tens of seconds of video) and improve the
convergence speed (about 40k iterations). However, all of the previous NeRF-based work focuses
on better image quality or reducing the training cost, while the generalizability to out-of-domain
audio is relatively an oversight.
Our GeneFace could be regarded as bridging the advantages of the aforementioned two types of
works. Compared with previous 3DMM-based methods, our work could enjoy good 3D naturalness
and high image quality brought by the NeRF-based renderer. Compared with previous end-to-end
NeRF-based methods, we improve the generalizabity to out-of-domain audio via introducing a gen-
erative audio-to-motion model trained on a large lip reading corpus.


3        G ENE FACE

In this section, we introduce our proposed GeneFace. As shown in Fig. 1, GeneFace is composed of
three parts: 1) a variational motion generator that transforms HuBERT features (Hsu et al., 2021) into
3D facial landmarks; 2) a post-net to refine the generated motion into the target person domain; 3)
a NeRF-based renderer to synthesize high-fidelity frames. We describe the designs and the training
process of these three parts in detail in the following subsections.


                                                                         3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023

            Training of Audio2motion



                                                                HuBERT
                                                  Audio         Features
                                                                                                Pretrained
                      Large Video Corpus                                                         SyncNet
                                                               Flow-based
                                Deep 3D Recon                     Prior


                                                WaveNet-like                    WaveNet-like
                                                                  𝜇, 𝜎           Decoder
                                                 Encoder                                       Generated
                                                                                               Landmark
                          3DMM Landmark                        Variational Motion Generator



Figure 2: The structure of variational motion generator. Dashed arrows means the process is only
performed during training; and only the dashed rectangle part is used during inference.

3.1   VARIATIONAL M OTION G ENERATOR

To achieve expressive and diverse 3D head motion generation, we introduce a variational auto-
encoder (VAE) to perform a generative and expressive audio-to-motion transform, namely the vari-
ational motion generator, as shown in Fig. 2.

Audio and motion representation To better extract the semantic information, we utilize Hu-
BERT, a state-of-the-art ASR model, to obtain audio features from the input wave and use it as the
condition of the variational motion generator. As for the motion representation, to represent detailed
facial movement in Euclidean space, we select 68 key points from the reconstructed 3D head mesh
and use their position as the action representations. Specifically,
                                           LM3D = {(M − M )i |i ∈ I},                                            (2)
                   68×3
where LM3D ∈ R          , M and M are the 3DMM mesh and mean mesh defined in Equation (1), I
is the index of the key landmark in the mesh. In this paper, we name this action representation 3D
landmarks for abbreviation.

Dilated convolutional encoder and decoder Inspired by WaveNet, to better extract features from
the audio sequence and construct long-term temporal relationships in the output sample, we design
the encoder and decoder as fully convolutional networks where the convolutional layers have incre-
mentally increased dilation factors that allow its receptive field to grow exponentially with depth.
In contrast to previous works, which typically divide the input audio sequence into sliding windows
to obtain a smooth result, we manage to synthesize the whole sequence of arbitrary length within
a single forward. To further improve the temporal stability of the predicted landmark sequence, a
Gaussian filter is performed to eliminate tiny fluctuations in the result.

Flow-based Prior We also notice that the gaussian prior of vanilla VAE limits the performance of
our 3D landmark sequence generation process from two prospectives: 1) the datapoint of each time
index is independent of each other, which induces noise to the sequence generation task where there
is a solid temporal correlation among frames. 2) optimizing VAE prior push the posterior distribution
towards the mean, limiting diversity and hurting the generative power. To this end, following Ren
et al. (2021), we utilize a normalizing flow to provide a complex and time-related distribution as the
prior distribution of the VAE. Please refer to Appendix A.1 for more details.

Training Process Due to the introduction of prior flow, the closed-form ELBO is not feasible,
hence we use the Monte-Carlo ELBO loss (Ren et al., 2021) to train the VAE model. Besides,
inspired by Prajwal et al. (2020), we independently train a sync-expert Dsync that measures the
possibility that the input audio and 3D landmarks are in-sync, whose training process can be found in
Appendix A.2 . The trained sync-expert is then utilized to guide the training of VAE. To summarize,
the training loss of our variational motion generator (VG) is as follows:
 LVG (ϕ, θ, ϵ) = −Eq (z|l,a) [log pθ (l|z, a)]+KL(qϕ (z|l, a)|pϵ (z|a))−E
                      ϕ
                                                                                   [log Dsync (ˆl)] (3)
                                                                                                 l̂∼pθ (l|z,c)

where ϕ, θ, ϵ denote the model parameters of the encoder, decoder and the prior, respectively. c
denotes the condition features of VAE. The ground truth and predicted 3D landmarks are represented
by l and ˆl, respectively.


                                                                 4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023
             Training of PostNet



                                                                                                                     Pretrained
                                          HuBERT                                                                      SyncNet
                                          Features                                                        as neg.
                                                                                              +           sample
                    Large Video Corpus   Variational                        Domain Adaptive                          MLP-based
                                                       Generated Landmark                     Refined Landmark
                                          Motion                               Post-net                                Disc.
                                                                                                           as neg.
                                         Generator                                            +            sample



                                          HuBERT
                                                                                                  MSE
                                          Features                                                      as positive sample


                  Target Person Video                           GT target person
                                                                3DMM Landmark



                   Figure 3: The training process of Domain Adaptative Post-net.

3.2   D OMAIN A DAPTIVE P OST-N ET

As we train the variational motion generator on a large multi-speaker dataset, the model can general-
ize well with various audio inputs. However, as the scale of the target person video is relatively tiny
(about 4-5 minutes) compared with the multi-speaker lip reading dataset (about hundreds of hours),
there exists a domain shift between the predicted 3D landmarks and the target person domain. As a
consequence, the NeRF-based renderer cannot generalize well with the predicted landmark, which
results in blurry or unrealistic rendered images. To this end, A naive solution is to fine-tune the
variational generator in the target person dataset. The challenge is that we generally only have a
short personalized video, and the generalizability of the model may be lost after the fine-tuning.
Under such circumstances, we design a semi-supervised adversarial training pipeline to perform a
domain adaptation. To be specific, we learn a post-net to refine the VAE-predicted 3D landmarks into
the personalized domain. We consider two requirements for this mapping: 1) it should preserve the
temporal consistency and lip-synchronization of the input sequence; 2) it should correctly map each
frame into the target person’s domain. To fulfill the first point, we utilize 1D CNN as the structure
of post-net and adopt the sync-expert to supervise the lip-synchronization; for the second point, we
jointly train an MLP-structured frame-level discriminator that measures the identity similarity of
each landmark frame to the target person. The detailed structure of the post-net and discriminator
can be found in Appendix A.3.

Training Process The training process of post-net is shown in Fig.3. During training, the MLP
discriminator tries to distinguish between the ground truth landmark l′ extracted from the target
person’s video and the refined samples Gω (ˆl) generated from the large-scale dataset. We use the
LSGAN loss to update the discriminator :

               LD (δ) = El̂∼pθ (l|z,c) [(Dδ (P Nω (ˆl)) − 0)2 ] + El′ ∼p′ (l) [(Dδ (l′ ) − 1)2 ]                                  (4)
                                                                                                                             ′
where ω and δ are the parameters of the post-net P N and discriminator D. l is the ground truth
3DMM landmark of the target person dataset, and ˆl is the 3D landmarks refined by the post-net.
As for the training of post-net, the post-net competes with the discriminator while being guided by
the pre-trained sync-expert to maintain lip synchronization. Besides, we utilize the target person
dataset to provide a weak supervised signal to help the adversarial training. Specifically, we extract
the audio c′ of the target person video for VAE to predict the landmarks ˆl′ ∼ pθ (l|z, c′ ) and en-
courage the refined landmarks P Nω (ˆl′ ) to approximate the ground truth expression l′ . Finally, the
training loss of post-net is:

               LPN (ω) = Eê∼pθ (l|z,c) [(Dδ (P Nω (ˆl)) − 1)2 ] + El̂∼pθ (l|z,c) [Dsync (ˆl)]
                                                                                                                                  (5)
                                                                            +El̂′ ∼pθ(l|z,c′ ) [((P Nω (ˆl′ ) − l′ )2 ]

3.3   N E RF- BASED R ENDERER

We obtain a robust and diverse audio-to-motion mapping through the variational motion generator
and post-net. Next, we design a NeRF-based renderer to render high-fidelity frames conditioned on
the predicted 3D landmarks.


                                                                       5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023
                 Training of NeRF


                      Target Person Video

                                             Head
                                             Pose

                                                         Head              Head Color   Torso
                        Deep 3D Recon
                                                         NeRF   Rendered    Encoder     NeRF
                                                                  Head
                                                                                                Rendered
                                            Landmark                                             Frame
                                             Encoder


                      3DMM Landmark                       3DMM NeRF Renderer


                      Figure 4: The training process of NeRF-based renderer.

3D landmark-conditioned NeRF Inspired by Guo et al. (2021), we present a conditional NeRF
to represent the dynamic talking head. Apart from viewing direction d and 3D location x, the
3D landmarks l will act as the condition to manipulate the color and geometry of the implicitly
represented head. Specifically, the implicit function F can be formulated as follows:
                                                    Fθ : (x, d, l) → (c, σ)                                (6)
where c and σ denote the color and density in the radiance field. To improve the continuity between
adjacent frames, we use the 3D landmarks from the three neighboring frames to represent the facial
shape, i.e., l ∈ R3×204 . We notice that some facial landmarks only change in a small range, which
numerically raises challenges for NeRF to learn the high-frequency image details. Therefore, we
normalize the input 3D landmarks point-wisely, which is necessary to achieve better visual quality.
Following the setting of volume rendering, to render each pixel, we emit a camera ray r(t) = o+t·d
in the radiance field, with camera center o, viewing direction d. The final color C is calculated by
aggregating the color c along the ray:
                                      Z tf
                         C(r, l; θ) =      σθ (r(t), l) · cθ (r(t), l, d) · T (t)dt              (7)
                                                 tn
where tn and tr is the near bound and far bound of ray r; cθ and σθ are the output of the implicit
function Fθ , T (t) is the accumulated transmittance along the ray from tn to t, which is defined as:
                                                  Z t
                                   T (t) = exp(−      σθ (r(τ ))dτ )                               (8)
                                                                    tn

Head-aware Torso-NeRF To better model the head and torso movement, we train two NeRFs to
render the head and torso parts, respectively. As shown in Fig. 4, we first train a head-NeRF to
render the head part, then train a torso-NeRF to render the torso part with the rendering image of the
head-NeRF as background. Following Guo et al. (2021), we assume the torso part is in canonical
space and provide the head pose h to torso-NeRF as a signal to infer the torso movement. The
torso-NeRF implicitly learns to expect the location of the rendered head, then rigid the torso from
canonical space to render a natural result.
However, this cooperation between head-NeRF and torso-NeRF is fragile since the torso-NeRF
cannot observe the head-NeRF’s actual output. Consequently, several recent works report that the
torso-NeRF produces head-torso separation artifacts (Liu et al., 2022; Yao et al., 2022) when the
head pose is relatively large. Based on the analysis above, we propose to provide the torso-NeRF
with a perception of the rendering result of the head-NeRF. Specifically, we use the output color
Chead of the head-NeRF as a pixel-wise condition of the torso-NeRF. The torso’s implicit function
Ftorso is expressed as:
                                Ftorso : (x, Chead ; d0 , Π, l) → (c, σ)                           (9)
                                                               3×4
where d0 is view direction in the canonical space, Π ∈ R           is the head pose that composed of a
rotation matrix and a transform vector.

Training Process We extract 3D landmarks from the video frames and use these landmark-image
pairs to train our NeRF-based renderer. The optimization target of head-NeRF and torso-NeRF is
to reduce the photo-metric reconstruction error between rendered and ground-truth images. Specifi-
cally, the loss function can be formulated as:
                                               X
                                 LN eRF (θ) =      ||Cθ (r, l) − Cg ||22                     (10)
                                                           r∈R


                                                                6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


where R is the set of camera rays, Cg is the color of the ground image.

4     E XPERIMENTS
4.1   DATASET PREPARATION AND PREPROCESSING

Dataset preparation. Our method aims to synthesize high-fidelity talking face images with great
generalizability to out-domain audio. To learn robust audio-to-motion mapping, a large-scale lip-
reading corpus is needed. Hence we use LRS3-TED (Afouras et al., 2018) to train our variational
generator and post-net 2 . Additionally, a certain person’s speaking video of a few minutes in length
with an audio track is needed to learn a NeRF-based person portrait renderer. To be specific, in order
to compare with the state-of-the-art methods, we utilize the data set of Lu et al. (2021) and Guo et al.
(2021), which consist of 5 videos of an average length of 6,000 frames in 25 fps.

Data preprocessing. As for the audio track, we downsample the speech wave into the sampling
rate of 16000 and process it with a pretrained HuBERT model. For the video frames of LRS3 and
the target person videos, we resample them into 25 fps and use the toolkit proposed by Deng et al.
(2019) to extract the head pose and 3D landmarks. As for the target person videos, they are cropped
into 512x512 and each frame is processed with the help of an automatic parsing method (Lee et al.,
2020) for segmenting the head and torso part and extracting a clean background.

4.2   E XPERIMENTAL S ETTINGS

Comparison baselines. We compare our GeneFace with several remarkable works: 1) Wav2Lip
(Prajwal et al., 2020), which pretrain a sync-expert to improve the lip-synchronization performance;
2) MakeItTalk (Zhou et al., 2020), which also utilize 3D landmark as the action representation; 3)
PC-AVS (Zhou et al., 2021), which first modularize the audio-visual representation. 4) LiveSpeech-
Portriat (Lu et al., 2021), which achieves photorealistic results at over 30fps; 5) AD-NeRF (Guo
et al., 2021), which first utilize NeRF to achieve talking head generation. For Wav2Lip, PC-AVS,
and MakeItTalk, the LRS3-TED dataset is used to train the model, and a reference clip of the target
person video is used during the inference stage; for LSP, both of LRS3-TED dataset and the target
person video is used to train the model; for the NeRF-based method, AD-NeRF, only the target
person video is used to train an end-to-end audio-to-image renderer.

Implementation Details. We train the GeneFace on 1 NVIDIA RTX 3090 GPU, and the detailed
training hyper-parameters of the variational generator, post-net, and NeRF-based are listed in Ap-
pendix B. For variational generator and post-net, it takes about 40k and 12k steps to converge (about
12 hours). For the NeRF-based renderer, we train each model for 800k iterations (400k for head and
400k for the torso, respectively), which takes about 72 hours.

4.3   Q UANTITATIVE E VALUATION

Evaluation Metrics We employ the FID score (Heusel et al., 2017) to measure image quality. We
utilize the landmark distance (LMD) (Chen et al., 2018) and syncnet confidence score (Prajwal et al.,
2020) to evaluate lip synchronization. Furthermore, to evaluate the generalizability, we additionally
test all methods with a set of out-of-domain (OOD) audio, which consists of cross-lingual, cross-
gender, and singing voice audios.

Evaluation Results The results are shown in Table 1. We have the following observations. (1) Our
GeneFace achieves good lip-synchronization with high generalizability. Since Wav2Lip is jointly
trained with SyncNet, it achieves the highest sync score that is higher than the ground truth video.
Our method performs best in LMD and achieves a better sync score than other baselines. When
tested with out-of-domain audios, while the sync-score of person-specific methods (LSP and AD-
NeRF) significantly drops, GeneFace maintains good performance. (2) Our GeneFace achieves the
best visual quality. We observe that one-shot methods (Wav2Lip, MakeItTalk, and PC-AVS) perform
   2
     we select samples of good quality in the LRS3-TED dataset, the selected subset contains 19,775 short
videos from 3,231 speakers and is about 120 hours-long.


                                                   7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                  Method              FID ↓     LMD↓       Sync ↑    FID(OOD) ↓       Sync(OOD) ↑
                  Wav2Lip             71.40     3.988       9.212          68.05         9.645
                  MakeitTalk          57.96     4.848       4.981          53.33         4.933
                  PC-AVS              96.81     5.812       6.239          98.31         6.156
                  LSP                 29.30     4.589       6.119          35.21         4.320
                  AD-NeRF             27.52     4.199       4.894          35.69         4.225
                  Ground Truth        0.00      0.000       8.733           N/A           N/A
                  GeneFace (ours)     22.88     3.933       6.987          27.38         6.212

           Table 1: Quantitative evaluation with different methods. Best results are in bold.


  Audio
            /i/        /w/      /s/           /ɒ/       /ju:/       /ɔɪ/       /um/     /f/      /ʃ/   /um/


AD-NeRF



GeneFace


Figure 5: The comparison of generated key frame results. We show the phonetic symbol of the
key frame and the corresponding synthesized talking heads of AD-NeRF and GeneFace. We mark
the head-torso separation artifact, blurry mouth, un-sync results with brown, blue, and red arrow,
respectively. Please zoom in for better visualization. More qualitative comparisons can be found
in demo video.

poorly on FID due to low image fidelity. Since we use 3D landmarks as the condition of the NeRF
renderer, it address the mean face problem and leads to better lip syncronization and visual quality
than AD-NeRF.

4.4   Q UALITATIVE E VALUATION

To compare the generated results of each method, we show the keyframes of two clips in Fig.5. Due
to space limitations, we only compare our GeneFace with AD-NeRF here and provide full results
with all baselines in Appendix C.1. We observe that although both methods manage to generate
high-fidelity results, GeneFace solves several problems that AD-NeRF has: 1) head-torso separation
(brown arrow) due to the separate generation pipeline of head and torso part; 2) blurry mouth images
due to the one-to-many audio-to-lip mapping; 3) unsynchronized lip due to the weak generalizability.

User Study We conduct user studies to test the quality of audio-driven portraits. Specifically, we
sample 10 audio clips from English, Chinese, and German for all methods to generate the videos,
and then involve 20 attendees for user studies. We adopt the Mean Opinion score (MOS) rating
protocol for evaluation, which is scaled from 1 to 5. The attendees are required to rate the videos
based on three aspects: (1) lip-sync accuracy; (2) video realness; (3) image quality.
We compute the average score for each method, and the results are shown in Table 2. We have
the following observations: 1) Our GeneFace achieves comparatively high lip-sync accuracy with
Wav2Lip (Prajwal et al., 2020) since both of them learn a generalized audio-to-motion mapping on
a large dataset with guidance from a sync-expert. 2) As for the video realness and image quality, the
Person-specific methods (LSP, AD-NeRF, and GeneFace) outperform one-shot methods (Wav2Lip,
MakeItTalk, and PC-AVS). Although LSP has slightly better image quality than GeneFace, our
method achieves the highest video realness and lip-sync accuracy score.

4.5   A BLATION S TUDY

In this section, we perform ablation study to prove the necessity of each component in GeneFace.


                                                            8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Methods              Wav2Lip      MakeItTalk       PC-AVS       LSP        AD-NeRF      GeneFace (ours)
Lip-sync Accuracy    3.77±0.25    2.86±0.33       3.11±0.30   3.65±0.20   3.05±0.26        3.82±0.24
Image Quality        3.38±0.19    2.84±0.20       2.73±0.25   3.92±0.13   3.44±0.22        3.87±0.16
Video Realness       3.27±0.26    2.52±0.30       2.46±0.28   3.62±0.24   3.31±0.24        3.87±0.16

      Table 2: User study with different methods. The error bars are 95% confidence interval.

               Setting            FID↓    LMD↓       Sync↑    FID(OOD)↓    Sync(OOD)↑
               GeneFace          22.88     3.933     6.987      27.38          6.212
               w/o prior flow    24.71    4.063      6.404      29.55          5.831
               w/o sync-expert   24.02    4.151      5.972      30.77          5.549
               w/o post-net      30.26    4.532      5.085      35.58          5.248
               w. fine-tune      25.75    4.227      6.875      29.30          5.966
               w/o head-aware    26.34    3.948      6.899      28.89          6.167

          Table 3: Ablation study results. The ablation settings are described in Sec. 4.5.


Varaiational motion generator We test two settings on the variational motion generator: (1) w/o
prior flow, where we replace the flow-based prior with a gaussian prior. The results are shown in
Table 3 (line 2), where the Sync score drops by a relatively large margin. This observation suggests
that the temporal enhanced latent variable contributes to the stability of the predicted landmark se-
quence. (2) w/o sync-expert (line 3), where the variational motion generator is no longer supervised
by a pretrained sync-expert. We observe that it leads to a significant degradation in Sync score.

Domain adaptative post-net In the setting w/o post-net, we remove the domain adaptative post-
net, the results are shown in Table 3 (line 4). It can be seen that directly using the 3D landmarks
predicted by the variational motion generator leads to a significant performance drop in FID and
Sync scores. To further investigate the efficacy of post-net, we utilize T-SNE to visualize the land-
marks of different domains in Fig. 10. The visualization results prove that there exists a significant
domain gap between the LRS3 dataset and the target person video, and our post-net successfully
rigs the predicted landmarks from the LRS3 domain into the target person domain. We also try to
replace the post-net with directly fine-tuning on the target person video (line 5), although it achieves
a competitive sync score on in-domain audios, its performance in OOD audio is worse.

Head-aware torso-NeRF In the w/o head-ware setting, we remove head image condition of the
torso-NeRF. The results are shown in Table 3 (line 6). Due to the unawareness of the head’s location,
the head-torso separation occurs occasionally, which results in a drop in the FID score.

5   C ONCLUSION
In this paper, we propose GeneFace for talking face generation, which aims to solve the weak gen-
eralizability and mean face problem faced by previous NeRF-based methods. A variational motion
generator is proposed to construct a generic audio-to-motion mapping based on a large corpus. We
then introduce a domain adaptative post-net with an adversarial training pipeline to rig the predicted
motion representation into the target person domain. Moreover, a head-aware torso-NeRF is present
to address the head-torso separation issue. Extensive experiments show that our method achieves
more generalized and high-fidelity talking face generation compared to previous methods. Due to
space limitations, we discuss the limitations and future work in Appendix D.

ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This work was supported in part by the National Natural Science Foundation of China Grant No.
62222211, Zhejiang Electric Power Co.,Ltd.Science and Technology Project No.5211YF22006 and
Yiwise.


                                                    9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


E THICS S TATEMENT

GeneFace improves the lip synchronization and expressiveness of the synthesized talking head
video. With the development of talking face generation techniques, it is much easier for people
to synthesize fake videos of arbitrary persons. In most situations, they utilize these techniques to
facilitate the movie and entertainment industry and reduce the bandwidth of video streaming by
sending audio signals only. However, the talking face generation techniques can be misused. As it is
more difficult for people to distinguish synthesized videos, the algorithm may be utilized to spread
fake information or obtain illegal profits. Potential solutions like digital face forensics methods to
detect deepfakes must be considered. We also plan to include restrictions in the open-source license
of the GeneFace project to prevent ”deepfake”-related abuse. We hope the public is aware of the
potential risks of misusing new techniques.

R EFERENCES
Triantafyllos Afouras, Joon Son Chung, and Andrew Zisserman. Lrs3-ted: a large-scale dataset for
  visual speech recognition. arXiv preprint arXiv:1809.00496, 2018.
Eric R. Chan, Connor Z. Lin, Matthew A. Chan, Koki Nagano, Boxiao Pan, Shalini De Mello,
  Orazio Gallo, Leonidas J. Guibas, Jonathan Tremblay, Sameh Khamis, Tero Karras, and Gordon
  Wetzstein. Efficient geometry-aware 3d generative adversarial networks. In CVPR, pp. 16123–
  16133, June 2022.
Lele Chen, Zhiheng Li, Ross K Maddox, Zhiyao Duan, and Chenliang Xu. Lip movements genera-
  tion at a glance. In ECCV, pp. 520–535, 2018.
Lele Chen, Ross K Maddox, Zhiyao Duan, and Chenliang Xu. Hierarchical cross-modal talking
  face generation with dynamic pixel-wise loss. In CVPR, pp. 7832–7841, 2019.
Daniel Cudeiro, Timo Bolkart, Cassidy Laidlaw, Anurag Ranjan, and Michael J Black. Capture,
  learning, and synthesis of 3d speaking styles. In CVPR, pp. 10101–10111, 2019.
Yu Deng, Jiaolong Yang, Sicheng Xu, Dong Chen, Yunde Jia, and Xin Tong. Accurate 3d face
  reconstruction with weakly-supervised learning: From single image to image set. In CVPRW,
  2019.
Guy Gafni, Justus Thies, Michael Zollhofer, and Matthias Niessner. Dynamic neural radiance fields
  for monocular 4d facial avatar reconstruction. In CVPR, pp. 8649–8658, June 2021.
Yudong Guo, Keyu Chen, Sen Liang, Yong-Jin Liu, Hujun Bao, and Juyong Zhang. Ad-nerf: Audio
  driven neural radiance fields for talking head synthesis. In ICCV, pp. 5784–5794, 2021.
Awni Hannun, Carl Case, Jared Casper, Bryan Catanzaro, Greg Diamos, Erich Elsen, Ryan Prenger,
  Sanjeev Satheesh, Shubho Sengupta, Adam Coates, et al. Deep speech: Scaling up end-to-end
  speech recognition. arXiv preprint arXiv:1412.5567, 2014.
Martin Heusel, Hubert Ramsauer, Thomas Unterthiner, Bernhard Nessler, and Sepp Hochreiter.
 Gans trained by a two time-scale update rule converge to a local nash equilibrium. Advances in
 neural information processing systems, 30, 2017.
Yang Hong, Bo Peng, Haiyao Xiao, Ligang Liu, and Juyong Zhang. Headnerf: A real-time nerf-
  based parametric head model. In CVPR, pp. 20374–20384, June 2022.
Wei-Ning Hsu, Benjamin Bolte, Yao-Hung Hubert Tsai, Kushal Lakhotia, Ruslan Salakhutdinov,
 and Abdelrahman Mohamed. Hubert: Self-supervised speech representation learning by masked
 prediction of hidden units. IEEE/ACM Transactions on Audio, Speech, and Language Processing,
 29:3451–3460, 2021.
Rongjie Huang, Max WY Lam, Jun Wang, Dan Su, Dong Yu, Yi Ren, and Zhou Zhao. Fast-
  diff: A fast conditional diffusion model for high-quality speech synthesis. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2204.09934, 2022a.


                                                 10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Rongjie Huang, Yi Ren, Jinglin Liu, Chenye Cui, and Zhou Zhao. Generspeech: Towards style
  transfer for generalizable out-of-domain text-to-speech. In NIPS, 2022b.
Rongjie Huang, Zhou Zhao, Huadai Liu, Jinglin Liu, Chenye Cui, and Yi Ren. Prodiff: Progressive
  fast diffusion model for high-quality text-to-speech. In Proceedings of the 30th ACM International
  Conference on Multimedia, pp. 2595–2605, 2022c.
Amir Jamaludin, Joon Son Chung, and Andrew Zisserman. You said that?: Synthesising talking
 faces from audio. International Journal of Computer Vision, 127(11):1767–1779, 2019.
Petr Kellnhofer, Lars C Jebe, Andrew Jones, Ryan Spicer, Kari Pulli, and Gordon Wetzstein. Neu-
  ral lumigraph rendering. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and
  Pattern Recognition, pp. 4287–4297, 2021.
Cheng-Han Lee, Ziwei Liu, Lingyun Wu, and Ping Luo. Maskgan: Towards diverse and interactive
  facial image manipulation. In CVPR, pp. 5549–5558, 2020.
Xian Liu, Yinghao Xu, Qianyi Wu, Hang Zhou, Wayne Wu, and Bolei Zhou. Semantic-aware
  implicit neural audio-driven video portrait generation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2201.07786, 2022.
Yuanxun Lu, Jinxiang Chai, and Xun Cao. Live speech portraits: real-time photorealistic talking-
  head animation. ACM Transactions on Graphics, 40(6):1–17, 2021.
Ben Mildenhall, Pratul P Srinivasan, Matthew Tancik, Jonathan T Barron, Ravi Ramamoorthi, and
  Ren Ng. Nerf: Representing scenes as neural radiance fields for view synthesis. In ECCV, pp.
  405–421. Springer, 2020.
Pascal Paysan, Reinhard Knothe, Brian Amberg, Sami Romdhani, and Thomas Vetter. A 3d face
  model for pose and illumination invariant face recognition. In 2009 sixth IEEE international
  conference on advanced video and signal based surveillance, pp. 296–301. Ieee, 2009.
Hai X Pham, Samuel Cheung, and Vladimir Pavlovic. Speech-driven 3d facial animation with
  implicit emotional awareness: a deep learning approach. In CVPRW, pp. 80–88, 2017.
KR Prajwal, Rudrabha Mukhopadhyay, Vinay P Namboodiri, and CV Jawahar. A lip sync expert is
 all you need for speech to lip generation in the wild. In ACM MM, pp. 484–492, 2020.
Albert Pumarola, Enric Corona, Gerard Pons-Moll, and Francesc Moreno-Noguer. D-nerf: Neural
  radiance fields for dynamic scenes. In CVPR, pp. 10318–10327, 2021.
Yi Ren, Jinglin Liu, and Zhou Zhao. Portaspeech: Portable and high-quality generative text-to-
  speech. volume 34, pp. 13963–13974, 2021.
Shuai Shen, Wanhua Li, and Zheng Zhu. Learning dynamic facial radiance fields for few-shot
  talking head synthesis. In ECCV, pp. 666–682, October 2022.
Vincent Sitzmann, Michael Zollhöfer, and Gordon Wetzstein. Scene representation networks: Con-
  tinuous 3d-structure-aware neural scene representations. volume 32, 2019.
Supasorn Suwajanakorn, Steven M Seitz, and Ira Kemelmacher-Shlizerman. Synthesizing obama:
  learning lip sync from audio. ACM Transactions on Graphics (ToG), 36(4):1–13, 2017.
Sarah Taylor, Taehwan Kim, Yisong Yue, Moshe Mahler, James Krahe, Anastasio Garcia Rodriguez,
  Jessica Hodgins, and Iain Matthews. A deep learning approach for generalized speech animation.
  ACM Transactions on Graphics (TOG), 36(4):1–11, 2017.
Samuli Laine Antti Herva Tero Karras, Timo Aila and Jaakko Lehtinen. Audio-driven facial ani-
  mation by joint endto-end learning of pose and emotion. ACM Transactions on Graphics, 36(4),
  2017.
Justus Thies, Mohamed Elgharib, Ayush Tewari, Christian Theobalt, and Matthias Nießner. Neural
  voice puppetry: Audio-driven facial reenactment. In ECCV, pp. 716–731. Springer, 2020.
Gadi Geiger Tony Ezzat and Tomaso Poggio. Trainable videorealistic speech animation. ACM
  Transactions on Graphics, 21(3), 2002.


                                                11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Konstantinos Vougioukas, Stavros Petridis, and Maja Pantic. Realistic speech-driven facial anima-
  tion with gans. International Journal of Computer Vision, 128(5):1398–1413, 2020.
Shunyu Yao, RuiZhe Zhong, Yichao Yan, Guangtao Zhai, and Xiaokang Yang. Dfa-nerf: Person-
  alized talking head generation via disentangled face attributes neural rendering. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2201.00791, 2022.
Zhenhui Ye, Zhou Zhao, Yi Ren, and Fei Wu. Syntaspeech: Syntax-aware generative adversarial
  text-to-speech. arXiv preprint arXiv:2204.11792, 2022.
Ran Yi, Zipeng Ye, Juyong Zhang, Hujun Bao, and Yong-Jin Liu. Audio-driven talking face video
  generation with learning-based personalized head pose. arXiv preprint arXiv:2002.10137, 2020.
Lingyun Yu, Jun Yu, Mengyan Li, and Qiang Ling. Multimodal inputs driven talking face gener-
  ation with spatial–temporal dependency. IEEE Transactions on Circuits and Systems for Video
  Technology, 31(1):203–216, 2020.
Zhimeng Zhang, Lincheng Li, Yu Ding, and Changjie Fan. Flow-guided one-shot talking face
  generation with a high-resolution audio-visual dataset. In CVPR, pp. 3661–3670, 2021.
Zijian Zhang, Zhou Zhao, and Zhijie Lin. Unsupervised representation learning from pre-trained
  diffusion probabilistic models. In NIPS, 2022.
Zijian Zhang, Zhou Zhao, Jun Yu, and Qi Tian. Shiftddpms: Exploring conditional diffusion models
  by shifting diffusion trajectories. arXiv preprint arXiv:2302.02373, 2023.
Hang Zhou, Yu Liu, Ziwei Liu, Ping Luo, and Xiaogang Wang. Talking face generation by adver-
  sarially disentangled audio-visual representation. In AAAI, volume 33, pp. 9299–9306, 2019.
Hang Zhou, Yasheng Sun, Wayne Wu, Chen Change Loy, Xiaogang Wang, and Ziwei Liu. Pose-
  controllable talking face generation by implicitly modularized audio-visual representation. In
  CVPR, pp. 4176–4186, 2021.
Yang Zhou, Xintong Han, Eli Shechtman, Jose Echevarria, Evangelos Kalogerakis, and Dingzeyu
  Li. Makelttalk: speaker-aware talking-head animation. ACM Transactions on Graphics (TOG),
  39(6):1–15, 2020.


A     D ETAILS OF M ODELS
A.1   VARIATIONAL M OTION G ENERATOR

Following PortaSpeech, our variational motion generator consists of an encoder, a decoder, and
a flow-based prior model. The encoder, as shown in Fig. 6a, is composed of a 1D-convolution
followed by ReLU activation and layer normalization, and a non-causal WaveNet. The decoder, as
shown in Fig. 6b, consists of a non-causal WaveNet and a 1D transposed convolution followed by
ReLU and layer normalization. The prior model, as shown in Fig. 6c, is a normalizing flow, which is
composed of a 1D-convolution coupling layer and a channel-wise flip operation. HuBERT features
are utilized as the audio condition of these three modules.

A.2   S YNC - EXPERT

Our sync-expert inputs a window of Tl consecutive 3D landmark frames and an audio feature clip of
size Ta × D, where Tl and Ta are the lengths of the video and audio clip respectively, and D is the
dimension of HuBERT features. The sync-expert is trained to discriminate whether the input audio
and landmarks are synchronized. It consists of a landmark encoder and an audio encoder, as shown
in Fig. 7, both of which are comprised of a stack of 1D-convolutions followed by batch normal-
ization and ReLU. We use cosine-similarity with binary cross-entropy loss to train the sync-expert.
Specifically, we compute cosine-similarity for the landmark embedding l and audio embedding a
to represent the probability that the input audio-landmark pair is synchronized. The training loss of
sync-expert can be represented as:
                                                       a·l
                                 Lsync = CE(                             )                       (11)
                                                max(||a||2 · ||l||2 , ϵ)


                                                 12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                 𝑧~𝑁 𝜇, 𝜎                             𝑙𝑎𝑛𝑑𝑚𝑎𝑟𝑘

                                                                                                 𝑧!          𝑧"
                    𝜇, 𝜎


                 Non-Causal                     TransposedConv1D
    ℎ𝑢𝑏𝑒𝑟𝑡                                      + ReLU +Layer Norm                                    Flip
                  WavNet
                                                                                                                  xN
                Conv1D + ReLU                         Non-Causal                                   Conv1D
                                    ℎ𝑢𝑏𝑒𝑟𝑡                                        ℎ𝑢𝑏𝑒𝑟𝑡
                 +Layer Norm                           WavNet                                   Coupling Layer


                  𝑙𝑎𝑛𝑑𝑚𝑎𝑟𝑘                                    𝑧                                   𝑧~𝑁 0,1
             (a) Encoder                        (b) Decoder                                (c) Flow-based Prior

 Figure 6: The structure of encoder, decoder, and flow-based prior in variational motion generator.

                                                 Pos/Neg?


                                                   cosine
                                                 similarity


                                    ReLU                             ReLU
                                                 xN                               xN
                                  Conv1D+BN                       Conv1D+BN



                                  ℎ𝑢𝑏𝑒𝑟𝑡 𝑐𝑙𝑖𝑝                     𝑙𝑎𝑛𝑑𝑚𝑎𝑟𝑘 𝑐𝑙𝑖𝑝


                                Figure 7: The structure of sync-expert.

                                      𝑟𝑒𝑓𝑖𝑛𝑒𝑑 𝑙𝑎𝑛𝑑𝑚𝑎𝑟𝑘


                                                  +
                                        Conv1D + ReLU
                                         +Batch Norm
                                                                            xN

                                       𝑐𝑜𝑎𝑟𝑠𝑒 𝑙𝑎𝑛𝑑𝑚𝑎𝑟𝑘

                                 Figure 8: The structure of post-net.

A.3     D OMAIN A DAPTATIVE P OST- NET AND D ISCRIMINATOR

The domain adaptative post-net, as shown in Fig. 8, is composed of a stack of residual 1D-
convolution followed by ReLU and batch normalization. The discriminator is a MLP composed
of a stack of fully connected layers followed with ReLU and dropout.


B     D ETAILED E XPERIMENTAL S ETTINGS

B.1     M ODEL C ONFIGURATIONS

We list the hyper-parameters of GeneFace in Tab. 4.


                                                      13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                   Table 4: Hyper-parameter list

                                     Hyper-parameter                               GeneFace
                                       Encoder Layers                                  8
                                       Decoder Layers                                  4
                                       Encoder/Decoder Conv1D Kernel                   5
                                       Encoder/Decoder Conv1D Channel Size           192
         Variational Motion Generator Latent Size                                     16
                                       Prior Flow Layers                               4
                                       Prior Flow Conv1D Kernel                        3
                                       Prior Flow Conv1D Channel Size                 64
                                       Sync-expert Layers                             14
                                       Sync-expert Channel Size                      512
                                       Post-net Layers                                 8
                                       Post-net Conv1D Kernel                          3
                                       Post-net Conv1D Channel Size                  256
          Post-net and Discriminator   Discrimnator Layers                             5
                                       Discrimnator Linear Hidden Size               256
                                       Discrimnator Dropout Rate                     0.25
                                       Head/Torso-NeRF Layers                         11
                                       Head/Torso-NeRF Hidden Size                   256
            NeRF-based Renderer        Landmark/Head Color Encoder Layers              3
                                       Landmark/Head Color Encoder Hidden Size       128


            Setting                                    L2 error on 3D landmark↓    LMD↓
            GeneFace (VAE + Flow + landmark NeRF)               0.0371             3.933
            vanilla VAE + landmark NeRF                         0.0385             4.063
            Regression Model + landmark NeRF                    0.0424             4.305
            AD-NeRF                                              N/A               4.199

                        Table 5: Ablation study on 3D Landmark L2 error.


C     A DDITIONAL E XPERIMENTS

C.1   Q UALITATIVE R ESULTS WITH ALL BASELINES

To compare the generated results of each method, we show the keyframes of one in-domain audio
clip in Fig.9. We have the following observations: 1) Wav2Lip achieves competitive lip-sync perfor-
mance yet generates blurry mouth results; 2) MakeItTalk and PC-AVS fail to preserve the speaker’s
identity, leading to unrealistic generated results; 3) LSP generates unnatural lip movement during the
transition phase of different syllables. Please see our supplementary video for better visualization.

C.2   E VALUATION ON 3D L ANDMARK L2 ERROR

To evaluate the contribution of the variational generator to the quality of the predicted landmark, we
adopt L2 error on the predicted 3D landmarks as the metric. We compare our vairiaitonal generator
(VAE+Flow) against vanilla VAE and a simple regression model trained with MSE loss. The results
are listed in Table 5. It can be seen that removing the prior flow or using a regression-based model
leads to a performance drop.

C.3   T-SNE V ISUALIZATION FOR D OMAIN A DAPTATION

To further investigate the efficacy of post-net, we utilize T-SNE to visualize the landmarks of dif-
ferent domains in Fig. 10. The visualization results prove that there exists a significant domain
gap between the LRS3 dataset and the target person video, and our post-net successfully rigs the
predicted landmarks from the LRS3 domain into the target person domain.


                                                 14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


               Audio          /i/           /w/         /s/           /ɒ/         /ju:/


                 GT


              Wav2Lip


           MakeItTalk


              PC-AVS


                LSP


            AD-NeRF


           GeneFace

Figure 9: The comparison of generated key frame results. We show the phonetic symbol of the
key frame and the corresponding synthesized talking heads of all baselines. Please zoom in for
better visualization. More qualitative comparisons can be found in demo video.

D    L IMITATIONS AND F UTURE W ORK
There are mainly two limitations of the proposed approach. Firstly, we found the landmark sequence
generated by variational motion generator and post-net occasionally has tiny fluctuations, which
results in some artifacts such as shaking hairs, etc. Currently, we utilize a heuristic post-processing
method (Gaussian filter) to alleviate this problem. We will explore better modeling the temporal
information in the network architecture to further improve the stability. Secondly, the current NeRF-
based renderer is majorly based on the setting of vanilla NeRF, which results in a long training and
inference time.
In the future, we will explore three directions: (1) Most importantly, we will try to enhance the
performance of the NeRF backend by combining recent progress in accelerated and light-weight
NeRF. (2) We will try to utilize GeneFace to achieve style and emotion controllable talking face
generation. (3) We will improve the image fidelity and lip-sync quality of GeneFace when driven by
singing voices.


                                                  15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Figure 10: The T-SNE visualization of 3DMM landmarks in different datasets. The green and blue
points denote the ground truth landmarks in LRS3 dataset and the target person video; The red and
yellow points represent the predicted landmarks without/with the domain adaptation.


                                               16
