Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


E XPLORING N EURAL N ETWORK R EPRESENTATIONAL
S IMILARITY USING F ILTER S UBSPACES
 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review


                                           A BSTRACT

         Analyzing representational similarity in neural networks is crucial to numerous
         tasks, such as interpreting or transferring deep models. One typical approach is
         to input probing data into convolutional neural networks (CNNs) as stimuli to re-
         veal their deep representation for model similarity analysis. Those methods are
         often computationally expensive and stimulus-dependent. By representing filter
         subspace in a CNN as a set of filter atoms, previous work has reported compet-
         itive performance in continual learning by learning a different set of filter atoms
         for each task while sharing common atom coefficients across tasks. Inspired by
         this observation, in this paper, we propose a new paradigm for reducing repre-
         sentational similarity analysis in CNNs to filter subspace distance assessment.
         Specifically, when filter atom coefficients are shared across networks, model rep-
         resentational similarity can be significantly simplified as calculating the cosine
         distance among respective filter atoms, to achieve millions of times computation
         reduction. We provide both theoretical and empirical evidence that this simplified
         filter subspace-based similarity preserves a strong linear correlation with other
         popular stimulus-based metrics, while being significantly more efficient and ro-
         bust to probing data. We further validate the effectiveness of the proposed method
         in various applications, such as analyzing training dynamics as well as in feder-
         ated and continual learning. We hope our findings can help further explorations of
         real-time large-scale representational similarity analysis in neural networks.


1   I NTRODUCTION
Deep neural networks have shown unprecedented performance in a large variety of
tasks (Krizhevsky et al., 2012; Ronneberger et al., 2015). The cornerstone to the success is the
deep representation learned by neural networks (NNs), which contains high-level semantic informa-
tion about a task. By viewing deep representation as to the characterization of each task in a high-
dimensional space, the representational similarity between a pair of deep models can be exploited
to understand the intrinsic relationship between associated tasks. In this way, the representational
similarity provides a way to open the black box of deep learning by showing the training dynam-
ics (Kornblith et al., 2019), and it further empowers machine learning systems with the ability to
transfer knowledge from one task to another (Huang et al., 2021a).
Previous works (Raghu et al., 2017; Morcos et al., 2018) measure representational similarity directly
relying on deep representations revealed by input data. These approaches introduce heavy computa-
tion from both the forward pass of numerous stimulus inputs and the calculation of high-dimensional
covariance matrices. Since these similarity metrics are stimulus-dependent, their quality can poten-
tially deteriorate when probing data are inappropriately chosen, scarce or unavailable.
We are inspired by the continual learning framework in Miao et al. (2021), where a group of tasks
is simultaneously modeled using NNs by learning for each task a different set of filter atoms while
sharing common atom coefficients across tasks. Miao et al. (2021) has in detail analyzed and val-
idated this framework in a continual learning context. In the above setting, it is easy to observe
that the representation variations across different NNs now become dominated by respective filter
atoms. Thus, Miao et al. (2021) adopts in experiments filter subspace distance to assess task rele-
vancy, however, without formal justification.
In this paper, we formally explore NN representational similarity using filter subspace distance,
with detailed theoretical and empirical justifications. We first simplify the filter subspace distance


                                                  1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


to the cosine distance of two sets of filter atoms, to eliminate heavy computation of singular value
decomposition in calculating principal angles. Then, we show both theoretically and empirically
that the obtained filter atom-based similarity preserves a strong linear correlation with other popular
stimulus-dependent similarity measures such as CCA (Raghu et al., 2017). Our representational
similarity is also immune to inappropriate choices of probing data, while stimulus-dependent metrics
can be perturbed drastically.
The proposed filter atom-based similarity shows extreme efficiency in both memory and computa-
tion. Since the similarity computation does not involve network forward pass, no GPU memory ac-
cess is required, whereas other stimulus-based measures consume the same amount of GPU memory
as regular inference. On the other hand, the proposed method involves only inner product calcula-
tions on filter atoms, which takes neglectable time for similarity evaluation. The evaluation time of
stimulus-based measures includes the time of both the forward pass of probing data and the calcula-
tion of high-dimensional covariance matrices. We report later the dramatically improved evaluation
time of the proposed method against other popular method, e.g., CKA (Kornblith et al., 2019).
We further validate our atom-based similarity for knowledge transfer with various continual learning
and federated learning tasks. In both settings, we fix the atom coefficients, learn the filter atoms for
each task, and finally conduct knowledge transfer among tasks by recalling the most similar models
for the ensemble. Compared with stimulus-based similarity metrics, the proposed measure achieves
competitive performance with millions of times reduction in the computational cost.
We summarize our contributions as follows,
       • We formally explore NN representational similarity measure using filter subspace distance.
       • We show both theoretically and empirically that the proposed filter atom-based measure
         preserves a strong linear correlation with other popular stimulus-dependent measures while
         being significantly more robust and efficient in both memory and computation.
       • We demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed similarity measure under various example
         settings, such as analyzing training dynamics as well as in federated and continual learning.

2     M ETHODOLOGY
In this section, we first provide a filter subspace formulation for NNs and propose a model simi-
larity metric based on a simplified filter subspace distance. Then, we review stimulus-based rep-
resentational similarities and show their limitations. We further demonstrate that under certain as-
sumptions, the proposed measure shows a strong linear relationship with popular stimulus-based
measures, while exhibiting dramatic improvement in computational efficiency and data robustness.
These unique characteristics of the proposed measure can potentially enable real-time large-scale
NN similarity assessment, e.g., helping fast knowledge transfer across a large number of models.
2.1   R EPRESENTATIONAL S IMILARITY IN F ILTER S UBSPACE
                                                                                   ′
Filter subspace. As in Qiu et al. (2018), the convolutional filter W ∈ Rc ×c×k×k (c′ and c are
the number of input and output channels, k is the kernel size) can be decomposed as m filter atoms
                                                                                ′
D[i] ∈ Rk×k (i = 1, ..., m), linearly combined by atom coefficients α ∈ Rm×c ×c as W = α × D.
The filter subspace is then expressed as V = Span{D[1], ..., D[m]}. With this formulation, we
consider a paradigm where atom coefficients are shared across different deep models while filter
subspaces are model specific. This paradigm has been in detail analyzed and validated in Miao et al.
(2021) and reports state-of-the-art performance in a continual learning context.
In this setting, we dive deep into the relationship between filter atoms and representations. For
simplicity, let c = c′ = 1, and the argument                          input image X(b) (b ∈ B, B ⊂ Z2 ),
                                               P extends. Given′ 2an1/2
define the local input norm ||X||F,Nb := ( b′ ∈Nb X(b − b ) )            and the convolution ⟨X, w⟩Nb :=
                  ′      ′
P
   b′ ∈Nb X(b−b     )w(b   ), where N b ⊂ B is a local Euclidean grid  centered at b. Then the decomposed
                                             Pm
convolution can be written as Z(b) = σ( i=1 αi ⟨X, Di ⟩Nb ), where D[i] denotes the i-th atom, αi
is the corresponded i-th coefficient.
Proposition 1. Suppose Du and Dv are two different sets of filter atoms for a convolutional layer
with the common atom coefficients α, and the activation function σ is non-expansive, we can upper
bound the changes in the corresponding    pfeatures Zu , Zv with atom changes,
             ||Zu − Zv ||F ≤ (||α||F λ) |B| · ||Du − Dv ||F , with λ = sup ||X||F,Nb ,                (1)
                                                                             b∈B


                                                   2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023



                     Stimulus-based similarity                                              Atom-based similarity
                    Model 1                          Model 2                         Model 1                            Model 2
                                                                                                  (𝟐)                   (𝟐)
                          …                             …                                        𝑫𝟏      Cosine        𝑫𝟐
              (𝟐)
                                        CCA                         (𝟐)                                 Similarity
             𝒁𝟏                                                    𝒁𝟐


                                …


                                                            …
                                                                              𝜶(𝟐)      ×                                     ×         𝜶(𝟐)


                    …


                                                   …
                        …                              …

                    Layer (2)                          Layer (2)                     Layer (2)                              Layer (2)


                                                                                     Filter (𝟏)                         (𝟏)
                          …             CCA             …                                  𝑫             Cosine        𝑫𝟐
                                                                    (𝟏)
                                                                                     atom 𝟏
              (𝟏)
             𝒁𝟏                                                    𝒁𝟐                                   Similarity
                                …


                                                            …
                    …


                                                   …
                        …                              …                      𝜶(𝟏)      ×                                      ×        𝜶(𝟏)
             Deep
            Features
                                                       Layer (1)                     Layer (1)                              Layer (1)
                    Layer (1)                                                                           Shared atom
                                                                                                         coefficient
                                        …
                                    …


                                              …
                                        …         Probing data 𝑿𝒑


Figure 1: Comparison between our method and stimulus-based methods. (left) Stimulus-based sim-
ilarity metrics, e.g., CCA, rely on probing data, and calculate the correlation between large groups
of features generated by the forward pass of probing data through NNs. (right) In comparison, our
atom-based method decomposes convolutional filters W as filter atoms D and atom coefficients α,
W = α × D, and only calculates the atom-based similarity between a small portion of parame-
ters, i.e., atoms, which is stimuli independent and computation efficient. The proposed atom-based
method can achieve millions of times computation reduction than popular stimulus-based methods.

The proof is provided in Appendix A.1. We further empirically validate this relationship in Sec-
tion 3.1.
Filter subspace similarity The above theorem suggests the possibility to measure the represen-
tational similarity of two CNNs by simply measuring the distance of their filter subspaces. As
proposed in Miao et al. (2021), the representational similarity of two models with different filter
subspaces Vu , Vv can be assessed by the similarity based on Grassmann distance between Vu , Vv as,
                                                            1 X
                           SGras (Fu , Fv ) = d(Vu , Vv ) =       cosθi ,                       (2)
                                                            m i
where θi is the i-th principal angle between Vu and Vv .
However, the above metric requires costly singular value decomposition. Note that filter atoms in
different models are intrinsically aligned under shared atom coefficients, which allows us to ap-
proximate the filter subspace similarity using the cosine similarity of the corresponding filter atoms.
To this end, as shown in Figure 1, we propose a significantly simplified representational similarity
measure with filter atom similarity.
Definition 1. Suppose two convolution neural networks Fu , Fv share atom coefficients layer-wise
which assume to be full-rank matrices, and their model-specific filter atoms are Du , Dv , then the
atom-based representational similarity is defined as,
                                                          < vec(Du ), vec(Dv ) >
                 SAtom (Fu , Fv ) = cos(Du , Dv ) =                                  .              (3)
                                                       ||vec(Du )||F · ||vec(Dv )||F

The above definition is a layer-wise similarity, allowing us to compare the similarity of different
networks per layer, and we simply average layer-wise similarities for the network-wise similarity.
We further show that SAtom and SGras are equivalent under certain assumption.
                                                        2
Proposition 2. Assume Du , Dv ∈ Rk ×m are orthogonal matrices, then SGras = SAtom .
The proof is provided in Appendix A.1. We empirically show in Figure 2(a) that the atom-based
similarity has still a strong linear correlation with the Grassmann subspace similarity even without
imposing the above orthogonality over atoms.
Note that our atom-based similarity measure only involves linear operations of vectorized atoms of
around 100 dimensions, which requires neglectable computation. Additionally, the proposed method
depends solely on models themselves and eliminates the reliance on probing data, equipping our
similarity with robustness to inappropriate choice of probing data.

                                                                          3
    Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                       Correlation: 0.8793                Correlation: 0.8638


Grassmann Similarity


                                                    CCA
                                                                                                                                                                               Correlation
                                                                                                                                    CCA (Raghu et al., 2017)                     0.8638
                                                                                                                                    CKA (Kornblith et al., 2019)                 0.7358
                                                                                                                                    Grassmann Distance (Miao et al., 2021)       0.8793


                            Atom-based Similarity              Atom-based Similarity
                                   (a)                                (b)
    Figure 2: (a) Correlation between Grassmann similarity and atom-based similarity; (b) Correlation
    between CCA and atom-based similarity. (Table) Correlation between atom-based similarity and
    other approaches.

    2.2                  R EPRESENTATIONAL S IMILARITY IN F EATURE S PACE
                                                                           Federated Learning (100 models) Continual Learning (10 models)
    Intuitively, the representational similarity can be directly       ∞                                                                                 ∞                           ∞

    assessed via features generated from different neural net-


                                                                                             # of times more efficient than CCA


                                                                                                                                                         …


                                                                                                                                                                                     …
    works. As shown in Figure 1, it usually includes three steps                                                                  13,611,052

    to evaluate stimulus-based representational similarity be-
    tween two NNs Fu and Fv : (1) Collect an appropriate and                                                                                   120,650

                                                     ′   ′   ′
    sufficient amount of probing data Xp ∈ Rn×c ×h ×w that                                                                                                     5,031



    can represent the whole data distribution, (2) Generate the                                                                                                          325


    feature Zu and Zv (Zu , Zv ∈ Rn×c×h×w ) by the forward
    pass of probing data through different neural networks,
    Zu = Fu (Xp , θu ) and Zv = Fv (Xp , θv ), where θu , θv de-
    note parameters of two NNs; (3) Choose a stimulus-based
    metric to assess the model similarity. Several popular meth- Figure 3: The ratio of the computational
    ods can be adopted in step (3), below we will give a brief cost savings of our atom-based similarity
                                                                     over stimulus-based similarities.
    introduction.
    CCA. Raghu et al. (2017) proposes to analyze the representational similarity by conducting canon-
    ical correlation analysis on two Zu , Zv , which is a recursive process of finding projection directions
    for two matrices that their correlation is maximized. Specifically, let Qu , Qv denote the orthonormal
    bases of Zu , Zv , the CCA can be denoted as,
                                                            v
                                                            u c
                                                            u1 X
                                         SCCA (Fu , Fv ) = t         σl2 ,                                                                (4)
                                                               c
                                                                                       l=1

     where σl denotes the l-th eigenvalue of Λu,v = Q⊺u Qv .
    CKA. Kornblith et al. (2019) proposes another way to assess the similarity based on Centered
    Kernel Alignment (CKA). Let Ku = Zu Z⊺u , Kv = Zv Z⊺v denote the Gram matrices of two feature
    space, the CKA is computed by,
                                                       HSIC(Ku , Kv )
                          SCKA (Fu , Fv ) = p                                 ,               (5)
                                                HSIC(Ku , Kv ) HSIC(Ku , Kv )
    where HSIC is the Hilbert-Schmidt Independence Criterion (Gretton et al., 2005).
    However, in addition to the forward pass, all the aforementioned approaches further introduce sig-
    nificant computational costs while performing evaluation in the representation space. Nevertheless,
    their qualities rely heavily on the mindful choice of probing data Xp , which undermines their ro-
    bustness.

    2.3                  A LGORITHM C OMPLEXITY A NALYSIS

    Here, we provide a detailed comparison of computation complexity between the proposed atom-
    based similarity and stimulus-based similarities. Consider one convolutional layer with filter W ∈
       ′                                                                             ′  ′    ′
    Rc ×c×k×k (W = α × D, D ∈ Rm×k×k ) which transforms the input Xp ∈ Rn×c ×h ×w to output
    Z ∈ Rn×c×h×w . The complexity of our method is dominated by inner product of two tiny filter
    atoms, O(m · k 2 ), e.g., m = 9, k = 3 in a typical setting.


                                                                            4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


In contrast, stimulus-based similarity measure first forward feed n probing samples with a complex-
ity of O(n · h′ w′ · k 2 · cc′ ), then calculates covariance matrix with complexity of O(n2 · hw · c). In
total, the time complexity of CCA is O(n · h′ w′ · k 2 · cc′ + n2 · hw · c).
                          ′   ′   2       ′    2
Our method is at least n·h w ·k m·k
                                ·cc +n ·hw·c
                                    2        times more efficient than stimulus-based similarity mea-
                       ′
sures. As h ≫ k, cc ≫ m, the computational cost of our method is negligible. For example,
with 10k probing datapoints, the CCA calculation requires 1.14 × 107 times more FLOPs than the
proposed atom-based similarity.
2.4   R ELATIONSHIP WITH S TIMULUS - BASED S IMILARITIES
The proposed atom-based measure not only shows extreme efficiency, but also exhibits a linear rela-
tionship with other popular stimulus-based similarities. Here, we analyze the proposed atom-based
similarity SAtom with CCA SCCA (Raghu et al., 2017). Suppose forward passes of decomposed
convolutional layer for Fu and Fv are Zu = αXp Du , Zv = αXp Dv , respectively. To start with,
we show that the SCCA is upper bounded by the proposed SAtom .
Theorem 1. Let T = Tr(X⊺p α⊺ αXp ), C = σmin (X⊺p α⊺ αXp ). Assume K(Z⊺u Zu ), K(Z⊺v Zv ) ≤ γ.
Then SCCA (Fu , Fv ) is upper bounded by SAtom (Fu , Fv ),
                                  C
                                      3       · SCCA (Fu , Fv ) ≤ SAtom (Fu , Fv ),                  (6)
                              γc 2 T
where Tr(·) denotes trace of a matrix, σmin indicates the minimum eigenvalue, K(A) denotes the
condition number of matrix A. We provide the proof in Appendix A.1.
Since SCCA is stimulus-dependent, the calculated value varies depending on the choice of probing
data, and the value range shows bounded by our atom-based similarity, as in the theorem above.
With additional assumptions imposed, we can further show a simple linear relationship between
CCA and our atom-based similarity.
Assumption 1. Suppose the diagonal elements of Z⊺u Zu , Z⊺u Zv and Z⊺v Zv are larger than non-
diagonal element, i.e., (Z⊺u Zu )ii ≫ (Z⊺u Zu )ij .
The Assumption 1 suggests different channels of feature Z have a low correlation. Reducing
channel-wise dependencies has been studied in Zhang et al. (2021) and has been shown to bene-
fit model stability.
Theorem 2. If Assumption 1 holds, SCCA (Fu , Fv ) is approximately linear to atom-based similarity,
                              √
                                c
                                     · SCCA (Fu , Fv ) = SAtom (Fu , Fv ),                        (7)
                            γ1 γ2 γ3
where γ1 , γ2 and γ3 contain higher order of features, which can be found in detail with the proof in
Appendix A.1.
As in Figure 2, we empirically observe the linear correlation between CCA and atom-based similar-
ity, which agrees with our theoretical findings. In addition, we find that the proposed similarity also
shows a strong correlation with CKA with different kernels.

3     E XPERIMENTS
In this section, we first validate our theorems with several simple experiments, and then demonstrate
various applications of the proposed atom-based similarity in efficiently analyzing training dynamics
as well as in federated and continual learning scenarios.
3.1   S IMPLE VALIDATION E XPERIMENTS
We empirically validate that the change of features is bounded by the change of atoms, and the near-
linear relationship between atom-based and stimulus-based similarity. Besides, we demonstrate the
limit of stimulus-based similarities, as well as the verification of our assumption and theorems.
Representation dependency on filter atoms. We first validate the dependency of deep features
on filter atoms in Proposition 1 with a simple experiment. The model F here is a 2-layer CNN with
coefficient α and atom D generated from normal distribution N (0, 1). The input sample X is also
generated from normal distribution N (0, 1). Figure 4(a) shows the relation between ∥Zu − Zv ∥F
and ∥Du − Dv ∥F by fixing coefficient α and input sample X and randomly varying filter atoms D.


                                                            5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023



              𝐙! − 𝐙" # = (𝜆 𝛂 # )   ℬ 𝐃! − 𝐃" #                 0.985
             Upper Bound


 𝐙! − 𝐙" #


                                                   Correlation
                                                                                                                     CCA                    CKA           Ours
                                                                         Linear Relationship   Training Data                        CIFAR-100
                                                                                               Stimulus Data   CIFAR-100   SVHN      CIFAR-100    SVHN    None
                                                                                                Similarity      0.8793     0.4862      0.8195     0.436   0.9136



                            𝐃! − 𝐃" #                                        𝛽

                           (a)                                            (b)

Figure 4: (a) The change of features ∥Zu − Zv ∥F is bounded by the change of atoms ∥Du − Dv ∥F .
(b) The channel decorrelation leads to a higher correlation between CCA and atom-based similarity.
And the correlation can reach 0.985 with β = 3 × 10−3 , which means a near linear relation between
CCA and atom-based similarity. (Table) The performance of stimulus-based similarities can be
compromised by poorly selected stimulus data. For two models trained on CIFAR-100, they have
high CCA and CKA similarities with stimuli from CIFAR-100 but low similarities with stimuli from
SVHN. In contrast, our atom-based similarity does not depend on stimulus data and shows a high
similarity between two networks as expected.

All the points are below the line which is the bound provided by Proposition 1, reflecting that the
representation variations are dominated by filter atoms.
Correlation of CCA and atom-based similarity. We next empirically verify that CCA and atom-
based similarity have a strong correlation. In this experiment, 10 tasks are generated from CI-
FAR100 (Krizhevsky et al., 2009) with 10 classes in each task. Only the filter atoms of each task are
trained while the atom coefficients are fixed. We calculate CCA and atom-based similarity among
45 pairs of models. The correlation between CCA and atom-based similarity is 0.8638 which is
shown in Figure 2(b). Similarly, the correlation between CKA and atom-based similarity is also
reported in Figure 2 (Table). These results clearly show that the proposed atom-based similarity has
high linear relationship with popular stimulus-based similarities, which agrees with Theorem 1 and
Theorem 2.
Effect of channel decorrelation. We further design a regularization term β i̸=j (Z⊺u Zu )2ij to ap-
                                                                               P

proach (Z⊺u Zu )ii ≫ (Z⊺u Zu )ij in Assumption. 1. As shown in Figure 4(b), the correlation between
CCA and atom-based similarity keeps increasing as β increases. The correlation reaches 0.985 when
β = 3 × 10−3 , indicating a near-linear relationship, which is aligned with Theorem. 2.
Limitations of stimulus-based similarities. Depending on stimulus data, the stimulus-based sim-
ilarities can be inconsistent. We expect a high value while evaluating the similarity between two
models trained on the same dataset. In this experiment, we train two models on CIFAR-100. As
shown in Figure 4 (Table), the CCA similarity of two models with stimuli from CIFAR-100 is
0.8793, but it drops to 0.4862 with stimuli from SVHN (Netzer et al., 2011). The CKA similar-
ity demonstrates the same inconsistency in values with different choices of stimuli. However, our
atom-based similarity of two models is 0.9136, which is aligned with our expectation.

3.2          L EARNING DYNAMICS
The atom-based similarity has various applications in analyzing NNs. It is capable of reflecting
the data similarity and measuring the evolution of model similarity during the training time. We
examine the training dynamics based on the heat map of atom-based similarities. In this experiment,
AlexNet (Krizhevsky et al., 2012) is trained on CIFAR-100 (Krizhevsky et al., 2009) for 150 epochs
and VGG11 (Simonyan & Zisserman, 2014) is fine-tuned on ImageNet (Russakovsky et al., 2015)
for 20 epochs. For both models, we train and store atoms at each epoch. Figure 5 shows heat maps
of similarities of the model among different training epochs.
Figure 5(a-c) are heat maps of the 1st, 3rd and 5th convolutional layers of Alexnet. We mark
the epoch when the parameters of each layer reaches 0.99 similarity with the their states in the
last epoch. The first layer reaches 0.99 similarity at epoch 36 which is earlier than final layers.
In Figure 5(d-f), VGG11 shows a similar behavior. Several previous works have also indicated
this bottom-up learning dynamics where layers closer to the input solidify into their final states
faster than very top layers (Raghu et al., 2017; Morcos et al., 2018). Our atom-based similarity
provides a highly efficient way to examine the training dynamics while showing results in accord
with previous studies. Moreover, we can apply our method to calculate the similarity of a model


                                                                                6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                                                Training Epoch                                            Training Epoch                                              Training Epoch


                                            Training Epoch


                                                                                                                                                                   Training Epoch
                                                                                                Training Epoch
                                                                        >0.99                                                             >0.99                                                       >0.99

                                                           0    36               150                             0             42                         150                     0   43                                 150
                                                                      (a)                                                                 (b)                                                         (c)
                                                               Training Epoch                                             Training Epoch                                              Training Epoch
                                          Training Epoch


                                                                                                                                                                 Training Epoch
                                                     0          5                20           Training Epoch   0                                     17     20                0                                        19 20
                                                                      (d)                                                                 (e)                                                     (f)
Figure 5: Layer-wise similarity matrices that show relations of model parameters of different train-
ing time points. (a)(b)(c) are the 1st, 3rd and 5th convolutional layer of AlexNet trained on CIFAR-
100. (d)(e)(f) are the 1st, 4th and 8th convolutional layer of VGG11 trained on ImageNet. We mark
the epoch when the parameter reaches 0.99/ 0.999 similarity to its final state with white lines. For
both models, we observe bottom-up learning dynamics where layers closer to the input solidify into
their final states faster than very top layers, which is in accord with previous studies (Raghu et al.,
2017; Morcos et al., 2018).

trained on different tasks, so we can track the process of the same model interacting with different
datasets. The details are shown in Appendix A.2.
3.3 F EDERATED L EARNING
Federated learning (FL) aims at learning models collaboratively by leveraging the local computa-
tional power and data of all users with the concern of privacy (McMahan et al., 2017). Personalized
Federated Learning (PFL) emerges to address some challenges in FL, such as poor convergence on
heterogeneous data and lack of solution personalization (Tan et al., 2022).
In this setting, our framework achieves personalization by enforcing FL models with the shared
atom coefficients for all users and specific filter atoms for each user. As illustrated in Figure 7, the
shared coefficients preserve the common knowledge, while user-specific atoms hold personalized
information about each user. Then, we can assess model relationships with our atom-based similarity
without any stimuli data, which meets the privacy requirement of the FL scenario.
The shared atom coefficients can be achieved in different ways. With our framework, the coefficient
can be obtained from a model pre-trained on a public dataset or from a global model trained by
other FL approaches. We can also get the coefficients by training the model locally and evolving the
coefficients at each communication round.
                     CIFAR100                                  SVHN                                                       CIFAR100                   SVHN                                                         CIFAR100                  SVHN
CIFAR100


                                                                                   CIFAR100


                                                                                                                                                                                           CIFAR100
SVHN


                                                                                   SVHN


                                                                                                                                                                                           SVHN


Task 13    14   15   16    17   18   19              20                           Task 13                      14    15   16    17   18    19   20                                         Task 13      14   15   16    17   18   19   20



                          (a) 10th epoch                                                                                       (b) 50th epoch                                                                          (c) 90th epoch
Figure 6: Similarity matrices that show relations among 60 users in FL with our atom-based simi-
larity through the training process. The labels of x-axis represent the ID’s of CIFAR tasks. We can
clearly see user clusters in all three figures. Specifically, the last 20 clients with SVHN data show
higher similarities with themselves than the first 40 clients with CIFAR data, while every five of the
first 40 clients sharing the same CIFAR task also show a high similarities within themselves.


                                                                                                                                                7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Table 1: Classification accuracy of model ensemble using different FL methods and model selection
strategies: Models are selected with different similarity measures in each setting. The model ensem-
ble performance using our atom-based method is comparable with stimulus-based methods while
being millions of times faster and consuming much fewer resources.
      FL Results                          Base             +Ours        +CCA (Raghu et al., 2017)   +CKA (Kornblith et al., 2019)
      FedAvg (McMahan et al., 2017)       83.78± 0.08    85.82 ± 0.35          85.65 ± 0.21                 85.29 ± 0.18
      Ditto (Li et al., 2021)             82.98 ± 0.13   85.49 ± 0.21          85.54 ± 0.19                  85.37 ± 0.2
      FedRep (Collins et al., 2021)       76.44 ± 0.06   78.35 ± 0.24          78.18 ± 0.18                 77.73 ± 0.19
      FedProx (Li et al., 2020b)          80.6 ± 0.1     82.95 ± 0.16          82.55 ± 0.19                 82.86 ± 0.16
      FedPer (Arivazhagan et al., 2019)   83.57 ± 0.07   85.21 ± 0.2           84.91 ± 0.18                 84.9 ± 0.14
      Pretrain                            81.77 ± 0.08   85.41 ± 0.19          85.24 ± 0.13                 86.33 ± 0.14
      Similarity Computation Cost
      GFLOPs                                                0.019                258,610                         2,225
      Time (s)                                              0.016                 1930.4                          92.6
      GPU Memory (MB)                                         0                    4915                          3965

Table 2: Continual Learning Results. The model ensemble using our atom-based similarity shows
better result than stimulus-based methods. Our similarity is also faster and consuming much fewer
resources.

                                                                             Similarity Computation Cost
             Method                                 CIFAR-100
                                                                        MFLOPs Time (s) GPU Memory (MB)
             AtomCL (base)                          78.11 ± 0.13           -               -                 -
             +CCA Raghu et al. (2017)               79.83 ± 0.04         35.2         0.26                1996
             +CKA Kornblith et al. (2019)           80.01 ± 0.06          111          0.3                1637
             +Ours                                  80.19 ± 0.09         0.007       0.0008                 0


Measuring user similarity. With the shared atom coefficients and user-specific filter atoms, we
can simply get relations of users by calculating atom-based similarity. To be specific, we expect
that users with similar data have a higher similarity. In this experiment, we combine two datasets,
CIFAR-100 (Krizhevsky et al., 2009) and SVHN (Netzer et al., 2011), and separate data on 120
clients. Specifically, SVHN are randomly split into 20 tasks and each task contains 5 classes;
CIFAR-100 are also split in the order of the class into 20 tasks and each task contains 5 classes.
20 clients are trained on 20 SVHN tasks, with each learning one task, while the other 100 clients
are trained on 20 CIFAR-100 tasks, where every 5 clients equally share the data of one task by
partitioning the data in a class-balanced way. The models share the same random initialization and
filter atoms are trained independently without communication with other clients. The experimental
details are described in Appendix A.2.
Figure 6 shows the atom-based similarity among last 40 clients of CIFAR-100 task and 20 clients of
SVHN task. In Figure 6(c), where clients are trained for 90 epochs, we can clearly see the cluster of
20 SVHN clients: The SVHN clients have a higher similarity among themselves but are dissimilar
from CIFAR clients. Every 5 CIFAR clients who share the same task also have a high similarity
among themselves. We can see the cluster appears at the early stage of training in Figure 6(a)(b).
It can be applied to quickly find clusters in FL (Tan et al., 2022). The full results of all 120 clients
are shown in Appendix Figure 8. We compare atom-based similarity with CCA and CKA. Note that
stimulus-based similarities need probing data which could violate the privacy requirement of FL.
The computational cost of three different approaches is shown in Figure 3. Notably, calculating
the atom-based similarity is significantly faster (million times), requiring 0 GPU memory usage
than stimuli-based methods. Note that the advantages in computational efficiency of atom-based
similarity become more prominent as the number of models increases.
Improving personalized model with ensemble of similar users. Once we get the relationships of
users, we can further improve the accuracy of the current model by the ensemble of similar models,
which is effective to mitigate the data heterogeneity problem in FL. The experiment is described in
detail in Appendix A.2. The final results are shown in Table 1. With ensemble, the accuracies of all
FL methods can be improved. Note that the results of model ensemble selected by our atom-based
similarity are comparable with stimulus-based methods while consuming much fewer resources.
3.4 C ONTINUAL L EARNING
Continual learning is an open problem in machine learning in which data from multiple tasks arrive
sequentially and the model is learned to adapt to new tasks while not forgetting the knowledge from


                                                                    8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


the past (Parisi et al., 2019). Note that some of the tasks in continual learning are related, so models
trained with these tasks can be benefited from aggregating knowledge from each other. We adopt the
setting in Miao et al. (2021), and apply atom-based similarity to find related models. Specifically,
we 10-Split CIFAR-100 dataset, where the 100 classes is broken down into 10 tasks with 10 classes
per task. We train AlexNet including atoms and atom coefficients on the first task, and train only
the atoms on the following tasks. Then, we calculate the task similarity with atom-based similarity,
and report the model ensemble result with most similar members. The accuracy and the similarity
computation costs are shown in Table 2. Our method provides higher results and has faster speed
compared with stimulus-based methods.
4   R ELATED W ORK
4.1 M ODEL S IMILARITY
Representational similarity analysis (RSA) (Kriegeskorte et al., 2008) demonstrates the method of
understanding brain activities by computing similarities between brain responses in different re-
gions. Measuring the similarity of models is beneficial for understanding neural network (NN)
architectures and learning dynamics (Raghu et al., 2017; Kornblith et al., 2019; Morcos et al., 2018;
Dwivedi & Roig, 2019). Model similarity can be used to understand or incorporate various machine
learning paradigms across different areas, including contrastive learning (Islam et al., 2021; Hua
et al., 2021), knowledge distillation (Stanton et al., 2021), meta-learning (Raghu et al., 2019a), and
transfer learning (Raghu et al., 2019b; Neyshabur et al., 2020; Bolya et al., 2021).
Multiple approaches are proposed to estimate the representational similarity of NNs. Some early
works show that individual neurons can capture meaningful information (Bau et al., 2017; Zeiler &
Fergus, 2014; Zhou et al., 2016; Bau et al., 2018). Later, gradient-based methods emerge to provide
a visual explanation of deep neural networks (Selvaraju et al., 2017). Current popular representa-
tional similarity methods rely on features of NN. Raghu et al. (2017) proposes SVCCA to measure
similarity by calculating the covariance matrix of the features of each layer after channel alignments.
Kornblith et al. (2019) discusses the invariance properties of similarity indices and proposes CKA
with consistent correspondences between layers. Stimulus-based similarities are data-dependent and
computationally expensive. But our method measures the representational similarity only via atoms,
a portion of model parameters, which is data-agnostic and much more efficient.
4.2 L EARNING PARADIGM WITH N UMEROUS M ODELS
Some machine learning tasks involve numerous models. For example, in Federated learning (Tan
et al., 2022), thousands of models are trained across clients. In Continual learning, there are multiple
models generated across time (Kirkpatrick et al., 2017). Federated learning (FL) aims to improve
the performance of the system by continuously training and aggregating models from users without
collecting data (McMahan et al., 2017; Smith et al., 2017; Konečnỳ et al., 2016). FL requires com-
munication efficiency while thousands or even millions of clients may be involved (Li et al., 2020a).
It also required to achieve personalization (Tan et al., 2022; Huang et al., 2021b) considering data
heterogeneity of different users (Li et al., 2020a; Kairouz et al., 2021). Estimating user similarity
can effectively address these challenges in FL. Continual learning (CL) aims at providing long-term
knowledge accumulation, and the main challenge is to avoid catastrophic forgetting by learning new
tasks while remembering the old ones (Kirkpatrick et al., 2017; Aljundi et al., 2018; Lee et al., 2017;
Zenke et al., 2017; Kolouri et al., 2019). One promising way is to store neural networks for each
task (Lopez-Paz & Ranzato, 2017; Rusu et al., 2016; Yoon et al., 2018; Jerfel et al., 2019; Li et al.,
2019). As the number of tasks increases, a large number of models are generated and stored. It is
important to find a way to access their relations to reuse models.

5   C ONCLUSION
In this paper, we proposed a new paradigm for reducing representational similarity analysis in CNNs
to filter subspace distance assessment. We provided both theoretical and empirical evidence that the
proposed filter subspace-based similarity exhibits a strong linear correlation with popular stimulus-
based metrics, while being significantly more efficient and robust in probing data. It was evaluated
on both federated learning and continual learning tasks, and achieves competitive performance with
millions of times reduction in computational cost.
Our method currently assumes respective layers among compared CNNs to have coefficients with
the same dimension. For our future work, we will explore the way to share coefficient among layers
to achieve atom-based similarity with different dimensions.


                                                   9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


R EFERENCES
Rahaf Aljundi, Francesca Babiloni, Mohamed Elhoseiny, Marcus Rohrbach, and Tinne Tuytelaars.
  Memory aware synapses: Learning what (not) to forget. In Proceedings of the European Confer-
  ence on Computer Vision (ECCV), 2018.
Manoj Ghuhan Arivazhagan, Vinay Aggarwal, Aaditya Kumar Singh, and Sunav Choudhary. Fed-
 erated learning with personalization layers. arXiv preprint arXiv:1912.00818, 2019.
Anthony Bau, Yonatan Belinkov, Hassan Sajjad, Nadir Durrani, Fahim Dalvi, and James Glass.
  Identifying and controlling important neurons in neural machine translation. In International
  Conference on Learning Representations, 2018.
David Bau, Bolei Zhou, Aditya Khosla, Aude Oliva, and Antonio Torralba. Network dissection:
  Quantifying interpretability of deep visual representations. In Proceedings of the IEEE conference
  on computer vision and pattern recognition, 2017.
Daniel Bolya, Rohit Mittapalli, and Judy Hoffman. Scalable diverse model selection for accessible
  transfer learning. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2021.
Liam Collins, Hamed Hassani, Aryan Mokhtari, and Sanjay Shakkottai. Exploiting shared repre-
  sentations for personalized federated learning. In International Conference on Machine Learning,
  2021.
Kshitij Dwivedi and Gemma Roig. Representation similarity analysis for efficient task taxonomy &
  transfer learning. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
  Recognition, 2019.
Arthur Gretton, Olivier Bousquet, Alex Smola, and Bernhard Schölkopf. Measuring statistical de-
  pendence with hilbert-schmidt norms. In International conference on algorithmic learning theory,
  2005.
Tianyu Hua, Wenxiao Wang, Zihui Xue, Sucheng Ren, Yue Wang, and Hang Zhao. On feature
  decorrelation in self-supervised learning. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Confer-
  ence on Computer Vision, 2021.
Jiaji Huang, Qiang Qiu, and Kenneth Church. Exploiting a zoo of checkpoints for unseen tasks.
   Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2021a.
Yutao Huang, Lingyang Chu, Zirui Zhou, Lanjun Wang, Jiangchuan Liu, Jian Pei, and Yong Zhang.
  Personalized cross-silo federated learning on non-iid data. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference
  on Artificial Intelligence, 2021b.
Ashraful Islam, Chun-Fu Richard Chen, Rameswar Panda, Leonid Karlinsky, Richard Radke, and
  Rogerio Feris. A broad study on the transferability of visual representations with contrastive
  learning. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision, 2021.
Ghassen Jerfel, Erin Grant, Thomas L Griffiths, and Katherine Heller. Reconciling meta-learning
  and continual learning with online mixtures of tasks. Advances in Neural Information Processing
  Systems, 2019.
Peter Kairouz, H Brendan McMahan, Brendan Avent, Aurélien Bellet, Mehdi Bennis, Arjun Nitin
  Bhagoji, Kallista Bonawitz, Zachary Charles, Graham Cormode, Rachel Cummings, et al. Ad-
  vances and open problems in federated learning. Foundations and Trends® in Machine Learning,
  2021.
James Kirkpatrick, Razvan Pascanu, Neil Rabinowitz, Joel Veness, Guillaume Desjardins, Andrei A
  Rusu, Kieran Milan, John Quan, Tiago Ramalho, Agnieszka Grabska-Barwinska, et al. Overcom-
  ing catastrophic forgetting in neural networks. Proceedings of the national academy of sciences,
  2017.
Soheil Kolouri, Nicholas Ketz, Xinyun Zou, Jeffrey Krichmar, and Praveen Pilly. Attention-based
  structural-plasticity. arXiv preprint arXiv:1903.06070, 2019.


                                                10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Jakub Konečnỳ, H Brendan McMahan, Felix X Yu, Peter Richtárik, Ananda Theertha Suresh, and
  Dave Bacon. Federated learning: Strategies for improving communication efficiency. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:1610.05492, 2016.
Simon Kornblith, Mohammad Norouzi, Honglak Lee, and Geoffrey Hinton. Similarity of neural
  network representations revisited. In International Conference on Machine Learning, 2019.
Nikolaus Kriegeskorte, Marieke Mur, and Peter A Bandettini. Representational similarity analysis-
  connecting the branches of systems neuroscience. Frontiers in systems neuroscience, 2008.
Alex Krizhevsky, Geoffrey Hinton, et al. Learning multiple layers of features from tiny images. PhD
  thesis, University of Toronto, 2009.
Alex Krizhevsky, Ilya Sutskever, and Geoffrey E Hinton. Imagenet classification with deep convo-
  lutional neural networks. Advances in neural information processing systems, 2012.
Sang-Woo Lee, Jin-Hwa Kim, Jaehyun Jun, Jung-Woo Ha, and Byoung-Tak Zhang. Overcoming
  catastrophic forgetting by incremental moment matching. In Advances in Neural Information
  Processing Systems, 2017.
Tian Li, Anit Kumar Sahu, Ameet Talwalkar, and Virginia Smith. Federated learning: Challenges,
  methods, and future directions. IEEE Signal Processing Magazine, 2020a.
Tian Li, Anit Kumar Sahu, Manzil Zaheer, Maziar Sanjabi, Ameet Talwalkar, and Virginia Smith.
  Federated optimization in heterogeneous networks. Proceedings of Machine Learning and Sys-
  tems, 2020b.
Tian Li, Shengyuan Hu, Ahmad Beirami, and Virginia Smith. Ditto: Fair and robust federated
  learning through personalization. In International Conference on Machine Learning, 2021.
Xilai Li, Yingbo Zhou, Tianfu Wu, Richard Socher, and Caiming Xiong. Learn to grow: A continual
  structure learning framework for overcoming catastrophic forgetting. In International Conference
  on Machine Learning, 2019.
David Lopez-Paz and Marc’Aurelio Ranzato. Gradient episodic memory for continual learning.
  Advances in neural information processing systems, 2017.
Brendan McMahan, Eider Moore, Daniel Ramage, Seth Hampson, and Blaise Aguera y Arcas.
  Communication-efficient learning of deep networks from decentralized data. In Artificial intelli-
  gence and statistics, 2017.
Zichen Miao, Ze Wang, Wei Chen, and Qiang Qiu. Continual learning with filter atom swapping. In
  International Conference on Learning Representations, 2021.
Ari Morcos, Maithra Raghu, and Samy Bengio. Insights on representational similarity in neural
  networks with canonical correlation. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2018.
Yuval Netzer, Tao Wang, Adam Coates, Alessandro Bissacco, Bo Wu, and Andrew Y Ng. Reading
  digits in natural images with unsupervised feature learning. Advances in Neural Information
  Processing Systems, 2011.
Behnam Neyshabur, Hanie Sedghi, and Chiyuan Zhang. What is being transferred in transfer learn-
  ing? Advances in neural information processing systems, 2020.
German I Parisi, Ronald Kemker, Jose L Part, Christopher Kanan, and Stefan Wermter. Continual
  lifelong learning with neural networks: A review. Neural Networks, 2019.
Qiang Qiu, Xiuyuan Cheng, Guillermo Sapiro, et al. Dcfnet: Deep neural network with decomposed
  convolutional filters. In International Conference on Machine Learning, 2018.
Aniruddh Raghu, Maithra Raghu, Samy Bengio, and Oriol Vinyals. Rapid learning or feature reuse?
  towards understanding the effectiveness of maml. In International Conference on Learning Rep-
  resentations, 2019a.


                                                11
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Maithra Raghu, Justin Gilmer, Jason Yosinski, and Jascha Sohl-Dickstein. Svcca: Singular vector
 canonical correlation analysis for deep learning dynamics and interpretability. Advances in neural
 information processing systems, 2017.
Maithra Raghu, Chiyuan Zhang, Jon Kleinberg, and Samy Bengio. Transfusion: Understanding
 transfer learning for medical imaging. Advances in neural information processing systems, 2019b.
Olaf Ronneberger, Philipp Fischer, and Thomas Brox. U-net: Convolutional networks for biomedi-
  cal image segmentation. In International Conference on Medical image computing and computer-
  assisted intervention, 2015.
Olga Russakovsky, Jia Deng, Hao Su, Jonathan Krause, Sanjeev Satheesh, Sean Ma, Zhiheng
  Huang, Andrej Karpathy, Aditya Khosla, Michael Bernstein, Alexander C. Berg, and Li Fei-Fei.
  ImageNet Large Scale Visual Recognition Challenge. International Journal of Computer Vision
  (IJCV), 2015.
Andrei A Rusu, Neil C Rabinowitz, Guillaume Desjardins, Hubert Soyer, James Kirkpatrick, Koray
  Kavukcuoglu, Razvan Pascanu, and Raia Hadsell. Progressive neural networks. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:1606.04671, 2016.
Ramprasaath R Selvaraju, Michael Cogswell, Abhishek Das, Ramakrishna Vedantam, Devi Parikh,
  and Dhruv Batra. Grad-cam: Visual explanations from deep networks via gradient-based local-
  ization. In Proceedings of the IEEE international conference on computer vision, 2017.
Karen Simonyan and Andrew Zisserman. Very deep convolutional networks for large-scale image
  recognition. arXiv preprint arXiv:1409.1556, 2014.
Virginia Smith, Chao-Kai Chiang, Maziar Sanjabi, and Ameet S Talwalkar. Federated multi-task
  learning. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2017.
Samuel Stanton, Pavel Izmailov, Polina Kirichenko, Alexander A Alemi, and Andrew G Wilson.
  Does knowledge distillation really work? Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems,
  2021.
Alysa Ziying Tan, Han Yu, Lizhen Cui, and Qiang Yang. Toward personalized federated learning.
  IEEE Transactions on Neural Networks and Learning Systems, 2022.
Jaehong Yoon, Eunho Yang, Jeongtae Lee, and Sung Ju Hwang. Lifelong learning with dynamically
  expandable networks. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2018.
Matthew D Zeiler and Rob Fergus. Visualizing and understanding convolutional networks. In
 European conference on computer vision, 2014.
Friedemann Zenke, Ben Poole, and Surya Ganguli. Continual learning through synaptic intelligence.
  In International Conference on Machine Learning, 2017.
Xingxuan Zhang, Peng Cui, Renzhe Xu, Linjun Zhou, Yue He, and Zheyan Shen. Deep stable
  learning for out-of-distribution generalization. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on
  Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, 2021.
Bolei Zhou, Aditya Khosla, Agata Lapedriza, Aude Oliva, and Antonio Torralba. Learning deep
  features for discriminative localization. In Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer
  vision and pattern recognition, 2016.


                                                12
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


A      A PPENDIX
A.1     T HEORETICAL P ROOFS

Proposition 1. Suppose Du and Dv are two different sets of filter atoms for a convolutional layer
with the common atom coefficients α, and the activation function σ is non-expansive, we can upper
bound the changes in the corresponding features Zu , Zv with atom changes,
                                     p
           ||Zu − Zv ||F ≤ (||α||F λ) |B| · ||(Du − Dv )||F , with λ = sup ||X||F,Nb ,        (8)
                                                                                       b∈B


Proof. Recall the decomposed convolution can be expressed as,
                                                 m
                                                 X
                                      Z = σ(           αi ⟨X, D[i]⟩Nb )                                  (9)
                                                 i=1

Since σ is non-expansive, ∀b we have,
                                          m
                                          X                             m
                                                                        X
                  |Zu (b) − Zv (b)| ≤ |         αi ⟨X, Du [i]⟩Nb −            αi ⟨X, Dv [i]⟩Nb |
                                          i=1                           i=1
                                               m
                                                                                                        (10)
                                              X
                                    ≤ ||α||F (   |⟨X, (Du [i] − Dv [i])⟩Nb |2 )1/2 .
                                                  i=1

By Cauchy-Schwarz inequality,
                    |⟨X, (Du [i] − Dv [i])⟩Nb | ≤ ||X||F,Nb · ||Du [i] − Dv [i]||F,Nb
                                                                                                        (11)
                                                ≤ λ · ||Du [i] − Dv [i]||F,Nb

we have that
            X                                     m
                                                 XX
                  |Zu (b) − Zv (b)|2 ≤ ||α||2F                |⟨X, (Du [i] − Dv [i])⟩Nb |2
            b∈B                                    b    i=1
                                                  m
                                                 XX
                                     ≤ ||α||2F                ||X||2F,Nb · ||(Du [i] − Dv [i])||2F,Nb   (12)
                                                   b    i=1
                                                        X
                                     ≤ (||α||F λ)2            ||(Du [i] − Dv [i])||2F,Nb
                                                        b,i


and observe that
   X                                 m
                                    XX
       ||(Du [i] − Dv [i])||2F,Nb =    ||(Du [i] − Dv [i])||2F,Nb = |B| · ||(Du − Dv )||2F ,            (13)
      b,i                            b∈B i=1


where |B| is the area of the domain of X. Then Eq. 12 becomes
                      X
                          |Zu (b) − Zv (b)|2 ≤ (||α||F λ)2 |B| · ||(Du − Dv )||2F ,                     (14)
                      b∈B
                                            p
which proves that ||Zu − Zv ||F ≤ (||α||F λ) |B| · ||(Du − Dv )||F as claimed.


Proposition 2. Assume filter atoms Du , Dv are orthogonal matrices, then SGras = SAtom .
                             2
Proof. Since Du , Dv ∈ Rk ×m are orthogonal matrices, i.e., DTu Du = DTv Dv = I, the Grassmann
similarity can be represented as,
                                                         m                    m
                                                   1 X         1 X
                             SGras (Fu , Fv ) =        cosθi =     σi ,                                 (15)
                                                   m i         m i


                                                        13
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


where σi = Σii , U ΣV = DTu Dv .
SAtom is defined as,
                                                                < vec(Du ), vec(Dv ) >
                 SAtom (Fu , Fv ) = cos(Du , Dv ) =                                        .   (16)
                                                             ||vec(Du )||F · ||vec(Dv )||F

                                                                            T
                                                                                      Pm
Analyze each part   separately, we have    <  vec(Du ), vec(Dv )  >=    Tr(Du D v ) =  i σi ,
                p
                         T
                                   p            √                             √
||vec(Du )||F = Tr(Du Du ) = Tr(I) = m, and also ||vec(Dv )||F = m. In total, the
atom-based similarity becomes,
                                                              Pm
                                                                   σi
                           SAtom (Fu , Fv ) = cos(Du , Dv ) = i       ,                 (17)
                                                                 m

which equals SGras . The claimed theorem is proved.


Lemma 1. For two positive semidefinite matrices A, B,
                                           Tr(AB) ≥ σmin (A) Tr(B),                            (18)
where σmin denotes the minimum eigenvalue of A.

Proof. It is equivalent to prove that,
                                           Tr((A − σmin (A)I)B) ≥ 0.                           (19)

Let C, D be matrices such that A − σmin (A)I = C⊺ C, B = D⊺ D, then
                          Tr((A − σmin (A)I)B) = Tr(C⊺ CD⊺ D)
                                               = Tr(CD⊺ DC⊺ )                                  (20)
                                               = Tr((DC⊺ )⊺ (DC⊺ )) ≥ 0.



Theorem 1. Suppose the forward of decomposed convolution layer for the u-th model is Zu =
αXDu . Zu , Zv nearly haveqzero-mean since Xp is preprocessed to be normalized. CCA coefficient
                              Pc
is defined as S(Zu , Zv ) = 1c i=1 σi2 , where σi2 denotes the i-th eigenvalue of Λu,v = Qu ⊺ Qv ,
                    1
Qu = Zu (Z⊺u Zu )− 2 . Then S(Zu , Zv ) is upper bounded,

                                                        3
                                                       c2 T
                                     S(Zu , Zv ) ≤          cos(Du , Dv ),                     (21)
                                                        C
where T = Tr(X⊺ α⊺ αX), C = σmin (X⊺ α⊺ αX).
                             Pc
Proof. Consider S 2 = 1c             2
                                i=1 σi .

                                               c
                                            1X 2      1
                                   S2 =           σi = Tr(Λu,v Λ⊺u,v ).                        (22)
                                            c i=1     c

where
                       Tr(Λu,v Λ⊺u,v ) = Tr(Q⊺u Qv Q⊺v Qu ) = Tr(Qv Q⊺v Qu Q⊺u ).              (23)

As defined above, we have
                                                   1          1
                       Qu Q⊺u = Zu (Z⊺u Zu )− 2 (Z⊺u Zu )− 2 Z⊺u = Zu (Z⊺u Zu )−1 Z⊺u
                                                   1         1
                                                                                               (24)
                        Qv Q⊺v = Zv (Z⊺v Zv )− 2 (Z⊺v Zv )− 2 Z⊺v = Zv (Z⊺v Zv )−1 Z⊺v .

                                                        14
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Then Equation 23 becomes,

                       Tr(Λu,v Λ⊺u,v ) = Tr(Zu (Z⊺u Zu )−1 Z⊺u Zv (Z⊺v Zv )−1 Z⊺v )
                                                                                                    (25)
                                       = Tr((Z⊺u Zu )−1 Z⊺u Zv (Z⊺v Zv )−1 Z⊺v Zu ).

By Cauchy-Schwartz Inequality,
                     Tr(Λu,v Λ⊺u,v ) ≤ Tr((Z⊺u Zu )−1 ) Tr((Z⊺v Zv )−1 ) Tr(Z⊺u Zv )2 .             (26)

Then we analyze these terms individually,
                     Tr(Z⊺u Zv ) = Tr(D⊺u X⊺ α⊺ αXDv ) = Tr(X⊺ α⊺ αXDv D⊺u )
                                                                                                    (27)
                                 ≤ Tr(X⊺ α⊺ αX) Tr(D⊺u Dv ) ≤ T · Tr(D⊺u Dv )

As for Tr((Z⊺u Zu )−1 ), let λ1 , λ2 , ..., λc be eigenvalues for Z⊺u Zu listed in descending order (λ1 ≥
λ2 ≥ ... ≥ λc ), and assume the condition number of Z⊺u Zu and Z⊺v Zv satisfy λmax /λmin ≤ γ,
then,

                                                     c
                                                     X 1              1    γc
                               Tr((Z⊺u Zu )−1 ) =               ≤c·      ≤    ,                     (28)
                                                     i=1
                                                           λi         λc   λ1

where λ1 = ||Z⊺u Zu ||2 , || · ||2 denotes the operator norm induced by the vector L2 -norm. With the
norm inequalities of any positive semidefinite matrix A,

                                           1           1          1
                                  ||A||2 ≥ √ ||A||F ≥ ||A||∗ ≥ Tr(A),                               (29)
                                            c          c          c
where || · ||F , || · ||∗ denote the Frobenius norm and the nuclear norm, respectively.
Equation (30) then becomes,

                                                           1              γc2
                            Tr((Z⊺u Zu )−1 ) ≤ c ·                ≤             .                   (30)
                                                     ||Z⊺u Zu ||2   Tr(Z⊺u Zu )
By Lemma 1,
                             Tr(Z⊺u Zu ) = Tr(D⊺u X⊺ α⊺ αXDu )
                                         = Tr(X⊺ α⊺ α⊺ XDu D⊺u )
                                         ≥ σmin (X⊺ α⊺ α⊺ X) Tr(D⊺u Du )                            (31)
                                         ≥ C · Tr(D⊺u Du )
                                         ≥ C · ||vec(Du )||22 ,
where vec(·) denotes vectorization of a matrix.
Then Equation 30 is further derived as,
                                                               γc2
                                  Tr((Z⊺u Zu )−1 ) ≤                       .                        (32)
                                                        C · ||vec(Du )||22

Similarly, we have
                                                               γc2
                                  Tr((Z⊺v Zv )−1 ) ≤                       .                        (33)
                                                        C · ||vec(Dv )||22

Finally, with Tr(D⊺u Dv ) =< vec(Du ), vec(Dv ) >, we have
                                          γ 2 T 2 c4 (< vec(Du ), vec(Dv ) >)2
                        Tr(Λu,v Λ⊺u,v ) ≤
                                              C 2 ||vec(Du )||22 · ||vec(Dv )||22
                                                                                                    (34)
                                          γ 2 T 2 c4
                                        ≤             · cos2 (Du , Dv ),
                                              C2

                                                     15
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


and thus,                                        r
                                                  1
                                 S(Zu , Zv ) =      Tr(Λu,v Λ⊺u,v )
                                                  c                                                  (35)
                                                     3
                                                γT c 2
                                              ≤        · cos(Du , Dv ).
                                                  C
Then the claimed theorem is proved.


Lemma 2. For two matrices A, B, their frobenius norm satisfies,
                                                  s
                                                             ∆1
                        ∥AB∥F = ∥A∥F ∥B∥F 1 −                         ,                              (36)
                                                          ∥A∥2F ∥B∥2F

where ∆1 = ij ( k A2ik )( k Bkj  ) · sin2 (⟨Ai: , B:j ⟩).
          P P            P 2

                                                                    qP
Proof. According to the definition of frobenius norm ∥A∥F =                           2 we have,
                                                                          ij |Aij |
                                                 sX X
                                   ∥AB∥F =         (  Aik Bkj )2 .                                   (37)
                                                     ij    k

Note that ( i xi yi )2 = ( i x2i )( i yi2 ) · cos2 (⟨x, y⟩) = ( i x2i )( i yi2 ) − ( i x2i )( i yi2 ) ·
            P               P        P                          P       P           P        P

sin2 (⟨x, y⟩), where ⟨x, y⟩ is the angle of two vectors x and y. We have,
                sX X
                      (    Aik Bkj )2
                   ij   k
               v "                                                           #
               u
               uX X         X          X        X
                                                             2
             = t   (  2
                     Aik )(    2
                              Bkj ) − (   2
                                         Aik )(    2
                                                  Bkj ) · sin (⟨Ai: , B:j ⟩)
                   ij       k        k               k          k
                                     v
                                                                    Bkj ) · sin2 (⟨Ai: , B:j ⟩)
                                     u       P P 2 P 2
                                                ij (  k Aik )(
                 sX        sX
                                                                                                      (38)
                                     u
             =          2
                       Aik         2
                                 Bkj 1 −
                                     t                     P k2 P             2
                                                                 A
                                                             ik ik          B
                                                                        kj kj
                    ik        kj
                             s      P P 2 P 2                        2
                                       ij (  k Aik )(   k Bkj ) · sin (⟨Ai: , B:j ⟩)
             =∥A∥F ∥B∥F 1 −
                                                     ∥A∥2F ∥B∥2F
                             s
                                          ∆1
             =∥A∥F ∥B∥F 1 −                        ,
                                    ∥A∥2F ∥B∥2F

where Ai: is the i-th row of A and B:j is the j-th column of B, ∆1 = ij ( k A2ik )( k Bkj
                                                                                P P               P 2
                                                                                                        )·
   2                                                                                            2   2
sin (⟨Ai: , B:j ⟩). As Ai: and B:j are more correlated, ⟨Ai: , B:j ⟩ →
                                                                     − 0, thus, ∆1 ≪ ∥A∥F ∥B∥F .


Lemma 3.
                                                   1/2         ∆1A1/2 1/4
                                ∥A1/2 ∥F = ∥A∥F (1 +                 ) .                             (39)
                                                               ∥A∥2F

Proof. According to Lemma 2, we have,
                                         ∥A∥2F = ∥A1/2 ∥4F − ∆1 .                                    (40)

Thus,
                                                     1/2       ∆1A1/2 1/4
                                ∥A1/2 ∥F = ∥A∥F (1 +                 ) ,                             (41)
                                                               ∥A∥2F

                                                     16
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


where ∆1A1/2 = ij ( k (A1/2 )2ik )( k (A1/2 )2kj ) · sin2 (⟨(A1/2 )i: , (A1/2 ):j ⟩). As (A1/2 )i: and
                   P P                  P

(A1/2 ):j are more correlated, ⟨(A1/2 )i: , (A1/2 ):j ⟩ →
                                                        − 0, thus, ∆1A1/2 ≪ ∥A∥2F .


Lemma 4. For three matrices A, B, and C, their frobenius norm satisfies,
                                               s
                                                          ∆2 + ∆ 3
                   ∥A∥F = ∥A∥F ∥B∥F ∥C∥F 1 −                             ,                               (42)
                                                      ∥A∥2F ∥B∥2F ∥C∥2F

where ∆2 = 12 [∥A∥2F kj ( l Bkl         )( l Clj ) · sin2 (⟨Bk: , C:j ⟩) + ∥C∥2F il ( k A2ik )( k Bkl
                        P P 2 P 2                                               P P            P 2
                                                                                                      )·
    2                                      1
                                               P P 2 P                     2        2
sin (⟨Ai: , B:l ⟩)] and ∆3            =    2[     ij (    k Aik )( k (BC)kj ) · sin (⟨Ai: , (BC):j ⟩) +
P P             2
                      P 2          2
   ij ( l (AB)  il )(   C
                       l lj ) · sin  (⟨(AB) i: , C:j ⟩)].

Proof. Based on Lemma 2, we have,
                ∥ABC∥2F
                                   XX            X
              =∥AB∥2F ∥C∥2F −       ( (AB)2il )(    2
                                                   Clj ) · sin2 (⟨(AB)i: , C:j ⟩)
                                      ij           l                      l
                                                                                                         (43)
                                                       XX         X
              =∥A∥2F ∥B∥2F ∥C∥2F − ∥C∥2F                ( A2ik )(    2
                                                                    Bkl ) · sin2 (⟨Ai: , B:l ⟩)
                                                        il            k            k
                   XX            X
                 −  ( (AB)2il )(    2
                                   Clj ) · sin2 (⟨(AB)i: , C:j ⟩)
                     ij       l                l

Symmetrically, we also have,
                ∥ABC∥2F
                                   XX        X
              =∥A∥2F ∥BC∥2F −       ( A2ik )( (BC)2kj ) · sin2 (⟨Ai: , (BC):j ⟩)
                                      ij           k              k
                                                                                                         (44)
                                                       XX       X
              =∥A∥2F ∥B∥2F ∥C∥2F − ∥A∥2F                (  2
                                                          Bkl )(   2
                                                                  Clj ) · sin2 (⟨Bk: , C:j ⟩)
                                                       kj             l            l
                   XX        X
                 −  ( A2ik )( (BC)2kj ) · sin2 (⟨Ai: , (BC):j ⟩)
                    ij        k       k

Thus,
              ∥ABC∥2F
              1                            XX               X
             = [∥A∥2F ∥B∥2F ∥C∥2F − ∥A∥2F      (   Bkl2
                                                         )(     2
                                                              Clj ) · sin2 (⟨Bk: , C:j ⟩)
              2
                                            kj   l          l
                XX             X
                                               2
              −    (    A2ik )( (BC)2kj ) · sin (⟨Ai: , (BC):j ⟩)
                   ij     k       k
                                                        XX        X                                      (45)
               + ∥A∥2F ∥B∥2F ∥C∥2F − ∥C∥2F               ( A2ik )(   2
                                                                    Bkl ) · sin2 (⟨Ai: , B:l ⟩)
                                                             il           k            k
                 XX            X
               −  ( (AB)2il )(    2
                                 Clj ) · sin2 (⟨(AB)i: , C:j ⟩)]
                   ij     l                l

             =∥A∥2F ∥B∥2F ∥C∥2F − ∆2 − ∆3 ,
where ∆2 = 21 [∥A∥2F kj ( l Bkl         )( l Clj ) · sin2 (⟨Bk: , C:j ⟩) + ∥C∥2F il ( k A2ik )( k Bkl
                        P P 2 P 2                                               P P            P 2
                                                                                                       )·
    2                                      1
                                               P P 2 P                    2         2
sin (⟨Ai: , B:l ⟩)] and ∆3            =    2[     ij (    k Aik )(  k (BC)kj ) · sin (⟨Ai: , (BC):j ⟩) +
P P             2
                      P 2          2
   ij ( l (AB)  il )(   C
                       l lj ) · sin  (⟨(AB) i: , C:j ⟩)].  Therefore,
                                                                          s
                                                                                      ∆2 + ∆ 3
                        ∥ABC∥F = ∥A∥F ∥B∥F ∥C∥F                               1−                     .   (46)
                                                                                   ∥A∥2F ∥B∥2F ∥C∥2F


                                                                  17
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


As Ai: and B:l , Bk: and C:j are more correlated, ⟨Ai: , B:l ⟩, ⟨Bk: , C:j ⟩, ⟨Ai: , (BC):j ⟩, ⟨(AB)i: , C:j ⟩ →
                                                                                                               −
0, thus, ∆2 ≪ ∥A∥2F ∥B∥2F ∥C∥2F and ∆3 ≪ ∥A∥2F ∥B∥2F ∥C∥2F .


Lemma 5.                                                                 s
                                           ∥B∥F                           ∆2 + ∆ 3
∥A−1/2 BC−1/2 ∥F = κF (A1/2 )κF (C1/2 ) 1/2                                  1−                 ,
                                       ∥A ∥F ∥C1/2 ∥F            ∥A−1/2 ∥2F ∥B∥2F ∥C−1/2 ∥2F
                                                                                            (47)
           1/2
q P κF (A ) P
where            and κF (C1/2 ) are the conditionqnumber  of A1/2 and C1/2 , κF (A1/2 ) =
  ( σi2 (A1/2 ))( σ2 (A11/2 ) ) and κF (C1/2 ) =  ( σi2 (C1/2 ))( σ2 (C11/2 ) ); σi2 (A1/2 ) are
                                                   P             P
                           i                                                         i

singular value of A1/2 and σi2 (C1/2 ) are singular value of C1/2 .

Proof. Based on Lemma 4, we have,
                                                                   s
         −1/2      −1/2             −1/2               −1/2                      ∆2 + ∆ 3
    ∥A          BC        ∥F = ∥A           ∥F ∥B∥F ∥C        ∥F   1−                                .    (48)
                                                                        ∥A −1/2 ∥2F ∥B∥2F ∥C−1/2 ∥2F
                                                             qP
By the definition of condition number κF (X) = ∥X∥F ∥X−1 ∥F = ( σi2 (X))( σ2 (X)
                                                                           P 1
                                                                                   ),
                                                                                i
                                                          s
                                                ∥B∥F                   ∆2 + ∆ 3
∥A−1/2 BC−1/2 ∥F = κF (A1/2 )κF (C1/2 ) 1/2                 1−                             .
                                           ∥A ∥F ∥C1/2 ∥F      ∥A−1/2 ∥2F ∥B∥2F ∥C−1/2 ∥2F
                                                                                      (49)



                                        q P convolution layer for the u-th model is Zu =
Theorem 2. Suppose the forward of decomposed
                                         1  c    2          2
αXDu , CCA coefficient be S(Zu , Zv ) =  c  i=1 σi , where σi denotes the i-th eigenvalue of
                                               1
Λu,v = Qu ⊺ Qv , Qu = Zu (Z⊺u Zu )− 2 . Then S(Zu , Zv ) is approximately linear to atom-based
similarity,

                                                     γ1 γ2 γ3
                                     S(Zu , Zv ) =     √ cos(Du , Dv ),                                   (50)
                                                         c
                                     q P
                                        c
                                      1
                                                                        pPc
                                                   2                              2
Proof. Based on S(Zu , Zv ) =           c     i=1 σi and ∥Λu,v ∥F =          i=1 σi , where σi are the singular
value of Λu,v ,
                  v
                  u c
                  u1 X         1            1             1                   1
                S=t      σ 2 = √ ∥Λu,v ∥F = √ ∥(Z⊺u Zu )− 2 Z⊺u Zv (Z⊺v Zv )− 2 ∥F .                      (51)
                    c i=1 i     c            c

According to Lemma. 5, we have

           1                1                    1     γ1 γ2        ∥Z⊺u Zv ∥F
           √ ∥(Z⊺u Zu )− 2 Z⊺u Zv (Z⊺v Zv )− 2 ∥F = √                                        ,          (52)
            c                                             c ∥(Zu Zu ) 21 ∥F ∥(Z⊺v Zv ) 12 ∥F
                                                               ⊺

                         1                   1
                                                          q
                                                                                  ∆2 +∆3
where γ1 = κF ((Z⊺u Zu ) 2 ) · κF ((Z⊺v Zv ) 2 ) and γ2 = 1 − ∥(Z⊺u Zu )−1/2 ∥2 ∥Z  ⊺      2   ⊺
                                                                                    u Zv ∥ ∥(Zv Zv )
                                                                                                    −1/2 ∥2 .
                                                                                    F        F              F

As Zu = αXDu and Zv = αXDv , we have

                           γ1 γ2        ∥Z⊺u Zv ∥F
                            √
                              c ∥(Zu Zu ) 12 ∥F ∥(Z⊺v Zv ) 12 ∥F
                                   ⊺
                                                                                                          (53)
                        γ1 γ2            ∥D⊺u X⊺ α⊺ αXDv ∥F
                       = √                                                    .
                           c ∥(Du X⊺ α⊺ αXDu ) 12 ∥F ∥(D⊺v X⊺ α⊺ αXDv ) 12 ∥F
                                ⊺



                                                         18
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


According to Lemma 3,
                       γ1 γ2             ∥D⊺u X⊺ α⊺ αXDv ∥F
                        √
                          c ∥(D⊺u X⊺ α⊺ αXDu ) 12 ∥F ∥(D⊺v X⊺ α⊺ αXDv ) 12 ∥F
                                                                                                               (54)
                      γ1 γ2 γ3          ∥D⊺u X⊺ α⊺ αXDv ∥F
                     = √                                                ,
                          c ∥(D⊺u X⊺ α⊺ αXD )∥ 12 ∥(D⊺v X⊺ α⊺ αXD )∥ 12
                                                              u    F                v   F
                                         1                               1
where γ3 = (1 + ∥(D⊺u X⊺ α∆⊺1αXDu )∥2 )− 4 (1 + ∥(D⊺v X⊺ α∆⊺1αXDv )∥2 )− 4 .
                                    F                               F

As Assumption 1 holds, it becomes
                 γ1 γ2 γ3          ∥D⊺u X⊺ α⊺ αXDv ∥F
                   √
                     c ∥(D⊺u X⊺ α⊺ αXD )∥ 21 ∥(D⊺v X⊺ α⊺ αXD )∥ 12
                                                  u       F                 v   F
                γ1 γ2 γ3               ∥D⊺u Dv ∥F ∥X⊺ α⊺ αX∥F
               = √
                    c ∥D⊺u ∥ 2 ∥X⊺ α⊺ αX∥ 12 ∥D ∥ 21 ∥D⊺v ∥ 12 ∥X⊺ α⊺ αX∥ 21 ∥D ∥ 21
                             1

                                F                     F           u F   F               F       v F            (55)
                γ1 γ2 γ3 ∥D⊺u Dv ∥F
               = √
                    c ∥Du ∥F ∥Dv ∥F
                γ1 γ2 γ3
               = √ cos(Du , Dv ).
                    c

Thus, we have

                                             γ1 γ2 γ3
                                S(Zu , Zv ) = √ cos(Du , Dv ).                                                 (56)
                                                 c



A.2   E XPERIMENT S ETTINGS

Model training of Federated Learning. In each experiment we have 100 clients in total and
sample a ratio r = 0.1 of all the clients on every round. All models are randomly initialized and
trained for T = 100 communication rounds for the CIFAR datasets. At each round, the client
executes 15 epochs of SGD with momentum to train the local model, the learning rate is 0.01 and
momentum is 0.9. Accuracies are computed by taking the average local accuracies for all users at
the final communication round. As shown in the Table 3, we have different settings for CIFAR-10
and CIFAR-100. For example, (100, 2) means 100 clients with 2 classes on each client. For each
method, the training takes about 12 hours on Nvidia RTX A5000.


                                           0.97                                             1    0.97   0.71

                                    0.71                           𝛂
                                                                                        0.97      1     0.63
                                       0.63
                                                                                        0.71     0.63    1


Figure 7: The shared coefficients and user-specific atoms represent common knowledge and person-
alized information. The atom-based similarity is used to calculate the relations among users. Users
with heterogeneous data result in lower similarity, as illustrated in a similarity matrix.


                                                              19
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                           Table 3: Compare accuracy with different approaches

                                               CIFAR-100                          CIFAR-10
        (# client, # classes per client)   (100, 5)   (100, 20)      (100, 2)     (100, 5)   (1000, 2)
        FedAvg                              82.39          62.92          86.37    70.63      86.12
        FedProx                             80.77           59.7          85.90    69.94      84.83
        FedPer                              81.46          62.52          81.74    68.24      81.74
        FedRep                              72.98          37.71          80.55     67.3      82.98
        Local                               81.21          49.25          90.24    72.05      97.80
        Ours                                81.03          52.13          83.37    65.63      82.54
                              1.000                                1.00                                  1.00

                              0.995
                                                                   0.98                                  0.98
                              0.990

                              0.985                                                                      0.96
                                                                   0.96
                              0.980

                              0.975                                                                      0.94
                                                                   0.94
                              0.970
                                                                                                         0.92
                              0.965                                0.92


          (a) 10th epoch                       (b) 50th epoch                         (c) 90th epoch
Figure 8: Similarity matrices that show relations among 120 users in FL with our atom-based simi-
larity through the training process.


Evolving shared atom coefficients. we can get shared atom coefficients by evolving them during
the communication, apart from pre-trained models or from other FL approaches. In FL, the server
aggregates models from every involved client at each communication round. Our method enforces
the model with a shared atom coefficient and atoms. At each communication round, the clients
perform training on both atoms and atom coefficients with locally stored data. Then, the server
aggregates only the atom coefficients of selected clients to get an updated coefficient. In this way,
we can get a shared coefficient across clients.

Comparison with other FL approaches. We compare our approach by evolving shared atom
coefficients with various personalized federated learning methods and federated learning methods
with local finetuning. Among these methods, FedPer (Arivazhagan et al., 2019) and FedRep(Collins
et al., 2021) have the similar ideas by learning shared global representation and personalized local
heads. Ditto (Li et al., 2021) and FedProx (Li et al., 2020b) induce global regularization to im-
prove the model performance. We also compare our method with FedAvg (McMahan et al., 2017).
FedRep (Collins et al., 2021) approaches the common knowledge with shared representation. The
codes are adapted from 1 . We evaluate the test accuracy on CIFAR-10 and CIFAR-100 with differ-
ent FL setting. As shown in Table 3, our method achieves comparable performance among different
methods.

Fine-tuning models for ensemble. We select 3 models with different similarity measures for en-
semble. For feature-based similarity methods, we randomly select 1000 examples from CIFAR-100
dataset. The fully-connected layer of each model is fine-tuned on the user’s local data with 100
epochs. The fine-tuning takes about 12 hours on Nvidia RTX A5000. After fine-tuning, the accu-
racy is measured on local test data, with the predictions of current model and 3 selected models.

Similar representations across datasets. Similar to (Kornblith et al., 2019), we can use atom-
based similarity to compare networks trained on different datasets. In Figure 9(a), we show that
pairs of models that are both trained on CIFAR-10 and CIFAR-100 have high atom-based similari-
ties. Models learned on two datasets respectively still show high similarity. In contrast, similarities
between trained and untrained models are significantly lower.
   1
       https://github.com/lgcollins/FedRep


                                                      20
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023



                                                                                                        z
                                                                                                              𝑧=
                                                                                                                      10
                                                                                                                         𝑦   −𝑥

 Atom-based Similarity
                                                                                                                                  +𝜖


                                                                                                                                       y
                                                                                     x


                                        Layer Index
                                         (a)                                                            (b)
Figure 9: (a) Using atom-based similarity, models trained on different datasets (CIFAR-10 and
CIFAR-100) are similar among themselves, but they differ from untrained models. (b) Illustration
of limitations of stimulus-based similarities. Input data from “red” ({(xi = 0, yi )}) and “blue”
({(x′i = yi , yi′ = 0)}) are orthogonal. Since two models are learned on “red” data, their similarity
should be 1, which can be faithfully indicated by our atom similarity. However, stimulus-based
similarities will become 0 with the “blue” probing data.
                                               1.000                                      1.000                                            1.000

                                               0.975                                      0.975                                            0.975

                                               0.950                                      0.950                                            0.950

                                               0.925                                      0.925                                            0.925

                                               0.900                                      0.900                                            0.900

                                               0.875                                      0.875                                            0.875

                                               0.850                                      0.850                                            0.850

                                               0.825                                      0.825                                            0.825


                         (a) 1st conv                                 (b) 2nd conv                                    (c) 3rd conv
                                                                       1.000                                  1.000

                                                                       0.975                                  0.975

                                                                       0.950                                  0.950

                                                                       0.925                                  0.925

                                                                       0.900                                  0.900

                                                                       0.875                                  0.875

                                                                       0.850                                  0.850

                                                                       0.825                                  0.825


                                                       (d) 4th conv                      (e) 5th conv
                    Figure 10: Similarity of AlexNet with atoms from different time point during the training.

Limitation of stimulus-based methods. As shown in Figure 9(b), to illustrate sensitivity of
stimulus-based similarities to probing data, we perform a simple regression task with data, {(xi =
0, yi , zi )}ni=1 , where zi = f (xi , yi ) + ϵi and yi , ϵi ∼ N (0.5, 0.1). Two NN models F1 and F2
with the same initialization and atom coefficients are trained for their different atoms to learn
F : (X, Y ) →      − Z. It is can be simply found that the atom-based similarity of F1 and F2 is 1
and the stimulus-based similarity is also 1 with the same {(xi = 0, yi )} as the probing data. How-
ever, if we choose {(x′i = yi , yi′ = 0)} as the stimuli data, then the stimulus-based similarities
directly become 0 as the data are now orthogonal to model parameters.

Training dynamics. We investigate the training dynamics of AlexNet (Krizhevsky et al., 2012)
and VGG (Simonyan & Zisserman, 2014) separately on CIFAR-100 (Krizhevsky et al., 2009) and
ImageNet (Russakovsky et al., 2015). The details of training dynamics of models with atoms from
different time point during the training are shown in Figure 10 and Figure 11. Moreover, we examine
the similarity between the two participated models shared the same initialization trained only with
atoms on two different tasks. The results is shown in Figure 12 and Figure 13. The difference is less


                                                                               21
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                           1.000                                                1.000                                            1.000                                           1.000

                                           0.999                                                0.999                                            0.999                                           0.999

                                           0.998                                                0.998                                            0.998                                           0.998

                                           0.997                                                0.997                                            0.997                                           0.997

                                           0.996                                                0.996                                            0.996                                           0.996

                                           0.995                                                0.995                                            0.995                                           0.995

                                           0.994                                                0.994                                            0.994                                           0.994

                                           0.993                                                0.993                                            0.993                                           0.993

                                           0.992                                                0.992                                            0.992                                           0.992


                  (a) 1st conv                                     (b) 2nd conv                                     (c) 3rd conv                                      (d) 4th conv
                                          1.000                                                1.000                                            1.000                                         1.000

                                          0.999                                                0.999                                            0.999                                         0.999

                                          0.998                                                0.998                                            0.998                                         0.998

                                          0.997                                                0.997                                            0.997                                         0.997

                                          0.996                                                0.996                                            0.996                                         0.996

                                          0.995                                                0.995                                            0.995                                         0.995

                                          0.994                                                0.994                                            0.994                                         0.994

                                          0.993                                                0.993                                            0.993                                         0.993

                                          0.992                                                0.992                                            0.992                                         0.992


                 (e) 5th conv                                      (f) 6th conv                                     (g) 7th conv                                     (h) 8th conv
          Figure 11: Similarity of VGG with atoms from different time point during the training.
    1.0                                                  layer_1     1.00                                                  layer_1   1.00
                                                         layer_2                                                           layer_2
                                                         layer_3     0.95                                                  layer_3   0.95
    0.9                                                  layer_4                                                           layer_4
                                                         layer_5     0.90                                                  layer_5
                                                                                                                                     0.90
                                                                     0.85
    0.8                                                                                                                              0.85
                                                                     0.80
    0.7                                                                                                                              0.80
                                                                     0.75
                                                                     0.70                                                            0.75          layer_1
                                                                                                                                                   layer_2
    0.6                                                                                                                                            layer_3
                                                                     0.65                                                            0.70          layer_4
                                                                                                                                                   layer_5
                                                                     0.60
           0      20     40   60   80   100        120   140                0      20     40     60      80   100    120   140              0            20     40   60   80   100   120   140


                       (a) Model 0 vs. 1                                                (b) Model 0 vs. 2                                                     (c) Model 0 vs. 3
    1.0                                                              1.00                                                            1.00
                                                                     0.95                                                            0.95
    0.9
                                                                     0.90
                                                                                                                                     0.90
    0.8                                                              0.85
                                                                                                                                     0.85
                                                                     0.80
    0.7
                                                                                                                                     0.80
                                                                     0.75
    0.6        layer_1                                                          layer_1                                              0.75          layer_1
               layer_2                                               0.70       layer_2                                                            layer_2
               layer_3                                                          layer_3                                                            layer_3
               layer_4                                               0.65       layer_4                                              0.70          layer_4
    0.5
               layer_5                                                          layer_5                                                            layer_5
                                                                     0.60
           0      20     40   60   80   100        120   140                0      20     40     60      80   100    120   140              0            20     40   60   80   100   120   140


                       (d) Model 0 vs. 4                                                (e) Model 0 vs. 5                                                     (f) Model 0 vs. 6
   1.00                                                  layer_1    1.00                                                   layer_1   1.00                                                  layer_1
                                                         layer_2                                                           layer_2                                                         layer_2
   0.95                                                  layer_3    0.95                                                   layer_3                                                         layer_3
                                                         layer_4                                                           layer_4                                                         layer_4
                                                         layer_5                                                           layer_5   0.95                                                  layer_5
   0.90                                                             0.90
   0.85                                                             0.85                                                             0.90
   0.80                                                             0.80
   0.75                                                             0.75                                                             0.85

   0.70                                                             0.70
                                                                                                                                     0.80
   0.65                                                             0.65
          0      20      40   60   80   100        120   140                0     20      40    60       80   100    120   140              0            20     40   60   80   100   120   140


                      (g) Model 0 vs. 7                                                (h) Model 0 vs. 8                                                      (i) Model 0 vs. 9
                  Figure 12: Similarity of AlexNet trained on different tasks during the training.

on the first few layers, but more on the middle layers. It reflects the middle layer is more critical
than other layers, which is aligned with previous work (Neyshabur et al., 2020).


                                                                                                        22
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


   1.000                                                         1.000                                                             1.000
   0.998                                                         0.998                                                             0.998
   0.996
                                                                 0.996                                                             0.996
   0.994
                                                                 0.994
   0.992                                                                                                                           0.994
              layer_0                                                          layer_0                                                        layer_0
   0.990      layer_3                                            0.992         layer_3                                                        layer_3
              layer_6                                                          layer_6                                             0.992      layer_6
   0.988      layer_8                                                          layer_8                                                        layer_8
              layer_11                                           0.990         layer_11                                                       layer_11
   0.986      layer_13                                                         layer_13                                            0.990      layer_13
              layer_16                                           0.988         layer_16                                                       layer_16
   0.984      layer_18                                                         layer_18                                                       layer_18
                                                                                                                                   0.988
        0.0    2.5       5.0   7.5   10.0   12.5   15.0   17.5           0.0    2.5       5.0   7.5    10.0   12.5   15.0   17.5        0.0    2.5       5.0   7.5   10.0   12.5   15.0   17.5


                     (a) Model 0 vs. 1                                                (b) Model 0 vs. 2                                              (c) Model 0 vs. 3
   1.000                                                         1.000                                                             1.000

   0.998                                                         0.998                                                             0.998

                                                                                                                                   0.996
   0.996                                                         0.996

                                                                                                                                   0.994
   0.994      layer_0                                            0.994         layer_0                                                        layer_0
              layer_3                                                          layer_3                                                        layer_3
              layer_6                                                          layer_6                                             0.992      layer_6
              layer_8                                            0.992         layer_8                                                        layer_8
   0.992      layer_11                                                         layer_11                                                       layer_11
              layer_13                                                         layer_13                                            0.990      layer_13
              layer_16                                           0.990         layer_16                                                       layer_16
   0.990      layer_18                                                         layer_18                                                       layer_18
                                                                                                                                   0.988
        0.0    2.5       5.0   7.5   10.0   12.5   15.0   17.5           0.0    2.5       5.0   7.5    10.0   12.5   15.0   17.5        0.0    2.5       5.0   7.5   10.0   12.5   15.0   17.5


                     (d) Model 0 vs. 4                                                (e) Model 0 vs. 5                                              (f) Model 0 vs. 6
   1.000                                                                                                                           1.000

   0.998                                                         0.998                                                             0.998

   0.996                                                         0.996                                                             0.996

                                                                                                                                   0.994
   0.994      layer_0                                            0.994         layer_0                                                        layer_0
              layer_3                                                          layer_3                                             0.992      layer_3
   0.992      layer_6                                            0.992         layer_6                                                        layer_6
              layer_8                                                          layer_8                                                        layer_8
              layer_11                                                         layer_11                                            0.990      layer_11
   0.990      layer_13                                                         layer_13                                                       layer_13
              layer_16                                           0.990         layer_16                                                       layer_16
              layer_18                                                         layer_18                                            0.988      layer_18
       0.0    2.5        5.0   7.5   10.0   12.5   15.0   17.5       0.0       2.5        5.0   7.5   10.0    12.5   15.0   17.5       0.0    2.5        5.0   7.5   10.0   12.5   15.0   17.5


                     (g) Model 0 vs. 7                                                (h) Model 0 vs. 8                                              (i) Model 0 vs. 9
                         Figure 13: Similarity of VGG trained on different tasks during the training.


                                                                                                      23
