Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


 R EINFORCEMENT L OGIC RULE L EARNING FOR T EM -
 PORAL P OINT P ROCESSES

  Anonymous authors
  Paper under double-blind review



                                             A BSTRACT

          We aim to learn a set of temporal logic rules to explain the occurrence of temporal
          events. Leveraging the temporal point process modeling and learning framework,
          the rule content and rule weights are jointly learned by maximizing the likelihood
          of the observed noisy event sequences. The proposed algorithm alternates between
          a master problem, where the rule weights are updated, and a subproblem, where
          a new rule is searched and included. The formulated master problem is convex
          and relatively easy to solve, whereas the subproblem requires searching the huge
          combinatorial rule predicate and relationship space. To tackle this challenge, we
          propose a neural search policy to learn to generate the new rule content as a
          sequence of actions. The policy parameters will be trained end-to-end using the
          reinforcement learning framework, where the reward signals can be efficiently
          queried by evaluating the subproblem objective. The trained policy can be used
          to generate new rules, and moreover, the well-trained policies can be directly
          transferred to other tasks to speed up the rule searching procedure in the new task.
          We evaluate our methods on both synthetic and real-world datasets, obtaining
          promising results.


 1   I NTRODUCTION
 Understanding the generating process of events with irregular timestamps has long been an interesting
 problem. Temporal point process (TPP) is an elegant probabilistic model for modeling these irregular
 events in continuous time. Instead of discretizing the time horizons and converting the event data
 into time-series event counts, TPP models directly model the inter-event times as random variables
 and can be used to predict the time-to-event as well as the future event types. Recent advances in
 neural-based temporal point process models have exhibited superior ability in event prediction (Du
 et al., 2016; Mei & Eisner, 2017). However, the lack of interpretability of these black-box models
 hinders their applications in high-stakes systems like healthcare.
 In healthcare, it is desirable to summarize medical knowledge or clinical experiences about the
 disease phenotypes and therapies to a collection of logic rules. The discovered rules can contribute to
 the sharing of clinical experiences and aid to the improvement of the treatment strategy. They can
 also provide explanations to the occurrence of events. For example, the following clinical report
“A 50 years old patient, with a chronic lung disease since 5 years ago, took the booster vaccine shot on
 March 1st. The patient got exposed to the COVID-19 virus around May 12th, and afterward within a
 week began to have a mild cough and nasal congestion. The patient received treatment as soon as
 the symptoms appeared. After intravenous infusions at a healthcare facility for around 3 consecutive
 days, the patient recovered... "
 contains many clinical events with timestamps recorded. It sounds appealing to distill compact
 and human-readable temporal logic rules from these noisy event data. In this paper, we propose an
 efficient reinforcement temporal logic rule learning algorithm to automatically learn these rules from
 event sequences. See Fig. 1 for a better illustration of the types of temporal logic rules we aim to
 discover, where the logic rules are in disjunctive normal form (i.e., OR-of-ANDs) with temporal
 ordering constraints.
 Our proposed reinforcement rule learning algorithm builds upon the temporal logic point process
 (TLPP) models (Li et al., 2020), where the intensity functions (i.e., occurrence rate) of events are
 informed by temporal logic rules. TLPP is intrinsically a probabilistic model that treats the temporal


                                                   1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


logic rules as soft constraints. The learned model can tolerate the uncertainty and noisiness in events
and can be directly used for future event prediction and explaination. Given this TLPP modeling
framework, our reinforcement rule learning algorithm jointly learns the rule content (i.e., model
structures) and rule weights (i.e., model parameters) by maximizing the likelihood of the observed
events. The designed learning algorithm alternates between solving a convex master problem,
where the continuous rule weight parameters are easily optimized, and solving a more challenging
subproblem, where a new candidate rule that has the potential to most improve the current likelihood
is discovered via reinforcement learning. New rules are progressively discovered and included until
by adding new rules the objective will not be improved.
Specifically, we formulate the rule discovery
subproblem as a reinforcement learning prob-          𝐱𝟏           𝐱𝟐            𝐱𝟑         𝐱𝟒      𝑓
                                                                                                    !

lem, where a neural policy is learned to ef-                                                             𝐘
ficiently navigate through the combinatorial                                                        𝑓
                                                                                                    "

search space to search for a good explanatory            𝐱 𝟓               𝐱 𝟐      𝐱 𝟑     𝐱 𝟔
temporal logic rule to add. The constructed
neural policy emits a distribution over the pre-         Rule-1(𝑓!)   Rule-2(𝑓")    Before    None     Equal
specified logic predicate and temporal relation
libraries, and generates the logic variables as ac- Figure 1: Example of temporal logic rules: f1 : Y ←
tions in a sequential way to form the rule content. x1 ∧ x2 ∧ x3 ∧ x4 ∧ (x1 Bef ore x2 ) ∧ (x2 N one x3 ) ∧
The generated rules can be of various lengths. (x3 Bef ore x4 ), f2 : Y ← x5 ∧ x2 ∧ x3 ∧ x6 ∧
Once a temporal logic rule is generated, a ter- (x5 N one x2 ) ∧ (x2 Equal x3 ) ∧ (x3 Bef ore x6 ).
minal reward signal can be efficiently queried N one means no temporal order constraints.
by evaluating the current subproblem objective
using the generated rule, which is computationally expedient, without the need to worry about the
insufficient reward samples. The neural policy is gradually improved by a risk-seeking policy gradient
to learn to generate rules to optimize the subproblem objective, which is rigorously formulated from
the dual variables of the master problem so as to search for a rule that has the potential to best improve
the current likelihood.
This proposed reinforcement logic rule learning algorithm has the following advantages: 1) We utilize
differentiable policy gradient to solve the temporal logic rule search subproblem. All the policy
parameters can be learned end-to-end via policy gradient using the subproblem objective as reward.
2) Domain knowledge or grammar constraints for the temporal logic rules can be easily incorporated
by applying specific dynamic masks to the rule generative process at each time step. 3) The memories
of how to search through the rule space have been encoded in the policy parameters. The well-trained
neural policies for each subproblem can be directly transferred to similar rule learning tasks to speed
up the computation in new tasks, where we don’t need to learn rules from scratch.
Contributions Our main contributions have the following aspects:
i) We propose an efficient and differentiable reinforcement temporal logic rule learning algorithm,
which can automatically discover temporal logic rules to predict and explain events. Our method will
add flexibility and explainability to the temporal point process models and broaden their applications
in scenarios where interpretability is important.
ii) All the well-trained neural policies in solving each subproblem can be readily transferred to new
tasks. This fits the continual learning concept well. The quality of the rule search policies can
be continually improved across various tasks. For a new task, we can utilize the preceding tasks’
memories even though we cannot get access to the old training data. We empirically evaluated the
transferability of our neural policies and achieved promising results.
iii) Our discovered temporal logic rules are human-readable. Their scientific accuracy can be easily
judged by human experts. The discovered rules may also trigger experts in thinking. In our paper, we
considered a real healthcare dataset and mined temporal logic rules from these clinical event data.
We invited doctors to verify these rules and incorporated their feedback and modification into our
experiments.

2    R ELATED W ORK
Temporal point process (TPP) models. TPP models can be characterized by the intensity function.
The modeling framework boils down to the design of various intensity functions to add the model
flexibility and interpretability (Mohler et al., 2011). Recent development in deep learning has


                                                     2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


significantly enhanced the flexibility of TPP models. (Du et al., 2016) proposed a neural point process
model, named RMTPP, where the intensity function is modeled by a Recurrent Neural Network.
(Mei & Eisner, 2017) improved RMTPP by constructing a continuous-time RNN. (Zuo et al., 2020)
and (Zhang et al., 2020a) recently leveraged the self-attention mechanism to capture the long-term
dependencies of events. Although flexible, these neural TPP models are black-box and are hard to
interpret. To add transparency, (Zhang et al., 2020b) used Granger causality as a latent graph to
explain point processes, and the structures are jointly learned via gradient descent. However, Granger
causality is still limited to the mutual triggering patterns of events. Recently, (Li et al., 2020) proposed
an explainable Temporal Logic Point Process (TLPP), where the intensity function is built on the basis
of temporal logic rules. TLPP model enables one to perform symbolic reasoning for events however
their rules are required to be pre-specified. A follow-up work (Li et al., 2022) designed a column
generation type of temporal rule learning algorithm. However, their subproblems are solved by
enumeration, which will be intractable for long temporal logic rules and their search memories cannot
be reused for future tasks. By contrast, our proposed algorithm makes the subproblem differentiable
and the trained neural policies can be reused and transferred.

Logic rule learning methods. Learning logic rules without temporal relation constraints has been
studied from various perspectives. Recently, (Wang et al., 2017) tried to learn an explanatory binary
classifier using the Bayesian framework. SATNet (Wang et al., 2019a) transformed rule mining into a
SDP-relaxed MaxSAT problem. Attention-based methods (Yang & Song, 2019) were also introduced.
Neural-LP (Yang et al., 2017) provided the first fully differentiable rule mining method based on
TensorLog (Cohen, 2016), and (Wang et al., 2019b) extended Neural-LP to learn rules with numerical
values via dynamic programming and cumulative sum operations. In addition, DRUM (Sadeghian
et al., 2019) connected learning rule confidence scores with low-rank tensor approximation. (Dash
et al., 2018; Wei et al., 2019) introduced a column generation (i.e., branch and price) type of MIP
algorithm to learn the logic rules. However, all these above-mentioned logic learning methods cannot
be directly applied to event sequences with timestamps. By contrast, we designed a differentiable
algorithm to learn temporal logic rules from event sequences.

Learning model structures via reinforcement learning (RL). RL provided a promising approach
to automatically finding the best-fitting model structures, which inspired us to apply it to rule learning.
For example, in AutoML, the famous NAS (Zoph & Le, 2017) trained a recurrent neural network by
RL to design the architectures of deep neural networks and has achieved comparable performance
with the human-designed models. Similar ideas have been adopted to aid the design of the explainable
machine learning models. For example, the RL algorithm has been successfully introduced to learn
the causal graph to explain the data (Zhu et al., 2020). Recently, the RL algorithm has been used
in symbolic regression (Petersen, 2021; Landajuela, 2021), which aims to learn the set of compact
mathematical expressions to explain the dynamics of complex dynamic systems. In our paper, we
customized the RL algorithm to learn the temporal logic rules to explain the event sequences.


3     BACKGROUND

3.1   T EMPORAL P OINT P ROCESSES

Given an event sequence Ht = {t1 , t2 , . . . , tn |tn < t} up to t, which yields a counting process
{N (t), t ≥ 0}, the dynamics of the TPP can be characterized by conditional intensity function,
denoted as λ(t|Ht ). By definition, we have λ(t|Ht )dt = E[N ([t, t + dt])|Ht ], where N ([t, t + dt])
denotes the number of points falling in an interval [t, t + dt]. By some simple proof (Rasmussen,
2018), one can express the joint likelihood of the events Ht as   Z
                                                 Y                      t
             p({t1 , t2 , . . . , tn |tn < t}) =    λ(ti |Hti ) · exp −   λ(τ |Hτ )dτ .            (1)
                                             ti ∈Ht                        0
The TPP modeling boils down to the design of intensity functions and the model parameters can be
learned by maximizing the likelihood. Recent neural-based event models start modeling λθ (t | Ht )
as a deep learning model, such as RNN, which greatly increases the model flexibility but the learned
model is hard to interpret. In this paper, we consider TLPP, where the intensity is constructed by
temporal logic rules.


                                                      3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


3.2   T EMPORAL L OGIC RULES
Predicate Define a set of entities C = {c1 , c2 , ..., cn }. The predicate is defined as the property
or relation of entities, which is a logic function that is defined over the set of entities, i.e., x(·) :
C × C · · · ×C 7→ {0, 1} . For example, Smokes(c) is the property predicate and F riend(c, c0 ) is the
relation predicate.

Temporal Logic Rule A first-order logic rule is a logical connectives of predicates, such as
f : ∀c, ∀c0 , Smokes(c0 ) ← F riend(c, c0 ) ∧ Smokes(c). A temporal dimension is added to the
predicates. The temporal logic rule is a logic rule with temporal ordering constraints. For example,
 f : ∀c, Covid(c, t3 ) ← SymptomsAppear(c, t2 ) ∧ ExposedT oV irus(c, t1 ) ∧ Bef ore(t1 , t2 ).
For discrete events, we consider three types of temporal relations,
Bef ore(t1 , t2 ) = 1{t1 − t2 < 0}, Af ter(t1 , t2 ) = 1{t1 − t2 > 0}, Equal(t1 , t2 ) = 1{t1 = t2 }.
We also treat the temporal relation as the temporal predicate, which is a boolean variable. Formally,
we consider the following general temporal logic rule (for simplicity, we omit the entity index c and
assume all the predicates are defined for ^
                                          the same entity),
                                                          ^
                          f : Y (ty ) ←       Xu (tu )        Tuu0 (tu , tu0 )                     (2)
                                         u∈Xf                  u,u0 ∈Xf
                                         |      {z        }|              {z            }
                                         property predicates       temporal relations
where Y (ty ) is the head predicate evaluated at time ty , Xf is the set of predicates defined in rule f ,
Tuu0 denotes the temporal relation of predicate u and u0 that can take any mutually exclusive relation
from the set {Bef ore, Af ter, Equal, N one}. Note that N one indicates there is no temporal relation
constraint between predicate u and u0 . ty , tu , and t0u are the occurrence times associated with the
predicates.
3.3   T EMPORAL L OGIC P OINT P ROCESS
The grounded temporal predicate x(c, t), such as Smokes(c, t), generates a sequence of discrete
events {t1 , t2 , . . . }, with the time that the predicate becomes 1 (i.e., True) is recorded.

Logic-informed intensity function The main idea of TLPP (Li et al., 2020) is to construct the
intensity functions using temporal logic rules. TLPP considers complicated logical dependency
patterns, which enables symbolic reasoning for temporal event sequences. Gven a rule as Eq. (2),
TLPP builds the intensity function conditional on history. Only the effective combinations of the
historical events that makes the body condition True will be collected to reason about the intensity of
the head predicate. We introduce a logic function gf (·) to check the body conditions of f . gf (·) can
also incorporate temporal decaying kernels to capture the decaying effect of the evidence like Hawkes
process. The logic-informed feature φf X gathers X
                                                 the information from history, which is computed as

                                φf (t) =                gf {tu }u∈Xf                                (3)
                                         u∈Xf {tu }∈Hu
                                                     t
where Htu indicates the historical event specific to predicate u up to t. Suppose there is a rule set F
that can be used to reason about Y . For each f ∈ F, one can compute the features φf (t) as above.
Assume that the rules are connected in disjunctive normal form (OR-of-ANDs). TLPP models the
intensity of the head predicate {Y (t)}t≥0 as
                                              a log-linear function of the
                                                                           features,
                                                      X
                            λ(t | Ht ) = exp b0 +             wf · φf (t)                            (4)
                                                                 f ∈F
where w = [wf ]f ∈F ≥ 0 are the learnable weight parameters associated with each rule, and b0 is the
learnable base intensity. All the model parameters can be learned by maximizing the likelihood as
defined in Eq. (1). Note that given this intensity model, the likelihood is convex with respect to w
(Fahrmeir et al., 1994).

4     R EINFORCEMENT T EMPORAL L OGIC RULE L EARNING
Our goal is to jointly learn the set of OR-of-ANDs temporal logic rules and their weights by MLE.
Each rule has a general form (2). To discover each rule, the algorithm needs to navigate through the
combinatorial space considering all the combinations of the property predicates and their temporal
relations. Moreover, each rule can have various lengths and the computational complexity grows
exponentially with the rule length. To tackle this challenging problem, we propose a RL search


                                                      4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                              Add rule to Restricted
                                 Master Problem
   Rule Evaluator              Rule Generator (RL Policy)                 Yes
                                                             Train
   Master    Restricted   Generate                           LSTM                         No
               Master     rules via                          using     Increased gain            End (Rule
  Problem     Problem                                        policy       negative?            set is found)
                            LSTM
                                                            gradient


Figure 2: Overall Learning Framework: alternating process between rule generator and rule evaluator
algorithm to discover new rules one-by-one. The overall learning framework is shown in Fig. 2where
the algorithm alternates between a master problem (rule evaluator) and a subproblem (rule generator).

4.1     OVERALL LEARNING OBJECTIVE : A REGULARIZED MLE
We formulate the overall model learning problem as a regularized MLE problem, where the objective
function is the log-likelihood with a rule set complexity penalty, i.e.,
       Original Problem : w∗ , b∗0 = arg min −`(w, b0 ) + Ω(w) s.t. wf ≥ 0, f ∈ F̄            (5)
                                          w,b0
where F̄ is the complete rule set, and Ω(w) is a convex regularization function
                                                                       P        that has a high value
for “complex” rule sets. For example, we can formulate Ω(w) = λ0 f ∈F̄ cf wf where cf is the
rule length.

4.1.1    R ESTRICTED M ASTER P ROBLEM : C ONVEX O PTIMIZATION
The above original problem is hard to solve, due to that the set of variables is exponentially large and
can not be optimized simultaneously in a tractable way. We therefore start with a restricted master
problem (RMP), where the search space is much smaller. For example, we can start with an empty
rule set, denoted as F0 ⊂ F̄. Then we gradually expand this subset to improve the results, this will
produce a nested sequence of subsets F0 ⊂ F1 ⊂ · · · ⊂ Fk ⊂ · · · . For each Fk , k = 0, 1, . . . , the
restricted master problem is formulated by replacing the complete rule set F̄ with Fk :
                                ∗
   Restricted Master Problem : w(k) , b∗0,(k) = arg min − ` (w, b0 ) + Ω(w)      s.t. wf ≥ 0, f ∈ Fk .   (6)
                                                 w,b0
 Solving the RMP corresponds to the evaluation of the current candidate rules. All rules in the current
set will be reweighed. The optimality of the current solution can be verified under the principle of the
complementary slackness for convex problems, which in fact leads to the objective function of our
subproblem. More proof can be found in the Appendix F.

4.1.2    S UBPROBLEM : C OMBINATORIAL P ROBLEM
A subproblem is formulated to propose a new temporal logic rule, which can potentially improve
                                                                ∗
the optimal value of the RMP most. Given the current solution w(k) , b∗0,(k) for the restricted master
problem (6), a subproblem is formulated to minimize the increased gain:
                                            ∂` (w, b0 ) ∂Ω(w)
                       Subproblem: min −               +                                           (7)
                                    φf         ∂wf         ∂wf w∗ ,b∗
                                                                           (k)   0,(k)
where φf is a rule-informed feature. We aim to search for a new rule so that the corresponding
feature minimizes the above objective function. If the optimal subproblem value is negative, we
will include the new rule to the set. Otherwise, if the optimal subproblem value is non-negative,
we reach the optimality and we can stop the overall algorithm. However, this search procedure is
also computationally expensive. It requires search rule structures to have a feature evaluation. In
the following, we will discuss how to solve the subproblem more efficiently using reinforcement
learning.
We want to emphasize here that, although the idea above as how to formulate the master and
subproblems have been widely used in machine learning, including the gradient grafting algorithm
for learning high-dimensional linear models (Perkins et al., 2003), column-generation algorithm for
solving mixed integer programming (Savelsbergh, 2002; Nemhauser, 2012; Lübbecke & Desrosiers,
2005) and large linear programming (Demiriz et al., 2002), and for learning ordinal logic rules
(Dash et al., 2018; Wei et al., 2019), our overall learning framework is gradient-based. For the master
problem, we solve a convex optimization with continuous variables by gradient descent (or SGD). For


                                                        5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


the subproblem, although it requires searching over the combinatorial space, we convert the problem
into learning a neural policy where the policy parameters can be learned by policy gradient.

4.2     S OLVING SUBPROBLEMS VIA R EINFORCEMENT L EARNING
                      1         2         3           4         5         6            7          8         9             10
        Head
      Predicate Y     A         B       𝑇(𝐴, 𝐵)       C       𝑇(𝐴, 𝐶)   𝑇(𝐵, 𝐶)        D        𝑇(𝐴, 𝐷)    𝑇(𝐵, 𝐷)       𝑇(𝐶, 𝐷)   …
      Categorical
      Distribution                                                                                                                 …
               LSTM                                                                                                                …
                          Library 1: Property Predicates                      Library 2: Temporal Relations
                      A     B       C      D      E       …   𝜙          𝑇)       𝑇*       𝑇+         𝑇,   …         𝜙



      Figure 3: Illustration of generating a temporal logic rule using a neural policy (LSTM).
The subproblem formulated as Eq. (7) proposes a criterion to propose a new temporal logic rule.
The subproblem itself is a minimization, which aims to attain the most negative increased gain.
However, explicitly solving the subproblem requires enumerating all possible conjunctions of the
input property predicates and all possible pairwise temporal relations among the selected predicates,
which is extremely computationally expensive. In this paper, instead of trying to enumerate all
the conjunctions, we propose to learn a neural policy by reinforcement learning to generate the
best-explanatory rules.

4.2.1     G ENERATING RULES W ITH R ECURRENT N EURAL N ETWORK
We leverage the fact that the temporal logic rules can be represented as a sequence of “tokens" subject
to some unique structures. Using the pre-ordered traversal trick, we parameterize the policy by an
RNN or LSTM, combined with dynamic masks, to guarantee that the generated tokens can yield a
valid temporal logic rule.
We generate the rules one token at a time according the pre-order traversal, as demonstrated in Fig.
3. Specifically, denote s as the state, which is the embedding of the previously generated tokens.
We model the policy as πθ (a|s) with learnable parameter θ, which quantifies the token selection
probability given s. Each token/action can be chosen from the two predefined libraries: i) the property
predicate libraries, and ii) the temporal relation libraries.
Given the head predicate, we generate the body predicates and their temporal relations in a sequential
way. Every time a property predicate is generated, we need to consider its temporal relation with
all the previously generated property predicates. Note that the temporal relation token can be None,
which means there is no temporal relation constraints. All these generative prior knowledge can be
incorporated as constraints by designing dynamic masks.

4.2.2     R ISK -S EEKING P OLICY G RADIENT
The standard policy gradient objective J(θ) is defined as an expectation. This is the desired objective
for control problems in which one seeks to optimize the average performance of a policy. However,
rule learning problems described in our paper are to search for best-fitting rules. For such problems,
J(θ) may not appropriate, as there is a mismatch between the objective being optimized and the final
performance metric.
We consider risk-seeking policy gradient like (Petersen, 2021; Landajuela, 2021), which proposed an
alternative objective that aims to maximize the best-case performance. According to the original work
(Landajuela, 2021; Petersen, 2021), we first define R  (θ) as the (1 −  )-quantile of the distribution of
rewards under the current policy. Then the new objective Jrisk (θ;  ) is given by:

                          Jrisk (θ;  ) = Eτ ∼π(τ |θ) [R(τ ) | R(τ ) ≥ R  (θ)]                                                          (8)
Then the risk-seeking policy gradient can be estimated using the roll-out samples, i.e.,

                       1 XN XK h (i)                 i
                                  R (τ ) − R̃ (i) (θ) · 1R(i) (τ )≥R̃(i) (θ) ∇θ log πθ (ak |sk ) (9)
                                                                                         (i) (i)
 ∇θ Jrisk (θ;  ) ≈
                       N  i=1 k=1


                                                                    6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                      Rules with different structures                                Tree-Like Rules
        Group-1: Case-4    Group-2: Case-4    Group-3: Case-4     Group-4: Case-4    Group-5: Case-4    Group-6: Case-4
        Jaccard = 1.00     Jaccard = 0.67     Jaccard = 0.33      Jaccard = 1.00     Jaccard = 1.00     Jaccard = 0.33
                   Learned            Learned             Learned            Learned            Learned           Learned

              3                  2 1                    1 2            3                   3                   1 2
      Truth             Truth                  Truth           Truth              Truth                Truth


Figure 4: Rule discovery ability and rule weight learning accuracy of our proposed model based on
Case-4 for all 6 groups. Blue one indicates ground truth rule and red/yellow one indicates learned
rule in different groups.
                                                                                                       (i)
where N is the number of episodes, and K is the length of tokens (actions). R̃  (θ) is the empirical
(1 −  )-quantile of the batch of rewards, and 1 returns 1 if condition is true and 0 otherwise. We use
this estimated policy gradient to update the policy θ.

                                     θ ← θ + α∇θ Jrisk (θ;  )                                    (10)
where α is the learning rate. Further, according to the maximum entropy reinforcement learning
framework (Haarnoja et al.), a bonus can be added to the loss function proportional to the entropy to
help the policy do the exploration.

5     E XPERIMENTS
5.1    S YNTHETIC DATA
We prepared 6 groups of synthetic event data, each group with a different set of ground truth rules. We
considered the following baselines: TELLER (Li et al., 2022), policy gradient without risk seeking,
and brute-force method (enumerating all possible rules).

Accuracy and Scalability For each group, we further considered 5 cases, with the to-be-searched
property predicate library being sized 8, 12, 16, 20, and 24, respectively. Note that only a small
amount of the predicates will be in the true rules. Many of the predicates are redundant information
and they will act as background predicates. We aim to test: 1) whether our reinforcement temporal
logic learning algorithm can truly uncover the rules from the noisy variable set, 2) how accurate can
the rule weights be estimated, 3) and how the performance will evolve if we gradually increase the
variable set with more and more redundant variables.
The ground truth rules of different groups are with different length and various content structures.
For some groups, each rule shares many common predicates in content, while for some groups, the
designed rules are quite distinct in content. For example, the ground truth rules in group-{1, 2, 3}
are quite different in their content, and the ground truth rules in group-{4, 5, 6} share many common
predicates. On the other hand, in group-{1, 4} and group-{2, 5}, the number of property predicates in
one ground truth rule is 6 and 7 respectively. We set the number of property predicates of ground truth
rules to be 8 in group-{3, 6} to craft relatively long rules, especially considering intricate temporal
relation at the same time. When uncovering ground truth rules in every group, we fix 2 predicates as
prior knowledge and ask the algorithm to complete the temporal logic rules. Complete results for all
the datasets can be found in Appendix I.
In Fig. 4, we reported the learning results for the case with predicate library size 20 for all groups
(with different rule content). We used 1000 samples of event sequences as training data. Each plot
in the top row uses a Venn diagram to show the true rule set and the learned rule set, from which
the Jaccard similarity score (area of the intersection divided by the area of their union) is calculated.
Our proposed model discovered almost all the ground truth rules. Each plot in the bottom compares
the true rule weights with the learned rule weights, with the Mean Absolute Error (MAE) reported.
Almost all the truth rule weights are accurately learned and the MAEs are quite low. In group-3 and
group-6, we crafted long and complex rules with 8 body property predicates and various temporal


                                                              7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


relations, which yield an extremely huge search space, but our model still discovered almost all the
ground truth rules.
Fig. 5 illustrates the Jaccard similarity score and MAE for all cases in all 6 groups using 1000
samples. For all 6 groups, as the number of predicates in the predicate set increases, the Jaccard
similarity scores decrease slightly and the MAE increases slightly, but it is still within an acceptable
range. This is because as the number of redundant predicates increases, the search space expands
exponentially and the complexity of searching is dramatically increased. But if the number of
predicates in the predicate set is appropriate and the samples are sufficient, our model is very stable
and reliable.
         Group-1                  Group-2               Group-3                Group-4                  Group-5                Group-6
1.0                      1.0                   1.0            Jaccard 1.0                      1.0                    1.0
                                                              MAE                                                     0.8
0.8                      0.8                   0.8                    0.8                      0.8

0.6            Jaccard   0.6      Jaccard      0.6                    0.6            Jaccard   0.6            Jaccard 0.6      Jaccard
               MAE                MAE                                                MAE                      MAE     0.4
                                                                                                                               MAE
0.4                      0.4                   0.4                    0.4                      0.4

0.2                      0.2                   0.2                                             0.2                    0.2
                                                                      0.2
0.0                      0.0                   0.0                                             0.0                    0.0
      8 12 16 20 24            8 12 16 20 24         8 12 16 20 24          8 12 16 20 24            8 12 16 20 24          8 12 16 20 24

Figure 5: Jaccard similarity score and MAE for all 6 groups. X-axis indicates the predicate library
size and Y-axis indicates the value of Jaccard similarity and MAE

Computational Efficiency As shown in Fig.6 (left), we displayed the curve of the log-likelihood
function versus the running time for our method and baselines. Our method uses the risk-seeking
policy gradient in solving subproblems (refer to the flat-line period in figure). As a comparison,
vanilla (normal) policy gradient still optimize the expectation of the reward to solve the subproblem.
For TELLER, it uses enumerative search to generate new rules in subproblems although adopts the
depth-first type of heuristic to try to append predicates to important short rules to generate long
rules. As for the brute-force method, it first considers all the one-body-predicate rules to optimize the
likelihood by learning the rule importance, then adds all the two-body-predicate rules to the model,
and so on. From the results, we see that our method uncovers the ground truth rules faster and more
accurately compared with all the baselines in the long-run. It is almost intractable for the brute-force
method. Compared with the normal policy gradient method, the performance and accuracy of our
model are also better, mainly because by using risk-seeking policy gradient, the model can focus
learning only on maximizing best-case performance. We did more experiments to compare the normal
policy gradient and risk-seeking policy gradient. Please refer to Appendix K for more details.


Figure 6: Log Likelihood Trajectory. Left: Compare our model (risk seeking policy gradient) with
several baselines (normal policy gradient, TELLER, Brute force way). Right: Transfer experiments.
First completely train a collection of rule generators and save the model parameters, then use the
well-trained model to uncover new rules on different datasets. Transfer ## indicates the new datasets
with ground truth rules that are slightly different compared with the datasets used by the well-trained
model. Same Rule ## indicates the new datasets generated by same ground truth rules.

Transferability Our well-trained neural search policies are also transferable. As shown in Fig. 6
(right), once we get a collection of well-trained policies in solving each subproblem, we can use it to
train on other different datasets which are generated by the same or similar ground truth rules. The


                                                                     8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


results showed that this will speed up the process of solving subproblems and improve the efficiency
and accuracy of uncovering ground truth rules in these datasets.

5.2   H EALTHCARE DATASET
MIMIC-III is an electronic health record dataset of patients admitted to the intensive care unit
(ICU) (Johnson et al., 2016). We considered patients diagnosed with sepsis (Saria, 2018; Raghu et al.,
2017; Peng et al., 2018), since sepsis is one of the major causes of mortality in ICU. Previous studies
suggest that the optimal treatment strategy is still unclear. It is unknown what is the optimal treatment
strategy in terms of using intravenous fluids and vasopressors to support the circulatory system. There
also exists clinical controversy about when and how to use these two groups of drugs to reduce
the side effect for the patients. For this real problem, we implemented our proposed reinforcement
temporal logic rule learning algorithm to learn explanatory rules and their weights and gain insight
into this problem.

Discovered temporal logic rules In Appendix C, we reported all the uncovered temporal logic
rules and their weights learned by our algorithm. We use LowUrine and NormalUrine as the
head predicates respectively. We also invited human experts (doctors) to check the correctness
of these discovered rules and the doctors think most of these rules have clinical meaning and are
consistent with the pathogenesis of sepsis. Doctors’ modifications and suggestions for these algorithm-
discovered rules are also provided. Experts think that Rule 1-9 capture the major lab measures, like
low systolic blood pressure, high blood urea nitrogen and low central venous pressure (appeared in
Rule 2), that usually emerge before extremely low urine. Rule 10-18 shed light on drug and treatment
selection. For example, reflected in Rule 12, Crystalloid and Dobutamine together yields a weight of
0.4535 for patient’s normal urine.

Compared with baselines in event prediction We considered the following SOTA baselines:
1) Recurrent Marked Temporal Point Processes (RMTPP) (Du et al., 2016), the first neural point
process (NPP) model, where the intensity function is modeled by a Recurrent Neural Network
(RNN); 2) Neural Hawkes Process (NHP) (Mei & Eisner, 2017), an improved variant of RMTPP
by constructing a continuous-time LSTM; 3) THP, Transformer Hawkes Process (Zuo et al., 2020),
which leverages the self-attention mechanism to capture long-term dependencies and meanwhile
enjoys computational efficiency; 3) Tree-Regularized GRU (TR-GRU) (Wu et al., 2018), a deep
time-series model with a designed tree regularizer to add model interpretability; 5) Hexp (Lewis
& Mohler, 2011), Hawkes Process with an exponential kernel; 6) Transformer (Vaswani et al.,
2017), an advanced model which follows an encoder-decoder structure, but does not rely on
recurrence and convolutions in order to generate an output. 7) TELLER (Li et al., 2022), al-
ternating between master problem and subproblem (enumerative search) to learn logic rules;
8) PG-normal, neural search policy learned by normal policy gradient, without risk seeking.
                                                                   Table 1: Event prediction results.
We used mean absolute error (MAE) as the evaluation                              LowUrine   NormalUrine
metrics for the event prediction tasks of the two head              Method
                                                                                  (MAE)       (MAE)
predicates: 1) LowUrine and 2) NormalUrine, which                  RMTPP           1.989        2.170
are evaluated by predicting the time when these events              NHP            1.784        1.977
will occur. Lower MAE (unit is hour in this example)                 THP           1.658        1.759
indicates better performance of model. The performance             TR-GRU          1.627        1.692
                                                                    Hexp           2.578        2.483
of our model and all baselines are compared in Tab. 1,           Transformer       1.704        1.872
from which one can observe that our model outperforms              TELLER          1.887        1.532
all the baselines in this experiment.                             PG-normal        2.050        1.647
                                                                OURMETHOD          1.622        1.305

6     C ONCLUSION
In this paper, we proposed a reinforcement temporal logic rule learning algorithm to jointly learn
temporal logic rules and their weights from noisy event data. The proposed learning algorithm
alternates between a rule generator stage and a rule evaluator stage, where a neural search policy is
learned by risk-seeking gradient descent to discover new rules in rule generator stage. The use of
the neural policy makes the subproblem differentiable, and the well-trained policies can be easily
transferred to other tasks. We empirically evaluated our method on both synthetic and healthcare
datasets, obtaining promising results.


                                                   9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


R EFERENCES
Frederick Callaway, Antonio Rangel, and Thomas L Griffiths. Fixation patterns in simple choice
  reflect optimal information sampling. PLoS computational biology, 17(3):e1008863, 2021.
William W Cohen. Tensorlog: A differentiable deductive database. arXiv preprint arXiv:1605.06523,
 2016.
Sanjeeb Dash, Oktay Gunluk, and Dennis Wei. Boolean decision rules via column generation.
  Advances in neural information processing systems, 31, 2018.
Ayhan Demiriz, Kristin P Bennett, and John Shawe-Taylor. Linear programming boosting via column
  generation. Machine Learning, 46(1):225–254, 2002.
Nan Du, Hanjun Dai, Rakshit Trivedi, Utkarsh Upadhyay, Manuel Gomez-Rodriguez, and Le Song.
  Recurrent marked temporal point processes: Embedding event history to vector. In Proceedings of
  the 22nd ACM SIGKDD international conference on knowledge discovery and data mining, pp.
 1555–1564, 2016.
Ludwig Fahrmeir, Gerhard Tutz, Wolfgang Hennevogl, and Eliane Salem. Multivariate statistical
  modelling based on generalized linear models, volume 425. Springer, 1994.
Tuomas Haarnoja, Aurick Zhou, Pieter Abbeel, and Sergey Levine. Soft actor-critic: off-policy
  maximum entropy deep reinforcement learning with a stochastic actor.
Alistair EW Johnson, Tom J Pollard, Lu Shen, H Lehman Li-Wei, Mengling Feng, Mohammad
  Ghassemi, Benjamin Moody, Peter Szolovits, Leo Anthony Celi, and Roger G Mark. Mimic-iii, a
  freely accessible critical care database. Scientific data, 3(1):1–9, 2016.
Kim Santiago Glatt Nathan Mundhenk Petttit Faissol Landajuela, Petersen. Discovering symbolic
  policies with deep reinforcement learning. pp. 5979–5989, 2021.
Erik Lewis and George Mohler. A nonparametric em algorithm for multiscale hawkes processes.
  Journal of Nonparametric Statistics, 1(1):1–20, 2011.
Shuang Li, Lu Wang, Ruizhi Zhang, Xiaofu Chang, Xuqin Liu, Yao Xie, Yuan Qi, and Le Song.
  Temporal logic point processes. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 5990–6000.
  PMLR, 2020.
Shuang Li, Mingquan Feng, Lu Wang, Abdelmajid Essofi, Yufeng Cao, Junchi Yan, and Le Song. Ex-
  plaining point processes by learning interpretable temporal logic rules. In International Conference
  on Learning Representations, 2022.
Marco E Lübbecke and Jacques Desrosiers. Selected topics in column generation. Operations
 research, 53(6):1007–1023, 2005.
Hongyuan Mei and Jason M Eisner. The neural hawkes process: A neurally self-modulating
  multivariate point process. Advances in neural information processing systems, 30, 2017.
George O Mohler, Martin B Short, P Jeffrey Brantingham, Frederic Paik Schoenberg, and George E
  Tita. Self-exciting point process modeling of crime. Journal of the American Statistical Association,
 106(493):100–108, 2011.
George L Nemhauser. Column generation for linear and integer programming. Optimization Stories,
  20(65):U73, 2012.
Xuefeng Peng, Yi Ding, David Wihl, Omer Gottesman, Matthieu Komorowski, Li-wei H Lehman,
 Andrew Ross, Aldo Faisal, and Finale Doshi-Velez. Improving sepsis treatment strategies by com-
  bining deep and kernel-based reinforcement learning. In AMIA Annual Symposium Proceedings,
 volume 2018, pp. 887. American Medical Informatics Association, 2018.
Simon Perkins, Kevin Lacker, and James Theiler. Grafting: Fast, incremental feature selection by
  gradient descent in function space. The Journal of Machine Learning Research, 3:1333–1356,
  2003.


                                                 10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Nathan Mundhenk Santiago K.Kim T.Kim Petersen, Larma. Deep symbolic regression: recovering
  mathematical expressions from data via risk-seeking policy gradients. 2021.
Aniruddh Raghu, Matthieu Komorowski, Imran Ahmed, Leo Celi, Peter Szolovits, and Marzyeh
  Ghassemi. Deep reinforcement learning for sepsis treatment. arXiv preprint arXiv:1711.09602,
  2017.
Jakob Gulddahl Rasmussen. Lecture notes: Temporal point processes and the conditional intensity
  function. arXiv preprint arXiv:1806.00221, 2018.
Ali Sadeghian, Mohammadreza Armandpour, Patrick Ding, and Daisy Zhe Wang. Drum: End-to-end
  differentiable rule mining on knowledge graphs. arXiv preprint arXiv:1911.00055, 2019.
Suchi Saria. Individualized sepsis treatment using reinforcement learning. Nature medicine, 24(11):
  1641–1642, 2018.
Martin WP Savelsbergh. Branch-and-price: Integer programming with column generation, bp. 2002.
Ashish Vaswani, Noam Shazeer, Niki Parmar, Jakob Uszkoreit, Llion Jones, Aidan N Gomez, Łukasz
  Kaiser, and Illia Polosukhin. Attention is all you need. Advances in neural information processing
  systems, 30, 2017.
Po-Wei Wang, Priya Donti, Bryan Wilder, and Zico Kolter. Satnet: Bridging deep learning and logical
  reasoning using a differentiable satisfiability solver. In International Conference on Machine
  Learning, pp. 6545–6554. PMLR, 2019a.
Po-Wei Wang, Daria Stepanova, Csaba Domokos, and J Zico Kolter. Differentiable learning of
  numerical rules in knowledge graphs. In International Conference on Learning Representations,
  2019b.
Tong Wang, Cynthia Rudin, Finale Doshi-Velez, Yimin Liu, Erica Klampfl, and Perry MacNeille. A
  bayesian framework for learning rule sets for interpretable classification. The Journal of Machine
  Learning Research, 18(1):2357–2393, 2017.
Dennis Wei, Sanjeeb Dash, Tian Gao, and Oktay Gunluk. Generalized linear rule models. In
  International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 6687–6696. PMLR, 2019.
Mike Wu, Michael Hughes, Sonali Parbhoo, Maurizio Zazzi, Volker Roth, and Finale Doshi-Velez.
 Beyond sparsity: Tree regularization of deep models for interpretability. In Proceedings of the
 AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, volume 32, 2018.
Fan Yang, Zhilin Yang, and William W Cohen. Differentiable learning of logical rules for knowledge
  base reasoning. arXiv preprint arXiv:1702.08367, 2017.
Yuan Yang and Le Song. Learn to explain efficiently via neural logic inductive learning. In
  International Conference on Learning Representations, 2019.
Qiang Zhang, Aldo Lipani, Omer Kirnap, and Emine Yilmaz. Self-attentive hawkes process. In
  International conference on machine learning, pp. 11183–11193. PMLR, 2020a.
Wei Zhang, Thomas Panum, Somesh Jha, Prasad Chalasani, and David Page. Cause: Learning
 granger causality from event sequences using attribution methods. In International Conference on
 Machine Learning, pp. 11235–11245. PMLR, 2020b.
Shengyu Zhu, Ignavier Ng, and Zhitang Chen. Causal discovery with reinforcement learning. 2020.
Barret Zoph and Quoc V Le. Neural architecture search with reinforcement learning. International
  Conference on Machine Learning, 2017.
Simiao Zuo, Haoming Jiang, Zichong Li, Tuo Zhao, and Hongyuan Zha. Transformer hawkes process.
  In International conference on machine learning, pp. 11692–11702. PMLR, 2020.


                                                11
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


A    A PPENDIX
In the following, we will provide supplementary materials to better illustrate our methods and
experiments.
       • B presents different ground truth rule structures and some experiment results on synthetic
         data.
       • C presents all learned rules on MIMIC-III data and expert identification and revision
         suggestion.
       • Section D provides the definitions of all types of temporal relations considered in our model.
       • Section E and F elaborate on the necessary proofs, which justify our model and learning
         framework.
       • Section G provides pseudocode to illustrate our rule generator policy, subproblem formula-
         tion, and the complete algorithm.
       • Section H provides our computing infrastructure.
       • Section I, J and K show the comprehensive experiments on synthetic data. In K we compared
         the performance between standard policy gradient and risk seeking policy gradient.
       • Section L introduces the background on the MIMIC-III data and provides a list of the chosen
         predicates used in our real experiment. Section M presents more experiment results in terms
         of the modified rules by experts.
       • Section N introduces another application using our proposed method, which is an experiment
         about understanding shoppers’ purchase patterns given their eye fixation event data.

B    A LL LEARNED RULES ON SYNTHETIC DATA
We did experiments on 6 groups of event data, each group with a different set of ground truth rules.
For each group, we further considered 5 cases. To illustrate different rule structures in different
structure, we listed all the discovered rules for Case-2 of all groups in Tab. 2, Tab. 3, and Tab. 4. Due
to limited space, we did not show all learned rule content for all cases of all groups. Please refer to I
for the complete results of experiments on synthetic data.
Table 2: Results of Case-2 for Group-1, Group-4. *Ground truth rules which are learned. * Ground
truth rules which are not learned. * Rules that are wrongly learned.
                       Group-1 Case-2                         Group-4 Case-2
             *Y←A∧B∧C∧D∧E∧F                          *Y←A∧B∧C∧D∧E∧F
             ∧ A Before B ∧ B Before C ∧ A Before B ∧ B Before C
             ∧ C Before D ∧ D Before E ∧ C Before D ∧ D Before E
             ∧ E Before F                            ∧ E Before F
             *Y←C∧B∧F∧D∧E∧G                          *Y←A∧B∧C∧D∧E∧G
             ∧ C Before B ∧ B Before F ∧ A Before B ∧ B Before C
             ∧ F Before D ∧ D Before E ∧ C Before D ∧ D Before E
             ∧ E Before G                            ∧ E Before G
             *Y←C∧B∧G∧D∧E∧H                          *Y←A∧B∧C∧D∧E∧H
             ∧ C Before B ∧ B Before G ∧ A Before B ∧ B Before C
             ∧ G Before D ∧ D Before E ∧ C Before D ∧ D Before E
             ∧ E Before H                            ∧ E Before H
                                                     *Y←D∧B∧C∧A∧E∧H
                                                     ∧ D Before B ∧ B Before C
                              —-
                                                     ∧ C Before A ∧ A Equal E
                                                     ∧ E Equal H


                                                  12
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Table 3: Results of Case-2 for Group-2 and Group-5. *Ground truth rules which are learned. *
Ground truth rules which are not learned. * Rules that are wrongly learned.
                      Group-2 Case-2                         Group-5 Case-2
            *Y←A∧B∧C∧D∧E∧F∧G *Y←A∧B∧C∧D∧E∧F∧G
            ∧ A Before B ∧ B Before C ∧ A Before B ∧ B Before C
            ∧ C Before D ∧ D Before E ∧ C Before D ∧ D Before E
            ∧ E Before F ∧ F Equal G               ∧ E Before F ∧ F Equal G
            *Y←C∧B∧F∧D∧E∧G∧H *Y←A∧B∧C∧D∧E∧F∧H
            ∧ C Before B ∧ B Before F ∧ A Before B ∧ B Before C
            ∧ F Before D ∧ D Before E ∧ C Before D ∧ D Before E
            ∧ E Before G ∧ G Equal H               ∧ E Before F ∧ F Equal H
            *Y←C∧B∧A∧D∧E∧H∧G *Y←A∧B∧C∧D∧E∧F∧H
            ∧ C Before B ∧ B Before A ∧ A Before B ∧ B Before C
            ∧ A Before D ∧ D Before E ∧ C Before D ∧ D Before E
            ∧ E Before H ∧ H Equal G               ∧ E Before F ∧ F Before H

Table 4: Results of Case-2 for Group-2 and Group-5. *Ground truth rules which are learned. *
Ground truth rules which are not learned. * Rules that are wrongly learned.
                    Group-3 Case-2                             Group-6 Case-2
        *Y←A∧B∧C∧D∧E∧F∧G∧H *Y←A∧B∧C∧D∧E∧F∧G∧H
        ∧ A Before B ∧ B Before C                  ∧ A Before B ∧ B Before C
        ∧ C Before D ∧ D Before E                  ∧ C Before D ∧ D Before E
        ∧ E Before F ∧ F Equal G                   ∧ E Before F ∧ F Equal G
        ∧ G Equal H                                ∧ G Equal H
        *Y←C∧B∧F∧D∧E∧G∧H∧A *Y←A∧B∧C∧D∧E∧F∧G∧H
        ∧ C Before B ∧ B Before F                  ∧ A Before B ∧ B Before C
        ∧ F Before D ∧ D Before E                  ∧ C Before D ∧ D Before E
        ∧ E Before G ∧ G Equal H                   ∧ E Before F ∧ F Equal G
        ∧ H Equal A                                ∧ G Before H
        *Y←C∧B∧A∧D∧E∧H∧G∧F *Y←A∧B∧C∧D∧E∧F∧H∧G
        ∧ C Before B ∧ B Before A                  ∧ A Before B ∧ B Before C
        ∧ A Before D ∧ D Before E                  ∧ C Before D ∧ D Before E
        ∧ E Before H ∧ H Equal G                   ∧ E Before F ∧ F Equal H
        ∧ G Equal F                                ∧ H Before G
        *Y←A∧C∧H∧G∧B∧D∧E∧F
        ∧ A Before C ∧ C Before H
        ∧ H Before G ∧ G Before B                                    —-
        ∧ B Before D ∧ D Before E
        ∧ E Before F


C    A LL LEARNED RULES ON MIMIC-III DATA
The complete sets of learned rule on MIMIC-III data are shown in Tab. 5 and Tab. 6. We invite human
experts to check our learned rules and provide several revision suggestion. Rules shown in these
tables have been identified by experts as clinically meaningful and consistent with sepsis pathology.
Some of the rules are directly learned by our method without any modification (marked with a blue
asterisk). And some are basically consistent with clinical facts, but some contents of the rules are not
pathological. These rules have been slightly modified by experts (marked with a red asterisk).


                                                  13
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Table 5: Part of learned rules with LowUrine as the head predicate. *Rules that are clinically
meaningful confirmed by experts. *Rules that are modified by experts.
    Weight Rule
              *Rule 1: LowUrine ← LowSysBP ∧ HighBUN ∧ LowArterialpH
    0.0015 ∧ (LowSysBP Equal HighBUN)
              ∧ (HighBUN Equal ArterialpH)
              *Rule 2: LowUrine ← LowSysBP ∧ HighBUN ∧ LowCVP
    0.1846 ∧ (LowSysBP Before HighBUN)
              ∧ (HighBUN Equal LowCVP)
              *Rule 3: LowUrine ← LowSodium ∧ LowChloride ∧ HighCreatinine
    0.1175 ∧ (LowSodium Equal LowChloride)
              ∧ (LowChloride Equal HighCreatinine)
              *Rule 4: LowUrine ← LowSodium ∧ LowChloride ∧ LowSVR
    0.8226 ∧ (LowSodium Equal LowChloride)
              ∧ (LowChloride Equal LowSVR)
              *Rule 5: LowUrine ← LowSodium ∧ LowChloride ∧ HighBUN
    0.3694 ∧ (LowSodium Before LowChloride)
              ∧ (LowChloride Before HighBUN)
              *Rule 6: LowUrine ← HighArterialLactate ∧ HighSVR ∧ LowBUN ∧
              LowArterialpH
    0.0727 ∧ (HighArterialLactate Equal HighSVR)
              ∧ (HighSVR Equal LowBUN)
              ∧ (LowBUN Equal LowArterialpH)
              *Rule 7: LowUrine ← HighArterialLactate ∧ HighSVR ∧
              HighPotassium ∧ LowCVP
    0.5554 ∧ (HighArterialLactate Equal HighSVR)
              ∧ (HighSVR Equal HighPotassium)
              ∧ (HighPotassium Equal LowCVP)
              *Rule 8: LowUrine ← HighArterialLatectatepH ∧ HighSVR
              ∧ HighHCO3 ∧ LowSodium
    0.0546
              ∧ (HighArterialLatectatepH Equal HighSVR)
              ∧ (HighSVR Equal HighHCO3) ∧ (HighHCO3 Equal LowSodium)
              *Rule 9: LowUrine ← LowSysBP ∧ HighArterialLactate
              ∧ HighPotassium ∧ HighChloride ∧ HighBUN
              ∧ (LowSysBP Equal HighArterialLactate)
    0.4935
              ∧ (HighArterialLactate Equal HighPotassium)
              ∧ (HighPotassium Equal HighChloride)
              ∧ (HighChloride Equal HighBUN)


D     D ETAILED E XPLANATION OF T EMPORAL R ELATION
In this paper, the temporal relation was defined among events. For any pairwise events, denoted as A
and B, there exist only three types of temporal relations, which can be grounded by their occurrence
times, denoted as tA and tB . See below Table 7 for illustrations.
The temporal relation of any two events will be treated as temporal ordering constraints and can be
included in a temporal logic rule as Eq. (4). Note that when included in the rule, the temporal relation
can be none, which indicates that there is no temporal relation constraint between the two events in
order to satisfy the rule.

E    P ROOF OF T HE L IKELIHOOD F UNCTION OF TLPP
The likelihood function of the TLPP is a straightforward result from TPP. Readers can refer to the
proofs in (Rasmussen, 2018). To be self-contained, we will provide a sketch of proof here.
For a specific entity c, given all the events associated with the head predicate (tc1 , tc2 , . . . ) ∈ [0, t),
the likelihood function is the joint density function of these events. Using the chain rule, the joint
likelihood can be factorized into the conditional densities of each points given all points before it.


                                                     14
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Table 6: All learned rules with NormalUrine as the head predicate. *Rules that are clinically
meaningful confirmed by experts. *Rules that are modified by experts.
 Weight Rule
            *Rule 10:NormalUrine ← LowUrine ∧ Crystalloid ∧ Phenylephrine
  0.2231 ∧ (LowUrine Equal Crystalloid)
            ∧ (Crystalloid Equal Phenylephrine)
            *Rule 11:NormalUrine ← LowUrine ∧ Phenylephrine ∧ Dopamine
  0.0773 ∧ (LowUrine Before Phenylephrine)
            ∧ (Phenylephrine Before Dopamine)
            *Rule 12:NormalUrine ← LowUrine ∧ Crystalloid ∧ Dobutamine
  0.4535 ∧ (LowUrine Equal Crystalloid)
            ∧ (Crystalloid Equal Dobutamine)
            *Rule 13:NormalUrine ← LowUrine ∧ Phenylephrine ∧ Norepinephrine
  0.2113 ∧ (LowUrine Equal Phenylephrine)
            ∧ (Phenylephrine Equal Norepinephrine)
            *Rule 14:NormalUrine ← LowUrine ∧ Norepinephrine ∧ Dopamine ∧
            NormalArterialBE
  0.5459 ∧ (LowUrine Equal Norepinephrine)
            ∧ (Norepinephrine Equal Dopamine)
            ∧ (Dopamine Equal NormalArterialBE)
            *Rule 15:NormalUrine ← LowUrine ∧ Norepinephrine ∧ NormalRBCcount
            ∧ NormalBUN ∧ (LowUrine Equal Norepinephrine)
  0.3926
            ∧ (Norepinephrine Equal NormalRBCcount)
            ∧ (NormalRBCcount Equal NormalBUN)
            *Rule 16:NormalUrine ← LowUrine ∧ Colloid ∧ NormalArterialpH
            ∧ Dobutamine ∧ (LowUrine Equal Colloid)
  0.6430
            ∧ (Colloid Equal NormalArterialpH)
            ∧ (NormalArterialpH Equal Dobutamine)
            *Rule 17:NormalUrine ← LowUrine ∧ Norepinephrine ∧ Dobutamine
            ∧ NormalSysBP ∧ (LowUrine Equal Norepinephrine)
  0.3464
            ∧ (Norepinephrine Equal Dobutamine)
            ∧ (Dobutamine Equal NormalSysBP)
            *Rule 18:NormalUrine ← LowUrine ∧ Phenylephrine ∧ NormalSysBP ∧
            Dopamine ∧ NormalCVP
            ∧ (LowUrine Equal Phenylephrine)
  0.5669
            ∧ (Phenylephrine Equal NormalSysBP)
            ∧ (NormalSysBP Equal Dopamine)
            ∧ (Dopamine Equal NormalCVP)
                                                                 𝑡!   𝑡"
                                                                  !     𝑡 "       𝑡
                            Table 7: Event-based temporal relations.
             Temporal Relation Mathematical Expression             Illustration
                 A Before B                   tA < tB                   𝑡𝑡"!     𝑡!𝑡"
                  A After B                   tA > tB                   𝑡"       𝑡!
                 A Equals B                   tA = tB                          𝑡! 𝑡"
                                                                        𝑡"        𝑡!
                                                                                𝑡! 𝑡"


                                                                        𝑡! 𝑡! 𝑡"
For entity c, this yields:
                                                                               𝑡"
               Lc = pc (tc1 | H0 ) pc tc2 | Htc1 · · · pc tcn | Htcn−1 1𝑡!− F c t | Htcn

                                                                                                      (11)
         c                                                         c
                                                                                  𝑡"
where p (t | Htn ) represents the conditional density and F (t | Htn ) refers to its cumulative
distribution function for any t > tn . (1 − F c (t | Htn )) appears in the𝑡likelihood
                                                                           !          since the unobserved
point tn+1 hasn’t happened up to t. Further, by the hazard rate definition of𝑡the  "
                                                                                       intensity function
                                                      c
                                                     p  (t | Htn )
                                        λc (t) =                                                       (12)
                                                 1 − F c (t | Htn )

                                                    15
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


we will have                                           Z t
                                   c                  c     c
                               p (t|Htn ) = λ (t) exp −    λ (s)ds .                                           (13)
                                                                          tn
Using the above equation, we can get       !
                       n
                c
                      Y
                           c c
                                                              λc (t)
              L =         p ti | Htci −1
                        i=1
                                                          pc (t | Htn )
                        Yn                           Z tci               !!              Z t               !
                   =          λ (tci ) exp
                               c
                                                −              c
                                                              λ (τ )dτ         exp −             c
                                                                                                λ (τ )dτ       (14)
                        i=1                           tci−1                               tcn
                         n
                                        !        Z t
                        Y
                   =          λ (tci )
                               c
                                            exp −     c
                                                     λ (τ )dτ .
                        i=1                               0
Now consider the likelihood function of all entities C = {c1 , c2 , ..., cn }, which can be factorized
according to the entities, the likelihood can be written as   Z
                                   Y Y                             t
                  Likelihood:               λc (tci |Hti ) · exp −   λc (τ |Hτ )dτ                (15)
                                       c∈C tci ∈Ht                                0
which completes the proof.


F    O PTIMALITY C ONDITION AND C OMPLEMENTARY S LACKNESS

We will provide more descriptions on the optimality condition and the complementary slackness,
which provides a sound guarantee to our learning algorithm.
Given the original restricted convex problem,
   Orignial Problem : w∗ , b∗0 = arg min −`(w, b0 ) + Ω(w); s.t. wf ≥ 0, f ∈ F̄          (16)
                                             w,b0
where Ω(w) is a convex regularization P
                                      function that has a high value for "complex" rule sets. For
example, we can formulate Ω(w) = λ0 f ∈F̄ cf wf where cf is the rule length.
The Lagrangian of the original master problem is           X
                         L(w, b0 ν) = −` (w, b0 ) + Ω(w) −   νf w f ,                                          (17)
                                                                                f ∈F̄
where νf ≥ 0 is the Lagrange multiplier associated with the non-negativity constraints of wf . As
it is a convex problem and strong duality holds under mild conditions. Define w∗ , b∗0 as the primal
optimal, and ν ∗ as the dual optimal, then:
                      −`(w∗ , b∗0 ) = inf L(w, b0 , ν ∗ ) (strong duality)
                                     w,b0
                                                                              
                                                                 X
                                    = inf −` (w, b0 ) + Ω(w) −         νf∗ wf 
                                     w,b0
                                                                 f ∈F̄                          (18)
                                                                X
                                             ∗ ∗          ∗            ∗ ∗
                                      ≤ −` (w , b0 ) + Ω(w ) −      νf wf
                                                                                 f ∈F̄
                                        ≤ −` (w∗ , b∗0 ) + Ω(w∗ ).
                      ∗ ∗
             P
Therefore, f ∈F̄ νf wf = 0, for f ∈ F̄. This implies the complementary slackness, i.e.,
                               wf∗ = 0 ⇒ νf∗ ≥ 0,         wf∗ > 0 ⇒ νf∗ = 0                    (19)
Given the Karush-Kuhn-Tucker (KKT) conditions, the gradient of Lagrangian L(w∗ , b∗0 , ν ∗ ) w.r.t.
w∗ , b∗0 vanishes, i.e.,
                                           ∂ [`(w, b0 ) − Ω(w)]
                                  νf∗ := −                                .                    (20)
                                                    ∂wf            w∗ ,b∗
                                                                        0
In summary, combining conditions (19) and (20), we obtain the optimalitiy condition of the original
problem,
       1. if wf∗ > 0, then νf∗ = 0;

      2. if wf∗ = 0, then νf∗ ≥ 0,
where the gradient νf∗ can be computed via (20). At each iteration, we solve the subproblem to find
the candidate rule that most violates this optimality condition, i.e., yields the most negative Eq. (20).


                                                              16
     Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


     G    A LGORITHM B OX
     Our method alternates between solving a restricted master problem and a subproblem. When
     executing the subproblem, we need to generate several candidate rules. We summarize the algorithm
     in Algorithm 1, Algorithm 2, and Algorithm 3. RG refers to the Rule Generator used to generate a
     new candidate rule when solving the subproblem. Here, we will parameterize the RG as a LSTM. SP
     is the abbreviation of Sub-Problem which is optimized to construct a new rule. RMP indicates the
     Restricted Master Problem used to update model parameters.
     Algorithm 1: Rule Generator (RG)
     Input: RuleLen, HeadPred
     Output: CandidateRule
 1
 2   PredLibrary ← {A, B, . . . };
 3   TempRelationLibrary← {Bef ore, Af ter, Equal, N one};
 4
 5   Sequence ← EmptySet;
 6   BodyPredSet ← EmptySet;
 7
 8   DynamicMask = All-Ones
 9
10 while BodyPredNum≤ RuleLen do
11    NewBodyPred ← LSTM(Sequence, PredLibrary DynamicMask)
12    DynamicMask ← Set the location of NewBodyPred zero (DynamicMask)
13    Sequence.add(NewBodyPred);
14
15       for BodyPred in BodyPredSet do
             // We need to consider the pairwise temporal relation
                 between the new selected body predicate and all the
                 body predicates that already have been selected in the
                 body predicate set.
16           TempRelation ← LSTM(BodyPred, NewBodyPred, TempRelationLibrary);
17           Sequence.add(TempRelation);
18
19       BodyPredSet.add(NewBodyPred);
20
21   CandicateRule ← Convertor(Sequence); // Convert a sequence of tokens to
        rule template.
22
23   return CandicateRule


                                                    17
     Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


     Algorithm 2: Sub-Problem (SP)
     Input: RuleLen, HeadPred
     Output: NewRule
 1
 2   while iter ≤ Total_Iter do
 3      CandidateRuleBatch ← EmptySet
 4
 5       while Batch_idx ≤ BatchSize do
 6          CandidateRule ← RG(RuleLen, HeadPred); // Generate candidate rule.
 7          CandidateRuleBatch.add(CandidateRule);
 8
 9       Policy ← Policy.update// Policy gradient.
10
11       if PolicyGradientNorm ≤ threshold then
12           FinalCandidateRule ← RG(RuleLen, HeadPred);
13           return FinalCandidateRule
14   FinalCandidateRule ← RG(RuleLen, HeadPred);
15   return FinalCandidateRule



     Algorithm 3: Complete model
     Input: RuleLen, HeadPred, TotalRuleNum
     Output: ruleSet
 1
 2 ruleSet ← EmptySet;
 3 b ← 0;
 4 w ← 0;
 5 b, w ← RMP(b, w, ruleSet); // Initialize weights and base terms.
 6
 7   while CurrentRuleNum≤ TotalRuleNum do
 8      NewRule ← SP(RuleLen, HeadPred); // Generate candidate rule.
 9
10       if IncreasedGain<0 then
11            ruleSet.add(NewRule);
12            b, w ← RMP(b, w, ruleSet); // After adding new rule, update
                  weights and base terms.
13   return b, w, ruleSet


     H    C OMPUTING I NFRASTRUCTURE .
     All experiments are performed on Ubuntu 20.04 LTS system with Intel(R) Xeon(R) CPU E5-2690 v3
     @ 2.60GHz CPU, 112 Gigabyte memory and single NVIDIA Tesla P100 accelerator.

     I   C OMPLETE R ESULTS OF E XPERIMENTS ON S YNTHETIC DATA
     Fig. 7 and Fig. 8 demonstrate the learning results for the cases with predicate size 8, 12, 16, 20, and
     24 (predicates in the library that we need to search) for all groups using 1000 samples of networked
     events. We set the learning rate in solving the subproblem to be ×10−2 . Hidden state size of LSTM
     was 32. The learning rate in solving the restricted master problem was ×10−3 . Our proposed model
     discovered almost all the ground truth rules for all cases in all groups. And almost all the truth rule
     weights are accurately learned and the MAEs are quite low. For cases in group-3 and group-6, we
     considered long and complex rules with 8 body property predicates and the associated temporal
     relations, which yield a very big search space, but our model still discovered most of the ground truth
     rules.


                                                       18
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


We also evaluated our model using 500 and 2000 samples with the same experiment settings. Our
model also achieved satisfactory performance when sample size is small, and the performance of the
model was further improved as the sample size increases.


                          Case-1: 8               Case-2: 12          Case-3: 16            Case-4: 20              Case-5: 24
                                    Learned               Learned                                                                   Learned
                                                                                Learned                 Learned
              Group-1           3                     3                     3                     3                       3 1
                        Truth                 Truth                 Truth                 Truth                   Truth
Rules with                 Learned         Learned         Learned          Learned           Learned
 different Group-2       3               3               3               2 1        Truth
                                                                                          1 2
                   Truth           Truth           Truth           Truth
structures
                                                          Learned
                                    Learned                                     Learned                Learned                      Learned
              Group-3           3                     3 1                   2 1                   1 2                   1 2
                        Truth                 Truth                 Truth                 Truth                   Truth
                                                          Learned
                                    Learned                                     Learned                 Learned                 Learned
              Group-4           3                     3 1                   3                      3                          2 1
                        Truth                 Truth                 Truth                 Truth                   Truth
                                    Learned               Learned               Learned                 Learned                 Learned
    Tree-Like
      Rules   Group-5       3                         3                   3                       3                           2 1
                      Truth                   Truth                 Truth                 Truth                   Truth
                                    Learned               Learned               Learned                 Learned                 Learned
              Group-6           3                     3                     3                     1 2                     3         2
                        Truth                 Truth                 Truth                 Truth               Truth


Figure 7: Jaccard similarity score for all 6 groups and all 5 cases using 1000 samples. Blue one indicates the
ground truth rule and red/yellow one indicates the learned rule in different groups.

J      R EUSE THE LSTM M EMORY AND E ARLY S TOP M ECHANISM
When to reuse the LSTM memory for different subproblem iterations? The ground truth rules
in group-{1, 2, 3} are quite distinct in their content with almost no common predicates in each rule.
Given this prior knowledge, when training the datasets in these groups, whenever the algorithm enters
the subproblem to search for a new candidate rule, we reset our LSTM model and clean the memory.
If not, we will get the convergence results as illustrated in Fig. 9, where we observe that keeping the
LSTM memory will hinder the convergence speed of the subproblems. As illustrated in Fig. 10 (left)
where we refresh the LSTM model parameters whenever the algorithm enters the subproblem stage.
As a comparison, by doing this, the convergence of the subproblem is much faster. The ground truth
rules in group-{4, 5, 6} are similar in content and share many predicates. Given this prior knowledge,
reuse the LSTM across subproblems may help the convergence.

Early stop mechanism. To speed up our algorithm, we propose an early stop mechanism. We
consider that when the iteration times reach a pre-set reasonable number, and when the LSTM model
consecutively generates identical logic rules (like identical 10 rules), we conclude that the LSTM
model has been trained enough and is able to generate a good-performing logic rule. We don’t need
to train the LSTM until the norm of policy gradient is within a very small tolerance. Hence, we may
early stop our training. Fig. 10 (right) illustrates the training trajectories of solving subproblem for
group-1 case-1, where we reset the LSTM in the beginning of the subproblems and use early stop
mechanism. It’s obvious that this mechanism can reduce redundant iterations and help us complete
the training process in a short time.

K       C OMPARE WITH S TANDARD P OLICY G RADIENT
For standard policy gradient, the policy πθ (a|s) is trained end-to-end by minimizing the subproblem
objective using policy gradient, i.e.,
                                  max J(θ) = max Eτ ∼πθ (τ ) [R(τ )]
                                              θ                θ


                                                               19
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                       Case-1                Case-2                Case-3                 Case-4                Case-4
                    8 predicates          12 predicates         16 predicates          20 predicates         24 predicates
              0.8           Truth   0.8           Truth   0.8            Truth   0.8           Truth   0.8        Truth
        Group-1
              0.6           Learned 0.6           Learned 0.6            Learned 0.6           Learned 0.6        Learned
              0.4                   0.4                   0.4                    0.4                   0.4
              0.2                   0.2                   0.2                    0.2                   0.2
              0.0   w0   w1     w2 0.0    w0   w1     w2 0.0    w0    w1     w2 0.0    w0   w1     w2 0.0 w0 w1 w2 w3
              1.0                   1.0
                            Truth                 Truth   0.8            Truth   0.8           Truth   0.8        Truth
              0.8                   0.8
        Group-2


                            Learned               Learned 0.6            Learned 0.6           Learned 0.6        Learned
              0.6                   0.6
              0.4                   0.4                   0.4                    0.4                   0.4
              0.2                   0.2                   0.2                    0.2                   0.2
              0.0   w0   w1     w2 0.0  w0     w1     w2 0.0    w0    w1     w2 0.0    w0   w1     w2 0.0 w0   w1     w2
              0.8           Truth   0.8       Truth       0.8            Truth   0.8           Truth   0.8             Truth
              0.7                   0.7                   0.7
        Group-3


              0.6           Learned 0.6       Learned     0.6            Learned 0.6           Learned 0.6             Learned
              0.5                   0.5                   0.5
              0.4                   0.4                   0.4                    0.4                   0.4
              0.3                   0.3                   0.3
              0.2                   0.2                   0.2                    0.2                   0.2
              0.1                   0.1                   0.1
              0.0   w0   w1     w2 0.0 w0 w1 w2 w3        0.0   w0    w1     w2 0.0    w0   w1     w2 0.0    w0   w1      w2
              0.8           Truth   0.8        Truth      0.8            Truth   0.8           Truth   0.8         Truth
        Group-4


                            Learned            Learned                   Learned               Learned             Learned
              0.6                   0.6                   0.6                    0.6                   0.6
              0.4                   0.4                   0.4                    0.4                   0.4
              0.2                   0.2                   0.2                    0.2                   0.2
              0.0   w0   w1     w2 0.0 w0 w1 w2 w3        0.0   w0    w1     w2 0.0    w0   w1     w2 0.0 w0    w1     w2
              0.8                   0.8                   0.8                    0.8                   0.8
              0.7           Truth   0.7        Truth      0.7            Truth   0.7           Truth   0.7         Truth
        Group-5


              0.6           Learned 0.6        Learned    0.6            Learned 0.6           Learned 0.6         Learned
              0.5                   0.5                   0.5                    0.5                   0.5
              0.4                   0.4                   0.4                    0.4                   0.4
              0.3                   0.3                   0.3                    0.3                   0.3
              0.2                   0.2                   0.2                    0.2                   0.2
              0.1                   0.1                   0.1                    0.1                   0.1
              0.0   w0   w1     w2 0.0 w0   w1     w2     0.0   w0    w1     w2 0.0    w0   w1     w2 0.0 w0    w1     w2
              0.8                   0.8                   0.8                    0.8                   0.8
              0.7           Truth   0.7        Truth      0.7            Truth   0.7           Truth   0.7         Truth
        Group-6


              0.6           Learned 0.6        Learned    0.6            Learned 0.6           Learned 0.6         Learned
              0.5                   0.5                   0.5                    0.5                   0.5
              0.4                   0.4                   0.4                    0.4                   0.4
              0.3                   0.3                   0.3                    0.3                   0.3
              0.2                   0.2                   0.2                    0.2                   0.2
              0.1                   0.1                   0.1                    0.1                   0.1
              0.0   w0   w1     w2 0.0 w0   w1     w2     0.0   w0    w1     w2 0.0    w0   w1     w2 0.0 w0 w1 w2 w3 w4
                    Rule weight           Rule weight           Rule weight            Rule weight           Rule weight



Figure 8: MAE values for all 6 groups and all 5 cases using 1000 samples. Blue one indicates the ground truth
rule and red/yellow one indicates the learned rules in different groups.


where τ is the generated tokens (i.e., candidate rule) and R(τ ) = ∂`(w,b
                                                                     ∂wf
                                                                          0)
                                                                             − ∂Ω(w)
                                                                                ∂wf                                     ∗ ,b∗
                                                                                                                                    . The
                                                                                                                       w(k) 0,(k)
policy gradient can be estimated using the roll-out samples, i.e.,
                                  1 XN XK                        (i) (i)
                     ∇θ J(θ) ≈                      ∇θ log πθ (ak |sk )R(i) (τ )                (21)
                                 N       i=1    k=1
where N is the number of episodes, and K is the length of tokens (actions). We use this estimated
policy gradient to update the policy θ, θ ← θ + α∇θ J(θ), where α is the learning rate.
However, in our problem, the final performance of our model is measured by the single or few
best-performing rules found during training. So normal policy gradient may not be satisfactory while
risk-seeking policy gradient may be more suitable.
We compare the performance of the risk-seeking policy gradient model with the normal policy
gradient model for cases in group-3 and group-6, mainly because the ground truth rules in these two
groups are long and complex with many body property predicates and various temporal relations.
Due to the difficulty of recovering ground truth rules in these groups, it may be more obvious to
distinguish the performance of the two models. We set   to be 0.3. The learning rate in solving the
subproblem was ×10−2 and the hidden state size of LSTM was 32. The learning rate in solving the
restricted master problem was ×10−3 . The results are shown in Fig. 11 and Fig. 12.


                                                                     20
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                                  Not Reset LSTM Model


                               Loss


                                                         Iteration number

Figure 9: Training loss trajectories of solving different subproblem stages if the LSTM model parameters are
inherited from the previous subproblem.
               Reset LSTM Model -- Not Early Stop                                  Reset LSTM Model -- Early Stop

                                                                    Loss
Loss


                         Iteration number                                                  Iteration number

Figure 10: Training loss trajectories of solving different subproblem stages for group-1 case-1. Left: The
LSTM parameters are refreshed in the beginning of each subproblem. Right: Early stop mechanism is used.


                                                           Group-3
Predicates in        Case-1: 8              Case-2: 12            Case-3: 16             Case-4: 20             Case-5: 24
   Library
                              Learned             Learned                    Learned                                       Learned
                                                                                                     Learned
    Policy               2 1                    1 2             Truth
                                                                      1 2                      3     1             3        2
   Gradient:     Truth                  Truth                                      Truth                   Truth
    Normal
                                                      Learned
                              Learned                                        Learned               Learned                 Learned
     Policy                                     3 1
   Gradient:        3                                                      2 1                 1 2             Truth
                                                                                                                     1 2
 Risk Seeking Truth                     Truth                   Truth                  Truth


Figure 11: Jaccard similarity score for all 5 cases in group-3 using 1000 samples. Blue one indicates the ground
truth rule, green one indicates the learned rule using normal policy gradient, and red one indicates the learned
rule using risk-seeking policy gradient.
By using risk-seeking policy gradient, there are actually some significant improvements. The results
show that more, and more importantly, more accurate ground truth rules were learned by the risk-
seeking policy gradient.


                                                                 21
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                                           Group-6
Predicates in        Case-1: 8             Case-2: 12         Case-3: 16                Case-4: 20               Case-5: 24
   Library
                           Learned                   Learned                Learned               Learned                 Learned
   Policy                2 1                     2 1           Truth
                                                                     1 2                      3      2                3    1
  Gradient:      Truth                   Truth                                   Truth                        Truth
   Normal

                               Learned               Learned               Learned                  Learned
    Policy
  Gradient:        3                             3                     3                      1 2                     3    2
Risk Seeking Truth                       Truth                 Truth                  Truth               Truth


Figure 12: Jaccard similarity score for all 5 cases in group-6 using 1000 samples. Blue one indicates the ground
truth rule, green one indicates the learned rule using normal policy gradient, and yellow one indicates the learned
rule using risk-seeking policy gradient.


L        P REDICATE D EFINITION IN MIMIC-III
MIMIC-III is an electronic health record ICU dataset, which is released under the PhysioNet Creden-
tialed Health Data License 1.5.01 . It was approved by the Institutional Review Boards of Beth Israel
Deaconess Medical Center (Boston, MA) and the Massachusetts Institute of Technology (Cambridge,
MA). In this dataset, all the patient health information was deidentified. We manually checked that
this data do not contain personally identifiable information or offensive content.
We defined 63 predicates, including two groups of drugs (i.e., intravenous fluids and vasopressors)
and lab measurements, see Tab. 8 for more details. Among all these predicates we were inter-
ested in reasoning about two predicates and define them as head predicates: 1) LowUrine and 2)
NormalUrine. We treated real time urine as head predicates since low urine is the direct indicator
of bad circulatory systems and the signal for septic shock; normal urine reflects the effect of the
drugs and treatments and the improvement of the patients physical condition. In our experiments,
lab measurement variables were converted to binary values (according to the normal range used in
medicine) with the transition time recorded. For drug predicates, they were recorded as 1 when they
were applied to patient. We extracted 2023 patient sequences, and randomly selected 80% of them
for training and the remaining 20% for testing. The average time horizon is 392.69 hours and the
average events per sequence is 79.03.

M        E XPERTS ’ MODIFICATION ALSO IMPORTANT
We also invite human experts (i.e. doctors in ICU) to justify correctness and modify our learned rules.
We compare the log-likelihood trajectories of directly updating the rule weights and directly updating
the weights of the modified rules by human experts, and the results are shown in Fig. 13. The results
show that the modification suggestion from human experts can indeed help improve the performance
of our model, since the log-likelihood trajectory of modified rules rise higher and faster.

N        R EAL -W ORLD E XPERIMENT: E YE F IXATION
Simple choices are made by integrating noisy evidence that is sampled over time and influenced by
visual attention. As a result, fluctuations in visual attention can affect choices. We aim to understand
shoppers’ purchase patterns given their eye fixation event data (Callaway et al., 2021).
Our conjecture is: the location of the items, shopper-assessed values of the items, and the shopper’s
visual habits (usually looking from left to right) will affect their final item choice. We learned
temporal logic rules and their weights to quantitatively understand this.
Dataset Description: Three items randomly placed on the “left”, “middle” and “right” on the
supermarket shelf, each has a unique “price” (value).
Each shopper evaluated three items by eye fixation until they identified an item to purchase.
    1
        https://physionet.org/content/mimiciii/view-license/1.4/


                                                               22
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                  Table 8: Defined Predicates in Our MIMIC-III Experiment.
                                Low/Normal/High-SysBP
                                Low/Normal/High-SpO2SaO2
                                Low/Normal/High-CVP
                                Low/Normal/High-SVR
                                Low/Normal/High-Potassium
                                Low/Normal/High-Sodium
                                Low/Normal/High-Chloride
                                Low/Normal/High-BUN
        Lab Measurements        Low/Normal/High-Creatinine
                                Low/Normal/High-CRP
                                Low/Normal/High-RBCcount
                                Low/Normal/High-WBCcount
                                Low/Normal/High-ArterialpH
                                Low/Normal/High-ArterialBE
                                Low/Normal/High-ArterialLactate
                                Low/Normal/High-HCO3
                                Low/Normal/High-SvO2ScvO2
        Output                                   LowUrine, NormalUrine
        Input                                    Colloid, Crystalloid, Water
        Drugs                                    Norepinephrine, Epinephrine,
                                                 Dobutamine, Dopamine, Phenylephrine
        Temporal Relation Type                   Before, After, Equal
                                                        Log-Likelihood Trajectory
                                      3.13

                                      3.14

                                      3.15
                     Log Likelihood


                                      3.16

                                      3.17

                                      3.18
                                                                                   Learned Rules
                                                                                   Modified by Experts
                                             0   1000     2000     3000     4000       5000      6000
                                                                  Time(s)
Figure 13: Log-likelihood trajectory for just running master problem to update rule weights. Blue curve
indicates that we put all learned rules directly into master problem and update their weights. Red curve indicates
that we put the modified rules directly into master problem and update their weights.



The data record each shopper’s eye fixated items, when and where, and their final purchased item.
There are 30 participants, each with at most 100 independent trials. At each trial, participants were
asked to look at these three items and choose the item that they think is most valuable. There are
2966 trials in total. On average, for one trial, a participant has 4.3011 eye fixations.
Predicate Definition: We are interested in explaining three final choices of a shopper:
1) finally choose the item with the actual (not shopper-assessed) largest value

2) finally choose the item with the last eye fixation, and

3) finally choose the item with the longest eye fixation.


                                                                 23
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


These final choices define the head predicate set. Another 18 predicates are about the location of the
items, value of the items, and the time of eye fixation of a shopper on one specific item. Please refer
the Tab. 9 below for a complete predicate set.

Table 9: Defined predicates for eye fixation trials. For eye fixation predicates, there are three parts:
location of item, value of item, duration of eye fixation
                                    Left_MaxValue_LongFixation
                                    Left_MaxValue_ShortFixation
                                    Left_MidValue_LongFixation
                                    Left_MidValue_ShortFixation
                                    Left_MinValue_LongFixation
                                    Left_MinValue_ShortFixation
                                    Middle_MaxValue_LongFixation
                                    Middle_MaxValue_ShortFixation
                                    Middle_MidValue_LongFixation
        Eye Fixation
                                    Middle_MidValue_ShortFixation
                                    Middle_MinValue_LongFixation
                                    Middle_MinValue_ShortFixation
                                    Right_MaxValue_LongFixation
                                    Right_MaxValue_ShortFixation
                                    Right_MidValue_LongFixation
                                    Right_MidValue_ShortFixation
                                    Right_MinValue_LongFixation
                                    Right_MinValue_ShortFixation
                                     FinalChoice_LargestValue
        Final Choice                 FinalChoice_LastFixation
                                     FinalChoice_LongestFixation
        Temporal Relation Type       Before

Rules Discussion: We displayed the discovered important rules in Tab. 10, which summarize the
eye fixation patterns before shoppers making choices. From the results, we have the following
discoveries:
1) the final fixation is shorter
2) the later (but not the final) fixations are longer
3) people are more likely to begin to look from the left or from the middle.
Specifically, if a shopper finally chooses the item with the largest value, he may first glance over all
three items at least once, or after looking at all three items, go back to check the item he wants to
choose, and then make a choice (Rule 1, 2, 5, and 8).
And people are more used to looking from left to right (Rule 2, 3, 5, and 7).
If a shopper finally chooses the item with the last eye fixation, he may only take a quick look at these
items and may miss one or two of these items (Rule 3, 6, and 9). If a shopper finally chooses the
item with the longest eye fixation, he may spend a lot of time on most of these items, reevaluating the
value of these items back and forth in his mind (Rule 4, 7, and 10).
In summary, our discovered temporal logic rules provide insight into shopper’s perchance behaviors
in terms of eye fixation patterns.


                                                   24
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Table 10: Temporal Logic Rules Discovered for Eye Fixation and Final Choice. Since there is only
one type of temporal relation “Before”, in the following representation of temporal logic rules, we
just ignore the temporal relation
  Weight Rule
             Rule 1: FinalChoice_LargestValue ← Middle_MaxValue_LongFixation
  0.0550
             ∧ Left_MidValue_ShortFixation ∧ Right_MinValue_ShortFixation
             Rule 2:FinalChoice_LargestValue ← Left_MaxValue_LongFixation
  0.0976
             ∧ Middle_MinValue_ShortFixation ∧ Right_MidValue_ShortFixation
             Rule 3:FinalChoice_LastFixation ← Left_MaxValue_LongFixation
  0.0278
             ∧ Middle_MinValue_ShortFixation ∧ Left_MaxValue_ShortFixation
             Rule 4:FinalChoice_LongestFixation ← Left_MaxValue_LongFixation
  0.0479
             ∧ Middle_MidValue_LongFixation ∧ Left_MaxValue_ShortFixation
             Rule 5:FinalChoice_LargestValue ← Left_MaxValue_LongFixation
  0.0648 ∧ Middle_MidValue_ShortFixation ∧ Right_MinValue_LongFixation
             ∧ Left_MaxValue_ShortFixation
             Rule 6:FinalChoice_LastFixation ← Middle_MidValue_ShortFixation
  0.0015 ∧ Left_MaxValue_LongFixation ∧ Middle_MidValue_ShortFixation
             ∧ Left_MaxValue_ShortFixation
             Rule 7:FinalChoice_LongestFixation ← Left_MinValue_LongFixation
  0.0457 ∧ Middle_MaxValue_LongFixation ∧ Right_MidValue_ShortFixation
             ∧ Middle_MaxValue_ShortFixation
             Rule 8:FinalChoice_LargestValue ← Middle_MidValue_ShortFixation
  0.0241 ∧ Left_MaxValue_LongFixation ∧ Right_MinValue_ShortFixation
             ∧ Middle_MidValue_LongFixation ∧ Left_MaxValue_ShortFixation
             Rule 9:FinalChoice_LastFixation ← Middle_MidValue_ShortFixation
  0.0243 ∧ Right_MinValue_ShortFixation ∧ Left_MaxValue_LongFixation
             ∧ Middle_MidValue_LongFixation ∧ Left_MaxValue_ShortFixation
             Rule 10:FinalChoice_LongestFixation ← Left_MaxValue_LongFixation
  0.0145 ∧ Middle_MidValue_ShortFixation ∧ Left_MaxValue_LongFixation
             ∧ Right_MinValue_LongFixation ∧ Left_MaxValue_ShortFixation


                                              25
