Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


H OW M UCH S PACE H AS B EEN E XPLORED ?
M EASURING THE C HEMICAL S PACE C OVERED BY
DATABASES AND M ACHINE -G ENERATED M OLECULES
 Yutong Xie1 , Ziqiao Xu2 , Jiaqi Ma3 , Qiaozhu Mei1∗
 1
   School of Information, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, Michigan, USA
 2
   Chemistry Department, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, Michigan, USA
 3
   School of Information Sciences, University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign, Champaign, Illinois, USA


                                                   A BSTRACT
             Forming a molecular candidate set that contains a wide range of potentially effective
             compounds is crucial to the success of drug discovery. While most databases and
             machine-learning-based generation models aim to optimize particular chemical
             properties, there is limited literature on how to properly measure the coverage
             of the chemical space by those candidates included or generated. This problem
             is challenging due to the lack of formal criteria to select good measures of the
             chemical space. In this paper, we propose a novel evaluation framework for
             measures of the chemical space based on two analyses: an axiomatic analysis
             with three intuitive axioms that a good measure should obey, and an empirical
             analysis on the correlation between a measure and a proxy gold standard. Using
             this framework, we are able to identify #Circles, a new measure of chemical space
             coverage, which is superior to existing measures both analytically and empirically.
             We further evaluate how well the existing databases and generation models cover
             the chemical space in terms of #Circles. The results suggest that many generation
             models fail to explore a larger space over existing databases, which leads to new
             opportunities for improving generation models by encouraging exploration.


1       I NTRODUCTION
To efficiently navigate through the huge chemical space for drug discovery, machine learning (ML)
based approaches have been broadly designed and deployed, especially de novo molecular generation
methods (Elton et al., 2019; Schwalbe-Koda & Gómez-Bombarelli, 2020; Bian & Xie, 2021; Deng
et al., 2022). Such generation models learn to generate candidate drug designs by optimizing various
molecular property scores, such as the binding affinity scores. In practice, these scores can be
computationally obtained using biological activity prediction models (Olivecrona et al., 2017; Li
et al., 2018), which is the key to obtaining massive labeled training data for machine learning.
However, high in silico property scores are far from sufficient, as there is usually a considerable
misalignment between these scores and the in vivo behaviors. Costly wet-lab experiments are still
needed to verify potential drug hits, where only a limited number of drug candidates can be tested.
In light of this cost constraint, it is critical to select or generate drug candidates not only with high
in silico scores, but also covering a large portion of the chemical space. As functional difference
between molecules is closely related to their structural difference (Huggins et al., 2011; Wawer
et al., 2014), a better coverage of the chemical space will likely lead to a higher chance of hits in
wet experiments. For this purpose, quantitative coverage measures of the chemical space become
crucial. Such measures can both be used to evaluate and compare the candidate libraries1 , and be
incorporated into training objectives to encourage ML models better explore the chemical space.
In this paper, we investigate the problem of quantitatively measuring the coverage of the chemical
space by a candidate library. There have been a few such coverage measures of chemical space.
For example, richness counts the number of unique compounds in a molecular set, and it has been
used to describe how well a model is able to generate unique structures (Shi & von Itzstein, 2019;
    ∗
        Correspondence to: Qiaozhu Mei <qmei@umich.edu>.
    1
        A candidate library is a collection of drug candidates filtered by rules or generated by ML models.


                                                          1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Polykovskiy et al., 2020). In addition, molecular fingerprints have been used to calculate pairwise
similarity or distance between two compounds, and the average of these pairwise distances has been
used to describe the overall internal diversity of a molecular set (Brown et al., 2019; Polykovskiy
et al., 2020).
However, most existing coverage measures are heuristically proposed and the validity of these
measures is rarely justified. In fact, defining the “right” measure for the coverage of chemical space
coverage is challenging. Unlike the molecular property scores, there is no obvious “ground truth”
about the coverage of chemical space. Moreover, the chemical space is complex and combinatorial,
making the design of a good measure even more difficult.
To address the fundamental problem of properly measuring the coverage of chemical space for drug
discovery, we propose a novel evaluation framework with two complementary criteria for evaluating
the validity of coverage measures. We first formally define the concept of coverage measures on the
chemical space (referred to as chemical space measures), where many existing heuristic measures
fall into our definition (Section 3). Then we introduce the two criteria and compare various (existing
and new) chemical space measures based on the criteria (Section 4). Specifically, the first criterion
(Section 4.1) is based on an axiomatic analysis with three intuitive axioms that a good chemical space
measure should satisfy. Surprisingly, most heuristic measures that are commonly used in literature,
such as internal diversity, fail to satisfy these intuitive axioms. The second criterion (Section 4.2)
compares the chemical space measures with a proxy of the gold standard: the number of unique
biological functionalities covered by the set of molecules. We find that #Circles, a new chemical space
coverage measure (defined in Section 3.2.3) that has a strong basis in the mathematical literature, not
only satisfies both axioms but also better correlates with the gold standard.
Finally, we apply the #Circles measure to evaluate how well the existing databases and ML models
cover the chemical space (Section 5). Interestingly, the evaluation results suggest that many ML
models fail to explore a larger portion of chemical space compared to drug candidates obtained from
virtual screening over existing databases. We believe these findings lead to a new direction to improve
ML-based drug candidate generation models on better exploring the chemical space.


2    R ELATED W ORK
Molecular databases and machine-generated compounds are rich sources of drug candidates for
forming a candidate library in drug discovery. To evaluate the quality of molecular databases
and molecular generation methods, a variety of metrics are proposed. In general, four categories
of evaluation metrics can be identified in the literature, which are related to: (1) bioactivities,
(2) molecular properties, (3) data likelihood, or (4) the coverage of the chemical space, respectively.
In this paper, we mainly focus on the fourth category of metrics, the metrics that are more or less
related to the degree of coverage (or exploration) in the chemical space (other metrics are discussed
in Appendix A). In this category, commonly used measures include richness, uniqueness, internal
diversity, external diversity, KL divergence, and Fréchet ChemNet Distance (FCD) (Olivecrona et al.,
2017; You et al., 2018; De Cao & Kipf, 2018; Elton et al., 2019; Brown et al., 2019; Popova et al.,
2019; Polykovskiy et al., 2020; Shi et al., 2020; Jin et al., 2020; Xie et al., 2021). Besides, Zhang
et al. (2021) propose to use the number of unique functional groups or ring systems to estimate the
chemical space coverage and to compare several recent generative models. Similarly in Blaschke
et al. (2020), the number of unique Bemis-Murcko scaffolds is used to measure the variety of drug
candidates. Koutsoukas et al. (2014) study the effect of molecular fingerprinting schemes on the
internal diversity of compound selection. These measures usually mix the concepts of diversity,
coverage, or novelty, and their validity as a measure of exploration is not justified.
To the best of our knowledge, this is the first work that formally investigates the validity of molecular
chemical space measures. In particular, axiomatic approaches are used to analytically evaluate
various designs of a measurement, such as utility functions (Herstein & Milnor, 1953), cohesiveness
(Alcalde-Unzu & Vorsatz, 2013), or document relevance (Fang et al., 2004). While one study applies
axiomatic analysis to the design of diversity measures, with a particular focus on the domain of
science of science (Yan, 2021), the analysis of chemical space measurements remains novel. Using
axiomatic analysis to evaluate the chemical space measures in the chemical space is novel. With
an empirical analysis in addition to the axiomatic analysis, we make practical recommendations on
effective chemical space measures, including two novel measures.

                                                   2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


3     D EFINING C HEMICAL S PACE M EASURES
3.1   D EFINITION OF C HEMICAL S PACE M EASURES
To define a chemical space measure, we first formalize the notion of chemical space by assuming a
distance metric exists. This assumption is widely adopted in cheminformatics, using distance metrics
such as the Tanimoto distance (Tanimoto, 1968; Bajusz et al., 2015).
Assumption 3.1 (Chemical space). The chemical space U contains all possible molecules and is a
metric space with a distance metric function d : U × U → [0, +∞).

Definition 3.2 (Tanimoto distance). For two molecules x1 , x2 ∈ U, whose binary molecular finger-
print vectors are x1 , x2 ∈ {0, 1}n where n is the dimensionality of the fingerprint, their Tanimoto
distance is defined as                             Pn
                                                     j=1 x1j · x2j
                              d(x1 , x2 ) := 1 − Pn                    .                         (1)
                                                   j=1 max(x1j , x2j )

The Tanimoto distance is also referred to as the Jaccard distance (Jaccard, 1912) in other domains.
Its range is [0, 1]. For finite sets (e.g., molecular fingerprints), the Tanimoto distance is a metric
function (Kosub, 2019; Lipkus, 1999).
Our definition and following analysis are generic to all distance functions and are not limited to
the Tanimoto distance. One can also use the distance of latent hidden vectors (Preuer et al., 2018;
Samanta et al., 2020) or the root-mean-square deviation (RMSD) of three-dimensional molecular
conformers (Fukutani et al., 2021).
We then define a chemical space measure as the following.
Definition 3.3 (chemical space measure). Given the universal chemical space U, a chemical space
measure is a function that maps a set of molecules to a non-negative real number that reflects to what
extent the set spans the chemical space, i.e., µ : P(U) → [0, ∞), where P(·) is the notation of power
set. In particular, µ(∅) = 0.

3.2   E XAMPLES OF C HEMICAL S PACE M EASURES
Definition 3.3 is intentionally left general. Many measures related to the coverage, diversity, or novelty
of a molecular set fall into this definition. We summarize these various measures used in literature
into three categories: reference-based measures, aggregation-based measures, and locality-based
measures. We are also able to define new chemical space measures under this formulation.

3.2.1 R EFERENCE - BASED M EASURES
The first broad category of chemical space measures compare the generated molecules S with a
reference set R. In such context, a reference-based measure can be defined as the coverage of
references:
                                             X
                          Coverage(S, R) :=       max cover(x, y) ,                       (2)
                                                         x∈S
                                                 y∈R

where cover(x, y) indicates how molecule x can cover the reference y.
When the reference set R is taken as a collection of molecular fragments, the coverage function can
be written as cover(x, y) := I[molecule x contains fragment y], where I[·] is the indication function.
A large body of drug discovery literature uses the number of distinct functional groups (FG), ring
systems (RS), or Bemis-Murcko scaffolds (BM) in S to gauge the size of explored chemical space
(Zhang et al., 2021; Blaschke et al., 2020), corresponding to the cases where R is the collection of all
possible FG, RS, or BM fragments. We denote these specific reference-based measures as #FG, #RS,
and #BM respectively. Another example is the Richness of the molecular set, i.e., Richness := |S|
(Shi & von Itzstein, 2019; Polykovskiy et al., 2020), where cover(x, y) := I[x = y] and R = U.

3.2.2 AGGREGATION - BASED M EASURES
Though reference-based measures estimate chemical space coverage in an intuitive way, such
measures highly rely on the characteristics of the reference set and do not consider the relations
between the compounds. In contrast, the aggregation-based measures utilize the pair-wise distances


                                                    3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


among molecules and reflect the extent of chemical space coverage by aggregating the distances. For
a set S with n molecules, several aggregation-based measures can be defined as follow:
                             2      X                                                       1    X
     Diversity(S; d) :=                  d(x, y), (3a)            SumDiversity(S; d) :=               d(x, y), (3d)
                          n(n − 1) x,y∈S                                                  n − 1 x,y∈S
                                     x̸=y                                                        y̸=x
                                                                                          X
     Diameter(S; d) := max d(x, y),                (3b)           SumDiameter(S; d) :=        max d(x, y),     (3e)
                          x,y∈S                                                               y∈S
                           x̸=y                                                           x∈S y̸=x
                                                                                          X
    Bottleneck(S; d) := min d(x, y),               (3c)          SumBottleneck(S; d) :=       min d(x, y),     (3f)
                          x,y∈S                                                               y∈S
                           x̸=y                                                           x∈S y̸=x


where x, y are molecules in S, d is a distance metric as defined previously.
Among these measures, Diversity (also referred to as the internal diversity), the average distance
between the molecules, is widely used in the literature (You et al., 2018; De Cao & Kipf, 2018; Popova
et al., 2019; Polykovskiy et al., 2020; Shi et al., 2020; Xie et al., 2021). We follow the topology theory
and also introduce Diameter and Bottleneck as the maximum and minimum distance between any pair
of molecules, respectively (Edelsbrunner & Harer, 2010), since they can also reflect the dissimilarity
between molecules in S. We further introduce three Sum- variants for the above measures. The
Sum- variants2 will tend to increase when new molecules are added into the set. In addition, the
determinant of the similarity matrix of molecules is also a measure of dissimilarity, which is often
employed in diverse subset selection as a key concept of the determinantal point processes (DPP)
(Kulesza & Taskar, 2011; Kulesza et al., 2012). The DPP measures is defined as DPP(S) := det(S),
where S is the Tanimoto similarity matrix of candidate molecules (i.e., 1 − d(x, y) for Tanimoto
distance).
3.2.3 L OCALITY- BASED M EASURES
Inspired by the sphere exclusion algorithm used in compound selection (Snarey et al., 1997; Gobbi
& Lee, 2003), we introduce a new chemical space coverage measure that highlights the local
neighborhoods covered by a set of molecules:
                      #Circles(S; d, t) := max |C|        s.t.     d(x, y) > t,   ∀x ̸= y ∈ C,                 (4)
                                            C⊆S

where t ∈ [0, 1) is a distance threshold that corresponds to the diameter of a circle.
Intuitively, #Circles counts the maximum number of mutually exclusive circles that can fit into
S as neighborhoods, with a subset of its members C as the circle centers. When the threshold
t = 0, #Circles becomes the richness measure Richness(S) := |S|, which is the number of unique
molecules (Shi & von Itzstein, 2019; Polykovskiy et al., 2020). Interestingly, #Circles has a close
relation to the concepts of covering and packing in mathematics, which is in particular related to the
definition of packing number in topology (Vershynin, 2018). We discuss their detailed connections in
Appendix B.

4        S ELECTING THE R IGHT M EASURE
While all the aforementioned measures can heuristically reflect the degree of exploration, they do
not always agree with each other. We need a principled way to select the most suitable measures
from a variety of possible choices. Ideally, the selection criteria should not depend on the particular
molecule properties of the target or the algorithm used to generate the candidates. We achieve this
through a qualitative axiomatic analysis and a quantitative correlation comparison.

4.1        C RITERION #1: A N A XIOMATIC A NALYSIS OF C HEMICAL S PACE M EASURES
We propose three simple and intuitive principles that a good chemical space measure should satisfy.
First, including more molecules should not decrease the degree of chemical space coverage. As
it is easy to filter large candidate libraries into smaller subsets, including more molecules (even
similar ones) is not harmful, and can render a higher probability of containing drug hits. Second,
when adding new molecules, the coverage should increase properly, instead of inflating too much.
Third, molecular sets with more dissimilar molecules should have a higher degree of chemical space
coverage. These three principles are formalized below as three axioms and can be tested analytically.
     2
         The SumBottleneck measure is sometimes abbreviated as “SumBot” in the main paper.


                                                          4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Axiom 4.1 (Monotonicity). A good chemical space measure µ should be monotonic, i.e., for any two
molecular sets S1 , S2 ⊆ U, it holds that
                                  µ(S1 ∪ S2 ) ≥ max(µ(S1 ), µ(S2 )).                                                  (5)
A monotonic measure tends to increase when more molecules are included. This tendency is intuitive
in drug discovery as testing more molecules means having a higher probability to discover a drug hit.
Axiom 4.2 (Subadditivity). A good chemical space measure µ should be subadditive, i.e., for any
two molecular sets S1 , S2 ⊆ U, it holds that
                                    µ(S1 ∪ S2 ) ≤ µ(S1 ) + µ(S2 ).                                                    (6)
Note that the coverage of chemical space spanned by a molecular set may correlate with the probability
of containing drug hits. So correspondingly, the coverage µ(S1 ∪ S2 ) should not exceed the sum
of µ(S1 ) and µ(S2 ). Some direct corollaries and discussions on how the first and second axioms
connect to mathematical measures are in Appendix C.
Axiom 4.3 (Dissimilarity). A good chemical space measure should have a preference to dissimilar
elements, i.e., for any three molecules x0 , x1 , x2 ∈ U, if d(x0 , x1 ) ≥ d(x0 , x2 ), it holds
                                     µ({x0 , x1 }) ≥ µ({x0 , x2 }),                                                   (7)
where d is the distance metric.
Intuitively, considering adding a new      Monotonicity                                                     Subadditivity
molecule into an existing molecular                                        Reference-based
set S = {x0 }, where there are two                                       E.g., #FG, #RS, #BM
choices, namely x1 and x2 , the more
dissimilar one x1 will be preferred.                                          #Circles
                                                          SumDiversity
                                                                                               Bottleneck
Depending on whether each chemical                           Diameter
                                                                           Sumbottleneck
                                                          SumDiameter
space measure satisfies monotocinicy,
subadditivity and/or dissimilarity, we                           Diversity
can put it into a Venn diagram as
shown in Figure 1. The formal proofs                                            Dissimilarity
are provided in Appendix D. Despite
that the three axioms are simple and Figure 1: Chemical space measures, categorized by whether
intuitive, surprisingly, the proposed they satisfy monotonicity, subadditivity, and/or dissimilarity.
#Circles is the only measure that sat- #Circles is the only measure that satisfies all simultaneously.
isfies all these three axioms.
4.2   C RITERION #2: C ORRELATION WITH B IOLOGICAL F UNCTIONALITY
While only one measure stands out in the axiomatic analysis, it does not guarantee its empirical
performance. Meanwhile, there are still multiple measures that satisfy one or two of the three axioms.
In this subsection, we further investigate the validity of the chemical space measures by testing their
correlations with the biological functionality variety of molecules. Such functionalities can provide
valuable information in distinguishing molecules and implicating chemical space coverage. We
correlate the chemical space measures to the number of unique biological functionality labels covered
by a molecular set. A better chemical space measure should have a higher correlation to the variety
of biological functionalities, even though it is a proxy gold standard.
4.2.1 E XPERIMENT S ETUP
We base the analysis on the BioActivity dataset that is also used to compare different compound
selection algorithms (Koutsoukas et al., 2014). This dataset contains 10,000 compound samples
extracted from the ChEMBL database (Gaulton et al., 2017) with bio-activity labels, which annotate
50 activity classes with 200 samples each. Following Koutsoukas et al. (2014), for a subset of this
dataset S, we take the number of unique class labels as a proxy “gold standard” of the variety of
the molecules in S, i.e., GS(S) := #unique labels in S, which represents the number of biological
functionality types covered by S. We then compare the behavior of the gold standard and the chemical
space measures in two settings to find out which measures have the highest correlations with the
coverage (or variety) of biological functionalities: (1) a fixed-size setting where random subsets
of the dataset with fixed sizes are measured, and (2) a growing-size setting where we sequentially


                                                    5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


    Diversity                                                   Diversity
 SumDiversity                                                SumDiversity
    Diameter                                                    Diameter
 SumDiameter                                                 SumDiameter
   Bottleneck                                                  Bottleneck
SumBottleneck                                               SumBottleneck
          DPP                                                         DPP
         #FG                                                         #FG
         #RS                                                         #RS
         #BM                                                         #BM
     #Circles                                                    #Circles
    Richness                                                    Richness
                 0.2   0.0    0.2     0.4   0.6   0.8                       1   2   3    5      10            50
                             Correlation                                                DTW distance

(a) Spearman’s correlations between the gold standard       (b) DTW distances between the gold standard GS and
GS and chemical space measures in the fixed-size            chemical space measures in the growing-size setting,
setting. A higher correlation is better.                    the smaller the better. A smaller distance is better.
Figure 2: Correlation between each chemical space measure and biological functionality coverage.
The chemical space measure with the highest correlation is highlighted in green. Results are
aggregated by running experiments independently ten times.


add molecules into a molecular set. We compare the measuring results of GS and chemical space
measures with Spearman’s correlation coefficient and dynamic time warping (DTW) distance. The
experiment details are listed in Appendix E.

4.2.2    R ESULTS AND D ISCUSSION         Table 1: Regarding the two suggested criteria, #Circles is
                                          the most recommended chemical space measure. “Mono”,
Experiment results in Figure 2 suggest
                                          “subadd”, and “dissim” are abbreviations for monotonicity,
that #Circles stands out for both empir-
                                          subadditivity, and dissimilarity respectively.
ical experiment settings. For the fixed-
size setting, #Circles and SumBottleneck                   (C1) Axiomatic           (C2) Correla
have notably higher correlations to the                  properties (Sec. 4.1)    -tions (Sec. 4.2)
gold standard than other measures. This     Measures       Axioms satisfied      Fixed       Growing
indicates that the locality information
                                             Diversity       Dissimilarity      Medium         Low
is critical, as these two measures both       SumBot        Subadd, dissim        High       Medium
prefer new molecules that are at arm’s           #FG        Mono, subadd        Medium Medium
length from their nearest neighbors. For     Richness Mono, subadd, dissim        Low        Medium
the growing-size setting, #Circles sur-      #Circles Mono, subadd, dissim        High         High
passes all other chemical space measures.
Reference-based measures such as #FG also perform prominently. Both #Circles and reference-based
measures satisfy subadditivity, making them suitable for a “growth” setting. The Sum- variants of
aggregation-based measures outperform their original forms, as they tend to increase when adding
new molecules.
More experiment results can be found in Appendix E, where we also discuss the impact of the
distance metric d. We also study the sensitivity of the subset size n, the way of adding new molecules,
and the choice of the #Circles’s threshold t. Results suggest that t = 0.75 is a good choice for both
two settings. Correlations between chemical space measures are visualized in Figure 8 and 11.

4.3     W HICH M EASURE IS THE R IGHT C HOICE ?
The empirical analysis shows that the locality-based #Circles measure is a robust choice for all tested
scenarios, which reconfirms the conclusion of the axiomatic analysis. Besides, SumBottleneck may
be an effective choice when a fixed number of candidates are the target. Reference-based measures
may be good alternatives if carefully-designed and comprehensive reference sets are available.
Surprisingly, the widely used Diversity measure is rendered inferior both analytically and empirically,
casting doubts on its efficiency in measuring and encouraging exploration for molecular generation.
Our analysis and comparison results are summarized in Table 1.

5     M EASURING C HEMICAL S PACE C OVERAGE
In this section, we apply the chemical space measures to evaluate how well the existing databases
and ML-based molecular generation models cover the chemical space.


                                                        6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                              Original Databases                                        Filtered Databases

                               249K            10K                                        174K               2053
                         460K           5.1K                                     427K              1256
                      1937K                 8.1K                      1846K                            1711
                     2305K                           33K                       967K                                 4581
            11488K                                         175K        1621K                                               8115


Figure 3: Richness and #Circles of molecular databases. Databases are listed vertically. The horizontal
axes are chemical space measures (plotted in logarithmic scales). #Circles has the threshold value
(t = 0.75). We find a discrepancy between Richness and #Circles, meaning that a larger database
does not necessarily span a wider range of the chemical space.

5.1     M EASURING C HEMICAL S PACE C OVERED BY M OLECULAR DATABASES
Other than being a rich source for virtual screening for drug purposes, molecular databases are also
bonanzas of data for training ML models. In both scenarios, the coverage of chemical space is a
crucial descriptor for comparing various databases. With a higher coverage of the chemical space, we
are able to construct candidate libraries with better varieties. Also, the ML model would benefit from
the diverse training data, obtaining a better understanding of the overall chemical space. Here, we
compare five commonly used molecular databases with the selected measures.

5.1.1    E XPERIMENT S ETUP
Databases and filtering rules. We include five widely used drug and compound databases in
our measurement: (1) ZINC-250k (a random subset of the ZINC database) (Irwin & Shoichet,
2005), (2) MOSES (Polykovskiy et al., 2020), (3) ChEMBL (Gaulton et al., 2017), (4) GDB-17
(Ruddigkeit et al., 2012), and (5) the Enamine Hit Locator Library (ENAMINE). More details
about the databases are listed in Appendix F.1.
We further apply two filtering rules to these databases to select potential drug candidates. In drug
discovery, drug-likeness and synthesizability of compounds are both important considerations. The
quantitative drug-likeness (QED) (Bickerton et al., 2012) and the synthetic accessibility (SA) (Ertl &
Schuffenhauer, 2009) are computed. The molecules are filtered with QED ≥ 0.6 and SA ≤ 4.
5.1.2 R ESULTS AND D ISCUSSION
Figure 3 compares Richness and Circles of molecular databases. From the results, we conclude
the findings as follows. (1) A larger database does not necessarily span a wider range of the
chemical space: There is a discrepancy between Richness and #Circles, and the #Circles measuring
results suggest that, in terms of chemical space coverage, ZINC-250k covers a larger area than
ENAMINE and MOSES. (2) ZINC-250k and GDB-17 are recommended: With the smallest
amount of compounds, ZINC-250k renders a relatively high coverage of the chemical space, which
is highly recommended for model training with limited computation resources. Constructed by
enumeration, GDB-17 substantially expands the known chemical space to a great level, which is
suitable for training ML models for chemical space representations. More details and findings on
other chemical measures are provided in Appendix F.

5.2     M EASURING C HEMICAL S PACE E XPLORED BY G ENERATION M ODELS
5.2.1 P ROBLEM F ORMULATION
In drug discovery, the search for active molecules towards a druggable target is often formulated as
the following unconstrained optimization problem (Olivecrona et al., 2017; Gómez-Bombarelli et al.,
2018; Liu et al., 2018; You et al., 2018; Jin et al., 2018; De Cao & Kipf, 2018; Popova et al., 2019;
Shi et al., 2020; Xie et al., 2021):
                                 arg max s1 (x) ◦ s2 (x) ◦ · · · sK (x),                          (8)
                                           x∈U
where x is a molecule in the chemical space U, sk : U → R is a function scoring particular biological
properties, and the “◦” operator indicates the combination of multiple scores (e.g., summation or
multiplication). This scoring function can be binding affinity to protein targets, drug-likeness, synthe-
sizability, etc. When wet-lab experiments are not available, these scores are obtained computationally.


                                                                  7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Table 2: Measuring results of the chemical space explored by molecular generation methods. In-
corporating chemical space measures into the objectives increases the exploration of the chemical
space measures, but none of the tested ML-based models surpasses the virtual screening baseline
(Databases) in terms of #Circles when t = 0.75 (as suggested in Sec. 4.2, highlighted in grey).
Numbers in the parentheses following #Circles are values for the threshold t. In each chemical space
measure, the larger value the better. Bold indicates the best performance in each measure.
 Method          Richness         #Circles (0.70)       #Circles (0.75)   #Circles (0.80)   Diversity
 Databases       1,250              78.0 ± 4.4%         55.7 ± 3.7%       30.3 ± 5.0%       0.827
 RationaleRL      526 ± 1.7%       14.2 ± 6.8%          12.1 ± 6.5%        9.9 ± 0.3%       0.762 ± 0.3%
 DST                29              2.0 ± 0.0%           1.0 ± 0.0%        1.0 ± 0.0%       0.559
 JANUS             261             15.0 ± 11.6%          6.7 ± 8.7%        4.0 ± 25.0%      0.759
 MARS            134K ± 10.2%      75.3 ± 4.4%          22.6 ± 13.3%       7.3 ± 16.0%      0.736 ± 0.8%
 +Diversity      177K ± 13.7%      93.8 ± 7.6%          24.4 ± 9.8%        8.8 ± 13.9%      0.752 ± 0.2%
 +SumBot         221K ± 13.4%     128.3 ± 8.1%          29.3 ± 7.6%        8.8 ± 13.0%      0.752 ± 0.3%
 +#Circles       179K ± 17.4%     129.9 ± 19.1%         30.2 ± 18.0%       9.7 ± 16.2%      0.749 ± 0.7%

Unfortunately, the majority of the computational scoring functions are merely approximations and
cannot accurately predict the wet-lab results. As pointed out in the chemistry literature, rather than
focusing on optimizing the estimated property scores, it is crucial to generate a variety of compounds
that span a wider range of the chemical space (Huggins et al., 2011; Wawer et al., 2014; Ashenden,
2018). We therefore propose the following objective as the goal of molecular generation, and use this
new objective to compare models:
                     arg max     µ(S) s.t.     sk (x) ≥ Ck , ∀k ∈ [K], x ∈ S,                           (9)
                         S⊆U

where S ⊆ U is a molecular candidate set, µ(·) is a chemical space measure, sk (x) ≥ Ck means the
estimated property score of a molecule x is at or above a threshold Ck .

5.2.2 E XPERIMENT S ETUP
Generation objective. Following Li et al. (2018) and Jin et al. (2020), we consider the inhibition
against an Alzheimer-related target protein c-Jun N-terminal kinase-3 (JNK3) as the biological
objective. The JNK3 binding affinity score is predicted by a random forest model based on Morgan
fingerprint features of a molecule (Rogers & Hahn, 2010). We also consider drug likeness (QED) and
synthetic accessibility (SA) as they are important in practical drug discovery scenarios.

Models, variations, and the baseline. We employ four recently proposed molecular generation
models to optimize the generation objective (JNK3, QED, and SA): (1) RationaleRL (Jin et al.,
2020) generates molecules by combining rationales with reinforcement learning (RL); (2) DST (Fu
et al., 2022) supports a gradient-based optimization on chemical graphs; (3) JANUS (Nigam et al.,
2022) uses the genetic algorithm (GA) to design drugs inversely with parallel tempering; (4) MARS
(Xie et al., 2021) generates fragment-based molecular structures based on Markov chain Monte Carlo
(MCMC) sampling. Due to MARS’ great ability to simultaneously optimize multiple drug discovery
objectives, we also consider three variants of it (MARS+Diversity, MARS+SumBottleneck, and
MARS+#Circles), where the chemical space measures are incorporated into Equation 8 to encourage
exploration. The virtual screening setting is introduced as a baseline, where the five aforementioned
molecular databases are combined, forming a candidate set of 11M compounds.

Evaluation. To validate the ability in exploring the chemical space, we compare the molecules
generated by models using Equation 9 with multiple chemical space measures. The molecules
(including molecules generated by models as well as compounds from databases) are filtered with
the constraints JNK3 ≥ 0.5, QED ≥ 0.6, and SA ≤ 4, representing the positive candidates. We
examine seven different measures, and report #Circles, Richness, and Diversity here; the others are
listed in Appendix G). Note we cannot directly measure the biological functionality coverage as in
Section 4.2, as many of the generated molecules are not in the database. For RationaleRL and DST,
5000 molecules are generated as suggested in their papers. For JANUS and MARS, the population
size and the number of MCMC chains are set as 5000. JANUS evolves for 10 generations, and MARS
iterates 2000 steps. More implementation details are listed in Appendix G.

5.2.3   R ESULTS AND D ISCUSSION

                                                    8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Table 2 lists the chemical space mea-
sures estimated for the positive candi-                                                    Method
                                                                                        Virtual Screening
date compounds (i.e., JNK3 ≥ 0.5,          10 4
                                                                                        RationalRL
QED ≥ 0.6, and SA ≤ 4) gener-                                                           DST
ated by models or from databases.                                                       JANUS
                                           10 3                                         MARS
Based on these results, we conclude                                                     MARS+#Circles
the following. (1) ML-based mod-


                                           #Circles
els fail to explore a larger effec-
                                           10 2
tual area compared to databases:
Unexpectedly, we find the molecules
obtained by virtual screening over
                                           10 1
databases span the largest area of the
chemical space in terms of #Circles
when t = 0.75. The most compet-
                                           10 0
itive model among the tested ones,
MARS+#Circles, explores only about              0.4        0.5       0.6            0.7  0.8             0.9
                                                                        Threshold t
half of the space compared to virtual
screening. (2) Chemical space mea- Figure 4: #Circles in the log scale and its threshold t selection
sures can encourage the model to for various models. Curves of the #Circles measure reflects
explore: By incorporating chemical characteristics of molecular generation methods.
space measures into the optimization
objective of MARS, all measures are significantly improved during molecular generation. (3) Diver-
sity should be avoided as a descriptor for exploration: During sampling, MARS and its variants
all converge quickly in Diversity (Figure 19), despite a large number of new molecules discovered.
Again, it suggests that the widely used Diversity is not suitable for measuring chemical space.
We want to stress that the parameter t of #Circles has an interpretable meaning. When t is
smaller, #Circles tends to reflect the “spread” of molecules at a finer granularity. When t is larger,
the measure focuses more on the global picture. Therefore, we can intuitively characterize different
molecular generation methods by examining #Circles values with different thresholds t as displayed
in Figure 4. From the results, we find MARS and JANUS present similar characteristics as they both
have a relatively sharp decrease around t = 0.75. This might be because both two models are based
on sampling algorithms and tend to exploit locally in the chemical space. In contrast, RationaleRL
tends to explore globally because it is designed to combine active fragments (rationales). We can
also compare the models by adopting the concept of Pareto optimization. We find the DST, JANUS,
and the vanilla MARS model are completely dominated by the variant MARS+#Circles. Besides, the
RationaleRL method is dominated by the virtual screening approach.
A few limitations of the measurement with #Circles should be noted. For example the running time
of calculating #Circles is exponential in theory. We implement a fast approximation by sacrificing
accuracy (Appendix H). More experiment details and findings are provided in Appendix G.

6 C ONCLUSION AND F UTURE W ORK
In this paper, we have presented a systematic study on the coverage measures of chemical space in
the context of drug discovery. The core contribution of this study is a novel evaluation framework
for selecting proper coverage measures. Using the proposed framework, we have identified a
new chemical space coverage measure, #Circles, which is superior to existing heuristic measures
commonly used in the drug discovery literature. We have also quantitatively compared molecular
databases and ML-based generation models in terms of #Circles. The results suggest that many
ML-based generation models fail to explore a larger chemical space compared to virtual screening,
since they tend to exploit locally instead of exploring widely.
Measuring the chemical space is a fundamental problem in drug discovery. Our work in this direction
opens even more research questions that are worth investigating in the future. For example, it would
be interesting to design and evaluate more chemical space measures under our framework. Moreover,
the newly suggested objective for molecular generation (Equation 9) inspires further study, since it is
computationally challenging as a combinatorial constrained optimization problem. In general, the
proposed chemical space measures and the generic measure selection framework are not restricted
to the application of drug discovery, but can also be used in other domains, such as material design,
science of science, and text or image generation.


                                                      9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We would like to thank Professor Kevyn Collins-Thompson, Professor Paramveer Dhillon, and
Professor Aaron Frank for their helpful feedback and suggestions. We also thank the anonymous
reviewers for their constructive comments, and in particular for pointing out the relation between
#Circles and packing number. This work was in part supported by the National Science Foundation
under grant number 1633370.

R EFERENCES
Shahin Ahmadi, Zohreh Moradi, Ashwani Kumar, and Ali Almasirad. Smiles-based qsar and
  molecular docking study of xanthone derivatives as α-glucosidase inhibitors. Journal of Receptors
  and Signal Transduction, pp. 1–12, 2021.

Jorge Alcalde-Unzu and Marc Vorsatz. Measuring the cohesiveness of preferences: an axiomatic
  analysis. Social Choice and Welfare, 41(4):965–988, 2013.

Stephanie Kay Ashenden. Screening library design. Methods in enzymology, 610:73–96, 2018.

Dávid Bajusz, Anita Rácz, and Károly Héberger. Why is tanimoto index an appropriate choice for
  fingerprint-based similarity calculations? Journal of cheminformatics, 7(1):1–13, 2015.

Yuemin Bian and Xiang-Qun Xie. Generative chemistry: drug discovery with deep learning generative
  models. Journal of Molecular Modeling, 27(3):1–18, 2021.

G. Richard Bickerton, Gaia V. Paolini, Jérémy Besnard, Sorel Muresan, and Andrew L. Hopkins.
  Quantifying the chemical beauty of drugs. Nature Chemistry, 4(2):90–98, 2012.

Thomas Blaschke, Ola Engkvist, Jürgen Bajorath, and Hongming Chen. Memory-assisted reinforce-
  ment learning for diverse molecular de novo design. Journal of cheminformatics, 12(1):1–17,
  2020.

Nathan Brown, Marco Fiscato, Marwin HS Segler, and Alain C Vaucher. Guacamol: benchmarking
  models for de novo molecular design. Journal of chemical information and modeling, 59(3):
 1096–1108, 2019.

Nicola De Cao and Thomas Kipf. MolGAN: An implicit generative model for small molecular graphs.
  ICML 2018 workshop on Theoretical Foundations and Applications of Deep Generative Models,
  2018.

Jianyuan Deng, Zhibo Yang, Iwao Ojima, Dimitris Samaras, and Fusheng Wang. Artificial intelligence
   in drug discovery: applications and techniques. Briefings in Bioinformatics, 23(1):bbab430, 2022.

Herbert Edelsbrunner and John Harer. Computational topology: an introduction. American Mathe-
  matical Soc., 2010.

Daniel C Elton, Zois Boukouvalas, Mark D Fuge, and Peter W Chung. Deep learning for molecular
  design—a review of the state of the art. Molecular Systems Design & Engineering, 4(4):828–849,
  2019.

Peter Ertl and Ansgar Schuffenhauer. Estimation of synthetic accessibility score of drug-like
  molecules based on molecular complexity and fragment contributions. Journal of Cheminformatics,
  1(1):8–8, 2009.

Hui Fang, Tao Tao, and ChengXiang Zhai. A formal study of information retrieval heuristics. In
 Proceedings of the 27th annual international ACM SIGIR conference on Research and development
  in information retrieval, pp. 49–56, 2004.

Tianfan Fu, Wenhao Gao, Cao Xiao, Jacob Yasonik, Connor W. Coley, and Jimeng Sun. Differ-
  entiable scaffolding tree for molecule optimization. In International Conference on Learning
  Representations, 2022.


                                                10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Tomonori Fukutani, Kohei Miyazawa, Satoru Iwata, and Hiroko Satoh. G-rmsd: Root mean square
  deviation based method for three-dimensional molecular similarity determination. Bulletin of the
  Chemical Society of Japan, 94(2):655–665, 2021.
Anna Gaulton, Anne Hersey, Michał Nowotka, A. Patrícia Bento, Jon Chambers, David Mendez,
  Prudence Mutowo, Francis Atkinson, Louisa J. Bellis, Elena Cibrián-Uhalte, Mark Davies, Nathan
  Dedman, Anneli Karlsson, María Paula Magariños, John P. Overington, George Papadatos, Ines
  Smit, and Andrew R. Leach. The chembl database in 2017. Nucleic Acids Research, 45, 2017.
Justin Gilmer, Samuel S. Schoenholz, Patrick F. Riley, Oriol Vinyals, and George E. Dahl. Neural
  message passing for quantum chemistry. In Proceedings of the 34th International Conference on
  Machine Learning, 2017.
Alberto Gobbi and Man-Ling Lee. Dise: directed sphere exclusion. Journal of chemical information
  and computer sciences, 43(1):317–323, 2003.
Rafael Gómez-Bombarelli, Jennifer Nansean Wei, David Duvenaud, José Miguel Hernández-Lobato,
  Benjamín Sánchez-Lengeling, Dennis Sheberla, Jorge Aguilera-Iparraguirre, Timothy D. Hirzel,
  Ryan Prescott Adams, and Alan Aspuru-Guzik. Automatic chemical design using a data-driven
  continuous representation of molecules. ACS central science, 4(2):268–276, 2018.
Paul R Halmos. Measure theory, volume 18. Springer, 2013.
Israel N Herstein and John Milnor. An axiomatic approach to measurable utility. Econometrica,
   Journal of the Econometric Society, pp. 291–297, 1953.
David John Huggins, Ashok Ramakrishnan Venkitaraman, and David Robert Spring. Rational
  methods for the selection of diverse screening compounds. ACS Chemical Biology, 6(3):208–217,
  2011.
John J Irwin and Brian K Shoichet. Zinc- a free database of commercially available compounds for
  virtual screening. Journal of chemical information and modeling, 45(1):177–182, 2005.
Paul Jaccard. The distribution of the flora in the alpine zone. 1. New phytologist, 11(2):37–50, 1912.
Huaipan Jiang, Jian Wang, Weilin Cong, Yihe Huang, Morteza Ramezani, Anup Sarma, Nikolay V
  Dokholyan, Mehrdad Mahdavi, and Mahmut T Kandemir. Predicting protein–ligand docking
  structure with graph neural network. Journal of Chemical Information and Modeling, 62(12):
  2923–2932, 2022.
Wengong Jin, Regina Barzilay, and Tommi S. Jaakkola. Junction tree variational autoencoder for
 molecular graph generation. In Proceedings of the 35th International Conference on Machine
 Learning, 2018.
Wengong Jin, Regina Barzilay, and Tommi Jaakkola. Multi-objective molecule generation using
 interpretable substructures. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 4849–4859.
 PMLR, 2020.
Sven Kosub. A note on the triangle inequality for the jaccard distance. Pattern Recognition Letters,
  120:36–38, 2019.
Alexios Koutsoukas, Shardul Paricharak, Warren RJD Galloway, David R Spring, Adriaan P IJzerman,
  Robert C Glen, David Marcus, and Andreas Bender. How diverse are diversity assessment methods?
  a comparative analysis and benchmarking of molecular descriptor space. Journal of chemical
  information and modeling, 54(1):230–242, 2014.
Alex Kulesza and Ben Taskar. Learning determinantal point processes. In Proceedings of the
  Twenty-Seventh Conference on Uncertainty in Artificial Intelligence, pp. 419–427, 2011.
Alex Kulesza, Ben Taskar, et al. Determinantal point processes for machine learning. Foundations
  and Trends® in Machine Learning, 5(2–3):123–286, 2012.
Yibo Li, Liang Ren Zhang, and Zhenming Liu. Multi-objective de novo drug design with conditional
  graph generative model. Journal of Cheminformatics, 10(1):33, 2018.


                                                 11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Alan H Lipkus. A proof of the triangle inequality for the tanimoto distance. Journal of Mathematical
  Chemistry, 26(1):263–265, 1999.

Qi Liu, Miltiadis Allamanis, Marc Brockschmidt, and Alexander Gaunt. Constrained graph variational
  autoencoders for molecule design. In S. Bengio, H. Wallach, H. Larochelle, K. Grauman, N. Cesa-
  Bianchi, and R. Garnett (eds.), Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 31.
  Curran Associates, Inc., 2018.

Leland McInnes, John Healy, and James Melville. Umap: Uniform manifold approximation and
  projection for dimension reduction. arXiv preprint arXiv:1802.03426, 2018.

AkshatKumar Nigam, Robert Pollice, and Alán Aspuru-Guzik. Parallel tempered genetic algorithm
  guided by deep neural networks for inverse molecular design. Digital Discovery, 1(4):390–404,
  2022.

Marcus Olivecrona, Thomas Blaschke, Ola Engkvist, and Hongming Chen. Molecular de-novo
 design through deep reinforcement learning. Journal of Cheminformatics, 9(1):48–48, 2017.

Daniil Polykovskiy, Alexander Zhebrak, Benjamin Sanchez-Lengeling, Sergey Golovanov, Oktai
  Tatanov, Stanislav Belyaev, Rauf Kurbanov, Aleksey Artamonov, Vladimir Aladinskiy, Mark
  Veselov, et al. Molecular sets (moses): a benchmarking platform for molecular generation models.
 Frontiers in pharmacology, 11:1931, 2020.

Mariya Popova, Mykhailo Shvets, Junier Oliva, and Olexandr Isayev. Molecularrnn: Generating
 realistic molecular graphs with optimized properties. arXiv: Learning, 2019.

Kristina Preuer, Philipp Renz, Thomas Unterthiner, Sepp Hochreiter, and Günter Klambauer. Fréchet
  chemnet distance: a metric for generative models for molecules in drug discovery. Journal of
  chemical information and modeling, 58(9):1736–1741, 2018.

David Rogers and Mathew Hahn. Extended-connectivity fingerprints. Journal of Chemical Informa-
  tion and Modeling, 50(5):742–754, 2010.

Lars Ruddigkeit, Ruud Van Deursen, Lorenz C Blum, and Jean-Louis Reymond. Enumeration of 166
  billion organic small molecules in the chemical universe database gdb-17. Journal of chemical
  information and modeling, 52(11):2864–2875, 2012.

Sergio Ruiz-Carmona, Daniel Alvarez-Garcia, Nicolas Foloppe, A Beatriz Garmendia-Doval, Szil-
  veszter Juhos, Peter Schmidtke, Xavier Barril, Roderick E Hubbard, and S David Morley. rdock: a
  fast, versatile and open source program for docking ligands to proteins and nucleic acids. PLoS
  computational biology, 10(4):e1003571, 2014.

Soumitra Samanta, Steve O’Hagan, Neil Swainston, Timothy J Roberts, and Douglas B Kell. Vae-sim:
  a novel molecular similarity measure based on a variational autoencoder. Molecules, 25(15):3446,
  2020.

Daniel Schwalbe-Koda and Rafael Gómez-Bombarelli. Generative models for automatic chemical
  design. In Machine Learning Meets Quantum Physics, pp. 445–467. Springer, 2020.

Jie Shen, Feixiong Cheng, You Xu, Weihua Li, and Yun Tang. Estimation of adme properties with
   substructure pattern recognition. Journal of chemical information and modeling, 50(6):1034–1041,
   2010.

Chence Shi, Minkai Xu, Zhaocheng Zhu, Weinan Zhang, Ming Zhang, and Jian Tang. Graphaf:
  a flow-based autoregressive model for molecular graph generation. In Proceedings of the 8th
  International Conference on Learning Representations, 2020.

Yun Shi and Mark von Itzstein. How size matters: diversity for fragment library design. Molecules,
  24(15):2838, 2019.

Brian K Shoichet, Irwin D Kuntz, and Dale L Bodian. Molecular docking using shape descriptors.
  Journal of computational chemistry, 13(3):380–397, 1992.


                                                12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Michael Snarey, Nicholas K Terrett, Peter Willett, and David J Wilton. Comparison of algorithms for
 dissimilarity-based compound selection. Journal of Molecular Graphics and Modelling, 15(6):
 372–385, 1997.
TT Tanimoto. An elementary mathematical theory of classification and prediction, ibm report
  (november, 1958), cited in: G. salton, automatic information organization and retrieval, 1968.
Oleg Trott and Arthur J Olson. Autodock vina: improving the speed and accuracy of docking with
  a new scoring function, efficient optimization, and multithreading. Journal of computational
  chemistry, 31(2):455–461, 2010.
Roman Vershynin. High-dimensional probability: An introduction with applications in data science,
  volume 47. Cambridge university press, 2018.
Sheng Wang, Yuzhi Guo, Yuhong Wang, Hongmao Sun, and Junzhou Huang. Smiles-bert: large
  scale unsupervised pre-training for molecular property prediction. In Proceedings of the 10th ACM
  international conference on bioinformatics, computational biology and health informatics, pp.
  429–436, 2019.
Mathias J Wawer, Kejie Li, Sigrun M Gustafsdottir, Vebjorn Ljosa, Nicole E Bodycombe, Melissa A
 Marton, Katherine L Sokolnicki, Mark-Anthony Bray, Melissa M Kemp, Ellen Winchester, et al.
 Toward performance-diverse small-molecule libraries for cell-based phenotypic screening using
 multiplexed high-dimensional profiling. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 111
 (30):10911–10916, 2014.
Scott A Wildman and Gordon M Crippen. Prediction of physicochemical parameters by atomic
  contributions. Journal of chemical information and computer sciences, 39(5):868–873, 1999.
Yutong Xie, Chence Shi, Hao Zhou, Yuwei Yang, Weinan Zhang, Yong Yu, and Lei Li. Mars: Markov
  molecular sampling for multi-objective drug discovery. In International Conference on Learning
  Representations, 2021.
Shiyan Yan. Axiomatic Analysis of Unsupervised Diversity on Large-Scale High-dimensional Data.
  PhD thesis, 2021.
Jiaxuan You, Bowen Liu, Zhitao Ying, Vijay S. Pande, and Jure Leskovec. Graph convolutional
   policy network for goal-directed molecular graph generation. In Advances in Neural Information
   Processing Systems 31: Annual Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems, 2018.
Jie Zhang, Rocío Mercado, Ola Engkvist, and Hongming Chen. Comparative study of deep generative
   models on chemical space coverage. Journal of Chemical Information and Modeling, 61(6):2572–
   2581, 2021.


                                               13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


A    E VALUATION M ETRICS FOR M OLECULAR DATABASES AND M OLECULAR
     G ENERATION M ETHODS
Molecular databases and machine-generated compounds are rich sources of drug candidates for
forming a candidate library in drug discovery. To evaluate the quality of molecular databases
and molecular generation methods, a variety of metrics are proposed. In general, four categories
of evaluation metrics can be identified in the literature, which are related to: (1) bioactivities,
(2) molecular properties, (3) data likelihood, or (4) the coverage of the chemical space, respectively.
The first category describes the biological activities of the included or generated molecules toward
certain protein targets. Using docking simulators, researchers can calculate docking scores to
determine the binding affinity between the given compound structure and the target (Trott & Olson,
2010). However, the simulation usually takes a long time to run. To obtain fast feedback and a
sufficient amount of data to train molecular generation models, machine learning (ML) methods are
also proposed to predict the bioactivity of molecules, including linear regression, supported vector
machines (SVMs), random forests, and neural networks (NNs) (Shoichet et al., 1992; Olivecrona
et al., 2017; Li et al., 2018; Ahmadi et al., 2021; Jiang et al., 2022). The second category of metrics
evaluates the molecular properties of compounds. Some of them are calculated based on heuristic
rules, such as the validity of compounds, molecular weight, octanol-water partition coefficient (logP)
(Wildman & Crippen, 1999), drug-likeness score (QED) (Bickerton et al., 2012), and synthetic
accessibility (SA) (Ertl & Schuffenhauer, 2009). With the advent of ML and deep learning, ML
(especially deep learning)-based prediction models like SVMs, random forests, recurrent neural
networks (RNNs), and graph neural networks (GNNs) are also employed to predict the properties of
compounds (Shen et al., 2010; Wang et al., 2019; Gilmer et al., 2017). Another branch of metrics
uses data likelihood to evaluate the molecules output by generative models (Gómez-Bombarelli et al.,
2018; Liu et al., 2018; Jin et al., 2018; De Cao & Kipf, 2018). A few other metrics are particularly
related to the coverage of the chemical space or the extent of exploration in the chemical space. These
coverage-and-exploration-related metrics are introduced in Section 2.

B    C OVERING N UMBER AND PACKING N UMBER
In mathematics, given a metric space (T, d), where T is the universal set and d is the distance metric,
the coverage of a subset K ⊂ T can be described in terms of ε-nets (Vershynin, 2018) defined below.
Definition B.1 (ε-net). Given a metric space (T, d), for a subset K ⊆ T and a positive number ε > 0,
an ε-net of K is a subset N ⊆ K, where every point in K is within distance ε of N , i.e.,
                                 ∀x ∈ K, ∃x0 ∈ N : d(x, x0 ) ≤ ε.

Two related concepts, covering number and the packing number, are then defined as follows.
Definition B.2 (Covering number). For a subset K of the metric space (T, d), its covering number,
denoted N (K, d, ε), is the smallest possible cardinality of an ε-net of K.
Definition B.3 (Packing number). For a subset N in the metric space (T, d), it is called ε-separated
if d(x, y) > ε for all points x ̸= y ∈ N . The packing number of a subset K ⊆ T , denoted P(K, d, ε),
is the largest possible cardinality of an ε-separated subset of K.

Our definition of #Circles is equivalent to the packing number when setting the distance threshold t in
#Circles equal to the diameter of the balls ε in the packing number. To our best knowledge, however,
the use of this notion as a chemical space coverage measure is novel. In light of this connection,
further leveraging insights from topology to investigate the chemical space would be an interesting
future direction.

C    A XIOM C OROLLARIES AND D ISCUSSIONS
Some direct corollaries of monotonicity and subadditivity are as follows.
Corollary C.1 (Subtraction). If a chemical space measure µ is subadditive, then for any two
molecular sets ∀S1 , S2 ⊆ U, we have
                              µ(S1 ) ≥ µ(S1 \ S2 ) ≥ µ(S1 ) − µ(S2 ).


                                                 14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Corollary C.2 (Monotonicity [Single Molecule). ] If a chemical space measure µ is subadditive,
then for any molecular set ∀S ⊆ U and a single molecule x ∈ U, we have µ(S ∪ {x}) ≥ µ(S).
Corollary C.3 (Dominance). If a chemical space measure µ is subadditive, then for any two
molecular sets ∀S1 , S2 ⊆ U, if S1 ⊆ S2 , then µ(S1 ) ≤ µ(S2 ).

A subadditive chemical space measure is a special case of outer measures in the context of mathemat-
ical measure theory. Outer measures are relaxations of measures, where the latter requires a stricter
additivity property, i.e., µ(S1 ∪ S2 ) = µ(S1 ) + µ(S2 ) for any two disjoint sets S1 , S2 (Halmos,
2013). We consider additivity to be too strong and can conflict with intuitionsP   in drug discovery: an
additive measure defined on a discrete space must take the form of µ(S) = x∈S w(x), in which
w(·) is a weight function that independently assigns a score to each element in the space, meaning
additive measures defined on the discrete chemical space cannot capture the interrelationship between
molecules in a candidate set, which counters the reality, thus can hardly tell the variety of compounds
and how much of the chemical space is been covered.

D    P ROOFS FOR M ONOTONICITY, S UBADDITIVITY AND D ISSIMILARITY

In Figure 1 we show the chemical space measures according to whether they will satisfy monotonicity,
subadditivity, and/or dissimilarity. In this section, we provide proofs to verify each measure’s
monotonicity, subadditivity, and dissimilarity.
Note that for aggregation-based measures, when |S| = 1, µ(S) is not defined. So without loss of
generality, we assume µ({x}) = w(x), x ∈ U in such cases, where w : U → R is an importance
function.
Proposition D.1 (Monotonicity of chemical space measures.). Reference-based chemical space
measures, SumDiversity, Diameter, SumDiameter, and #Circles are monotonic. Diversity, Bottleneck,
SumBottleneck, and DPP are not monotonic.

Proof. In the proof, for two arbitrary molecular sets S1 and S2 as stated in the monotonicity axiom,
we consider combining them into S := S1 ∪ S2 .
For the reference-based chemical space measures, We prove the monotonicity and subadditivity
simultaneously for reference-based measures by first proving the monotonicity and subadditivity of
the maximum of cover(·, ·).
To prove the monotonicity and subadditivity of the maximum of cover(·, ·), we consider combining
any two molecular sets S1 , S2 ⊆ U. For any reference y ∈ R, we have


                               max max cover(x, y), max cover(x, y)
                                          x∈S1               x∈S2

                           ≤    max         cover(x, y)
                               x∈S1 ∪S2
                           ≤ max cover(x, y) + max cover(x, y).
                               x∈S1                   x∈S2


Therefore,


                                 max (Coverage(S1 ), Coverage(S2 ))
                               ≤ Coverage(S1 ∪ S2 )
                               ≤ Coverage(S1 ) + Coverage(S1 ),

thus proving the Coverage measure is monotonic and subadditive.
For the SumDiversity chemical space measure, note that the monotonicity corollary (Corollary C.2)
can also entail the monotonicity property defined in Axiom 4.1 (by sequentially adding molecules
from S2 to S1 or from S1 to S2 ). So we prove the monotonicity (defined in Axiom 4.1) by proving


                                                     15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


the monotonicity [single molecule] (defined in C.2). For a molecule x ∈ U and a molecular set
S ⊆ U with size n, using the fact that SumDiversity(S) = n · Diversity(S), we have


                      SumDiversity(S ∪ {x}) − SumDiversity(S)
                                               2X
                     =(n − 1) · Diversity(S) +    d(x, y) − n · Diversity(S)
                                               n
                                                       y∈S
                                           2X
                     = − Diversity(S) +              d(x, y).
                                           n
                                               y∈S


Comparing Diversity(S) and n2 y∈S d(x, y) is equivalent to comparing y1 ̸=y2 ∈S d(y1 , y2 ) and
                                  P                                          P
        P
(n − 1) y∈S d(x, y). Consider each “triangle” tuple (y1 , y2 , x), due to the metric characteristics
                                                               P
of d, we have d(y1 , y2 ) ≤ d(x, y1 ) + d(x, y2 ), meaning that y1 ̸=y2 ∈S d(y1 , y2 ) is less or equal to
        P
(n − 1) y∈S d(x, y). When w(x) = 0, SumDiversity(S ∪ {x}) − SumDiversity(S) ≥ 0, proving
the monotonicity of SumDiversity.
For the Diameter chemical space measure, when the importance function satisfies w(x) = 0, ∀x ∈ U,
we have
                       Diameter(S) = max d(x, y)
                                        x,y∈S
                                         x̸=y
                                                                                

                                     ≥ max  max d(x, y), max d(x, y)
                                                 x,y∈S1          x,y∈S2
                                                  x̸=y            x̸=y

                                     = max(Diameter(S1 ), Diameter(S2 )),

proving the monotonicity of Diameter.
For the SumDiameter chemical space measure, when the importance function satisfies w(x) =
0, ∀x ∈ U, we have

                                       X
                 SumDiameter(S) =          max d(x, y)
                                           y∈S
                                       x∈S y̸=x
                                                                                     
                                                X                    X
                                    ≥ max            max d(x, y),        max d(x, y)
                                                     y∈S1                 y∈S2
                                                x∈S1 y̸=x            x∈S2 y̸=x

                                    = max(SumDiameter(S1 ), SumDiameter(S2 )),

proving the monotonicity of SumDiameter.
For the #Circles chemical space measure, we define C ∗ (S) ⊆ S as an arbitrary set that satisfies
|C ∗ (S)| = #Circles(S). For any two molecular sets S1 , S2 ⊆ U, since C ∗ (S1 ) ⊆ S1 ∪ S2 , according
to the definition of #Circles, we have

                                  #Circles(S1 ) ≤ #Circles(S1 ∪ S2 ).
Similarly, we also have

                                  #Circles(S2 ) ≤ #Circles(S1 ∪ S2 ),
proving the monotonicity of #Circles.
For the Diversity chemical space measure, we disprove its monotonicity by proving it violates the
monotonicity [single molecule] corollary (Corollary C.2). For a molecule x ∈ U and a molecular set
S ⊆ U with size n > 1, if x ̸∈ S, we have


                                                      16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                             Diversity(S ∪ {x})
                                                                            
                                2      X              X
                                          d(y, y ′ ) +
                                                                
                         =                              d(x, y)
                             (n + 1)n 
                                        ′
                                                                
                                         y,y ∈S               y∈S
                                          y̸=y ′
                             n−1                     2     X
                         =       · Diversity(S) +            d(x, y).
                             n+1                  (n + 1)n
                                                                     y∈S


And the change in Diversity is


                     Diversity(S ∪ {x}) − Diversity(S)

                       n−1 n+1                             2    X
                   =          −         Diversity(S) +              d(x, y)
                       n+1 n+1                         (n + 1)n
                                                                y∈S
                                                          
                       2                     1X
                   =         −Diversity(S) +        d(x, y) .
                     n+1                      n
                                                        y∈S


When the average distance of x and S, i.e., n1 y d(x, y), is less than Diversity(S) (e.g., adding a
                                              P
molecule on the “segment” between two existing molecules), Diversity would decrease, thus violating
the monotonicity corollary and proving Diversity is not monotonic.
For the Bottleneck chemical space measure, we disprove its subadditivity by proving it violates
the monotonicity [single molecule] corollary (Corrolary C.2). Consider adding a molecule x into a
molecular set S with size n > 1. If x ̸∈ S, we have


                  Bottleneck(S ∪ {x}) = min Bottleneck(S), min d(x, y) .
                                                                           y∈S


When x introduces a more restricting bottleneck, i.e., miny d(x, y) < Bottleneck(S), we will have
Bottleneck(S ∪ {x}) < Bottleneck(S), violating the monotonicity corollary, thus proving Bottleneck
is not monotonic.
For the SumBottleneck chemical space measure, we disprove its monotonicity by proving it violates
the monotonicity [single molecule] corollary (Corrolory C.2). Consider adding a molecule x into a
molecular set S with size n > 1. If x ̸∈ S, we have


                         SumBottleneck(S ∪ {x})
                                                         
                         X
                       =    min  min  d(y, y ′ ), d(x, y) + min d(x, y),
                                                         
                                   ′                                  y∈S
                                     y ∈S
                          y∈S
                                     y ′ ̸=y


and

                                                         X
                              SumBottleneck(S) =              min d(y, y ′ ).
                                                            y ′ ∈S
                                                         y∈S ′
                                                            y ̸=y


When x introduces some more restricting bottlenecks, i.e., for many y ∈ S, d(x, y) is small (e.g.,
adding a molecule into a set whose size is two, and the new molecule is added near one of the two


                                                   17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


molecules), we will have SumBottleneck(S ∪ {x}) < SumBottleneck(S), violating the monotonicity
corollary, thus proving SumBottleneck is not subadditive.
For the DPP chemical space measure, we disprove its monotonicity by proving it violates the
monotonicity [single molecule] corollary (Corrolory C.2). Consider adding x into {x0 } where
x ̸= x0 1 − d(x, x0 ) is denoted as b. We have


                                                       1     b
                                 DPP({x0 , x}) =               = 1 − b2 .
                                                       b     1

When b > 0 we will have DPP({x0 , x}) < DPP({x0 }) = 1, violating the monotonicity corollary,
thus proving DPP is not monotonic.


Proposition D.2 (Subadditivity of chemical space measures.). Reference-based chemical space mea-
sures, Bottleneck, SumBottleneck, and #Circles are subadditive. Diversity, SumDiversity, Diameter,
and SumDiameter are not subadditive.

Proof. For the reference-based chemical space measures, the subadditivity is provided under Propo-
sition D.1.
For the Bottleneck chemical space measure, when the importance function satisfies w(x) ≥ M, ∀x ∈
U, where M is the upper bound of Bottlenkeck (e.g., w(x) = ∞), we have
                     Bottleneck(S) = min d(x, y)
                                        x,y∈S
                                         x̸=y
                                                                                        

                                     ≤ min  min d(x, y), min d(x, y)
                                                 x,y∈S1            x,y∈S2
                                                  x̸=y              x̸=y

                                     ≤Bottleneck(S1 ) + Bottleneck(S2 )),

proving the subadditivity of Bottleneck.
For the SumBottleneck chemical space measure, when the importance function satisfies w(x) ≥
M, ∀x ∈ U, where M is the upper bound of SumBottleneck (e.g., w(x) = ∞), we have
                                    X
             SumBottleneck(S) =            min d(x, y)
                                                   y∈S1 ∪S2
                                        x∈S1 ∪S2     y̸=x
                                        X                              X
                                    =           min        d(x, y) +            min      d(x, y)
                                               y∈S1 ∪S2                       y∈S1 ∪S2
                                        x∈S1     y̸=x                  x∈S2     y̸=x
                                           X                           X
                                    ≤=             min d(x, y) +              min d(x, y)
                                                y∈S1                    y∈S2
                                           x∈S1 y̸=x               x∈S2 y̸=x

                                    =SumBottleneck(S1 ) + SumBottleneck(S2 )),

proving the subadditivity of SumBottleneck.
For the #Circles chemical space measure, we prove its subadditivity by contradiction. For any two
molecular sets S1 , S2 ⊆ U, we assume #Circles(S1 ∪ S2 ) > #Circles(S1 ) + #Circles(S1 ). Use the
notations C1 := C ∗ (S1 ∪ S2 ) ∩ S1 and C2 := C ∗ (S1 ∪ S2 ) ∩ S2 . We have

                 |C1 | + |C2 | ≥ #Circles(S1 ∪ S2 ) > #Circles(S1 ) + #Circles(S1 ).

Since all values are non-negative, we must have |C1 | > #Circles(S1 ) or |C2 | > #Circles(S2 ),
contradicting with the definition of #Circles(S1 ) or #Circles(S1 ), thus proving the subadditivity of
#Circles.


                                                    18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


For the Diversity and SumDiversity chemical space measures, we disprove their subadditivity by
providing a counter-example. For two disjoint molecular sets with two molecules in each, i.e.,
{x1 , x2 } and {x3 , x4 }, we denote dij = d(xi , xj ). Then we have


                              Diversity({x1 , x2 , x3 , x4 })
                            = Diversity({x1 , x2 , x3 , x4 })
                               2
                            =     (d12 + d13 + d14 + d23 + d24 + d34 ),
                              4·3


and


                      Diversity({x1 , x2 }) + Diversity({x3 , x4 }) = d12 + d34 .

Similarly,


                            SumDiversity({x1 , x2 , x3 , x4 })
                          = 4 · Diversity({x1 , x2 , x3 , x4 })
                                 2
                          =4·       (d12 + d13 + d14 + d23 + d24 + d34 ),
                                4·3


and


              SumDiversity({x1 , x2 }) + SumDiversity({x3 , x4 }) = 2 · d12 + 2 · d34 .

When the inter-set distances are larger than the inner-set distances, i.e., d13 +d14 +d23 +d24 > 5·(d12 +
d34 ), we will have Diversity({x1 , x2 , x3 , x4 }) > SumDiversity{x1 , x2 } + Diversity{x3 , x4 }. Simi-
larly, when d13 + d14 + d23 + d24 > 2 · (d12 + d34 ), we will have SumDiversity({x1 , x2 , x3 , x4 }) >
SumDiversity{x1 , x2 } + SumDiversity{x3 , x4 }, thus proving both Diversity and SumDiversity mea-
sures are not subadditive.
For the Diameter chemical space measure, For two disjoint molecular sets S1 , S2 ⊆ U whose sizes
are larger than one, we have


                              Diameter(S1 ∪ S2 ) =       max        d(x, y),
                                                       x,y∈S1 ∪S2
                                                          x̸=y


and


                Diameter(S1 ) + Diameter(S2 ) = max
                                                 ′
                                                    d(x, x′ ) + max
                                                                 ′
                                                                    d(y, y ′ ).
                                                    x,x ∈S1               y,y ∈S2
                                                     x̸=x′                 y̸=y ′


When the maximum inter-set distance is larger than the maximum inner-set distance, i.e.,
maxx,y,∈S1 ∪S2 d(x, y) > maxx,x′ ,∈S1 d(x, x′ ) + maxy,y′ ,∈S2 d(y, y ′ ), we will have Diameter(S1 ∪
S2 ) > Diameter(S1 ) + Diameter(S2 ), thus proving the Diameter measure is not subadditive.
For the SumDiameter chemical space measure, we disprove its subadditivity by providing a counter-
example. For two disjoint molecular sets with two molecules in each, i.e., {x1 , x2 } and {x3 , x4 }, we
denote dij = d(xi , xj ). Then we have


                                                  19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                                                X
                        SumDiversity({x1 , x2 , x3 , x4 }) =        max d(xi , xj ),
                                                                    j∈[4]
                                                               i∈[4] j̸=i


and


               SumDiversity({x1 , x2 }) + SumDiversity({x3 , x4 }) = 2 · d12 + 2 · d34 .

When the inter-set distances are larger than the inner-set distances, i.e., d13 , d14 , d23 , d24 > d12 , d34 ,
we will have SumDiversity({x1 , x2 , x3 , x4 }) > SumDiversity{x1 , x2 } + SumDiversity{x3 , x4 },
thus proving the SumDiameter measure is not subadditive.


Proposition D.3 (Dissimilarity property of chemical space measures.). Diversity, SumDiversity,
Diameter, SumDiameter, Bottleneck, SumBottleneck, DPP, and #Circles have preferences to dissimi-
larity.

Proof. In the proof, for the three molecules x0 , x1 , x2 ∈ U as stated in the dissimilarity axiom in
Section 4.1, we assume d(x0 , x1 ) ≥ d(x0 , x2 ).
For the Diversity chemical space measure, we have


                Diversity({x0 , x1 }) = d(x0 , x1 ) ≥ d(x0 , x2 ) = Diversity({x0 , x2 }),

proving the dissimilarity property of Diversity.
For the SumDiversity chemical space measure, we have


        SumDiversity({x0 , x1 }) = 2 · d(x0 , x1 ) ≥ 2 · d(x0 , x2 ) = SumDiversity({x0 , x2 }),

proving the dissimilarity property of SumDiversity.
For the Diameter chemical space measure, we have


                Diameter({x0 , x1 }) = d(x0 , x1 ) ≥ d(x0 , x2 ) = Diameter({x0 , x2 }),

proving the dissimilarity property of Diameter.
For the SumDiameter chemical space measure, we have


        SumDiameter({x0 , x1 }) = 2 · d(x0 , x1 ) ≥ 2 · d(x0 , x2 ) = SumDiameter({x0 , x2 }),

proving the dissimilarity property of SumDiameter.
For the Bottleneck chemical space measure, we have


               Bottleneck({x0 , x1 }) = d(x0 , x1 ) ≥ d(x0 , x2 ) = Bottleneck({x0 , x2 }),

proving the dissimilarity property of Bottleneck.
For the SumBottleneck chemical space measure, we have


      SumBottleneck({x0 , x1 }) = 2 · d(x0 , x1 ) ≥ 2 · d(x0 , x2 ) = SumBottleneck({x0 , x2 }),


                                                      20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


proving the dissimilarity property of SumBottleneck.
For the DPP chemical space measure defined with the Tanimoto similarity, denoting d(x0 , x1 ) and
d(x0 , x2 ) as d1 and d2 respectively, when d1 , d2 ∈ [0, 1] (Tanimoto distances),
we have


                      1       1 − d1                             1             1 − d2
DPP({x0 , x1 }) =                    = 2d1 − d21 ≥ 2d2 − d22 =                        = DPP({x0 , x2 }),
                    1 − d1      1                              1 − d2            1

proving the dissimilarity property of DPP.
For the #Circles chemical space measure, we have


     #Circles({x0 , x1 }) = 1 + I[d(x0 , x1 ) > t] ≥ 1 + I[d(x0 , x2 ) > t] = #Circles({x0 , x2 }),

proving the dissimilarity property of #Circles.



Discussion on the dissimilarity property of reference-based measures. For a reference-based
measure, considering adding a new molecule x1 or x2 to the existing moelculer set S = {x0 }, we
have

                                              X
                 Coverage({x0 , x1 }, R) =         (max(cover(x0 , y), cover(x1 , y))) ,
                                             y∈R
                                              X
                 Coverage({x0 , x2 }, R) =         (max(cover(x0 , y), cover(x2 , y))) ,
                                             y∈R


where the values of Coverage({x0 , x1 }, R) and Coverage({x0 , x2 }, R) will depend on the particular
definition of cover(·, ·) and the choice of the reference set R.
Generally, an arbitrary coverage function and an arbitrary reference set do not necessarily meet
the dissimilarity requirement. In our study, we define the cover function as cover(x, y) :=
I[molecule x contains fragment y], where I[·] is the indicator function, and y is a fragment con-
tained in the reference set R. Some counter-examples can be easily constructed, for instance, if x1
is far away from the reference set R while x2 is very close to R (even contained in R), then the
Coverage measure will prefer the molecule x2 instead of the more dissimilar molecule x1 .
Therefore, the dissimilarity property does not hold for chemical space measures #FG, #RS, and #BM.

Discussion on a new definition of reference-based measure. In addition to counting the number
of fragments in the reference set R contained in the molecular set S, another way to define a
reference-based measure is to investigate the distance from S to R. Particularly, we could define
such a reference-based measure as below:
                                           X
                   Coverage(S, R; d, t) :=      I[∃x ∈ S such that d(x, y) < t],             (10)
                                              y∈R

where I[·] is the indicator function, d is the distance metric, and t is the distance threshold.
Similar to the discussion on #FG, #RS, and #BM, the characteristics of the reference-based measure
defined by Eq. 10 highly relies on the property of R, and an arbitrary reference set R can not
guarantee the dissimilarity property of this measure.
We now prove that the reference-based measure defined by Eq. 10 satisfies both monotonicity and
subadditivity. In the proof, Coverage(·) refers to the definition in Eq. 10.


                                                    21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Proof. We first prove the monotonicity and subadditivity of the indicator function I[·], where we
consider combining any two molecular sets S1 , S2 ⊆ U. For any reference y ∈ R and a distance
threshold t, we have
               max (I[∃x ∈ S1 such that d(x, y) < t], I[∃x ∈ S2 such that d(x, y) < t])
             ≤ I[∃x ∈ S1 ∪ S2 such that d(x, y) < t]
             ≤ I[∃x ∈ S1 such that d(x, y) < t] + I[∃x ∈ S2 such that d(x, y) < t].
Therefore,
                                 max (Coverage(S1 ), Coverage(S2 ))
                               ≤ Coverage(S1 ∪ S2 )
                               ≤ Coverage(S1 ) + Coverage(S1 ),
thus proving the Coverage measure defined by Eq. 10 is monotonic and subadditive.

E     R ANDOM S UBSET E XPERIMENT D ETAILS
E.1   B IO -ACTIVITY DATASET

The 10K BioActivity dataset (Koutsoukas et al., 2014) contains 10,000 compound samples excerpted
from the ChEMBL database (Gaulton et al., 2017) with bio-activity labels. These labels are the 50
largest ChEMBL activity classes, including enzymes (e.g., proteases, lyases, reductases, hydrolases,
and kinases) and membrane receptors (e.g., GPCRs and non-GPCRs). The label distribution is shown
in Figure 5.


Figure 5: Label distribution of the BioActivity dataset (Koutsoukas et al., 2014). 50 bio-activity
functionality classes are included.

We use UMAP (McInnes et al., 2018) to visualize the molecules in this dataset based on their Morgan
fingerprints as displayed Figure 6. From the visualization, we can see that fingerprint similarity is
indeed correlated with bio-activity similarity.


                                                 22
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Figure 6: UMAP visualization of compounds in the BioActivity dataset. Different colors stand for
different bio-activity labels.


E.2   R ANDOM S UBSETS WITH F IXED S IZES

We first consider randomly sampled molecular subsets of the BioActivity dataset with a fixed size
n. We randomly sample n molecules S from the dataset and compute the biological functionality
coverage GS(S) as well as each chemical space measure µ(S). By repeating the randomization, we
can calculate Spearman’s correlation between the gold standard GS and each individual measure µ.
We run the experiment for three different fixed sizes n = 50, n = 200, and n = 1000 to represent
different molecular distribution density. The pair-wise correlations between measures are displayed
in Figure 8.
Furthermore, when n = 50 and the molecules are distributed sparsely, all chemical space measures
are positively correlated with the gold standard. However, when the subset size increases to n = 200
and n = 1000, Bottleneck and DPP becomes negatively correlated, while other measure tend to
perform better. This is because these two measures will be bounded by the most similar molecular
pair, thus severely conflicting with the subadditivity axiom.
In this experiment, we repeat Algorithm 1 for ten times to obtain reliable correlations.

Algorithm 1 Calculating chemical space measures for random subsets with fixed sizes.
  Input: The fixed subset size n; The bio-activity dataset {(xi , yi )}10K
                                                                       i=1 where yi ∈ Y are bio-activity
  labels and |Y| = 50; K chemical space measures {µk }K     k=1 .
  repeat
     Sample a number m uniformly from {1, . . . , 50}.
     Sample m labels Y ′ uniformly from Y.
     Sample n molecules S with labels in Y ′ uniformly.
     Compute GS(S) and µk (S) for k ∈ [K].
  until repeated for 1000 times
  Calculate the correlations between GS and {µk }K  k=1 based on the 1000-times experiment results.


Experiment results.      We show the experiment results for different fixed random set size n in
Figure 7. We find the #Circles and SumBottleneck measures perform constantly better than all other
measures.
When the fixed size n increases, most chemical space measures’ performances also increase, except
for Bottleneck and DPP, meaning they are not suitable for measuring the variety when the molecules
are distributed crowdedly.


                                                  23
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                       Diversity
                    SumDiversity
                       Diameter
                    SumDiameter
                      Bottleneck
                   SumBottleneck
                             DPP
                            #FG
                            #RS
                            #BM
                        #Circles
                       Richness
                                         0.2      0.0      0.2       0.4       0.6      0.8       1.0
                                                               Correlation
                                   (a) Random subsets with a fixed size n = 50.
                       Diversity
                    SumDiversity
                       Diameter
                    SumDiameter
                      Bottleneck
                   SumBottleneck
                             DPP
                            #FG
                            #RS
                            #BM
                        #Circles
                       Richness
                                         0.2      0.0      0.2       0.4       0.6      0.8       1.0
                                                               Correlation
                                  (b) Random subsets with a fixed size n = 200.
                       Diversity
                    SumDiversity
                       Diameter
                    SumDiameter
                      Bottleneck
                   SumBottleneck
                             DPP
                            #FG
                            #RS
                            #BM
                        #Circles
                       Richness
                                         0.2      0.0      0.2       0.4       0.6      0.8       1.0
                                                               Correlation
                                  (c) Random subsets with a fixed size n = 1000.

Figure 7: Correlations between the gold standard GS and chemical space measures in the fixed-size
random subset setting. The fixed size is set as different values. A larger correlation indicates the
better. The average results are obtained by running experiments independently for ten times.


Correlation between chemical space measures.          We also visualize the pairwise correlation
between chemical space measures in Figure 8. From the figure we can see that, the gold standard GS,
#Circles, and SumBottleneck are most similar with each other in the fixed-size setting.

Threshold t for #Circles. The #Circles threshold t is selected to maximize the correlation to the
gold standard GS. Taking n = 200 as an example, we test different t values as Figure 9 displays and
select t = 0.70 as the threshold. We can see #Circles works well for a wide range of thresholds like
[0.40, 0.70]. In Olivecrona et al. (2017), the authors suggest to use a threshold t = 0.60 to decide
whether two molecules are dissimilar with each other3 , which aligns our results. For n = 50 and
n = 1000, the threshold is set as t = 0.70 and t = 0.65 respectively.

    3
      In the original text, the authors suggest a similarity threshold of 0.40 that is equivalent to a distance threshold
of 0.60.


                                                          24
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                            1

                            0

                                1                                          DPP
                                                                           Bottleneck
                                                                           Richness
                                                                           Diameter
                                                                           SumDiameter
                                                                           #FG
                                                                           Diversity
                                                                           SumDiversity
                                                                           GS
                                                                           SumBottleneck
                                                                           #Circles
                                                                           #RS
                                                                           #BM


                                         #Circles
                                              DPP

                                        Richness
                                       Bottleneck

                                        Diameter
                                     SumDiameter
                                             #FG
                                        Diversity
                                     SumDiversity
                                               GS
                                    SumBottleneck

                                             #RS
                                             #BM
Figure 8: Correlations between chemical space measures in the fixed-size random subset setting. The
fixed size is set as n = 200. A larger correlation indicates the better. The average results are obtained
by running experiments independently for ten times.


                            0.8
                            0.6
              Correlation


                            0.4
                            0.2
                            0.0
                            0.2
                               0.0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8 0.9 1.0
                                                 Threshold t
Figure 9: Correlations between the gold standard GS and the #Circles measure in the fixed-size
setting with different threshold t. The fixed size is set as n = 200. A larger correlation indicates the
better. The average results are obtained by running experiments independently for ten times.


Distance metric d.       We also study the impact of distance metric d. In Table 3, we listed the
experiment results for both fingerprint-based Tanimoto distance and VAE-based latent space dissim-
ilarity (Samanta et al., 2020). We find the experiment results obtained with the VAE dissimilarity
remain consistent with the results obtained with the Tanimoto distance.

E.3   R ANDOM S UBSETS WITH G ROWING S IZES

To mimic the molecular generation process, we also grow the size of the subsets. Specifically, for
a maximum size n, we sequentially sample n molecules without replacement to form n subsets


                                                   25
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Table 3: Correlations between the gold standard and chemical space measures in the fixed-size random
subset setting. The fixed size is set as n = 200. A larger correlation indicates the better. Results are
obtained by averaging ten independent experiments. Italic texts indicate molecular representation
and the distance metric. The top three measures are highlighted in green , and the best measure is
printed in bold.

                                                       Aggregation-based
                                               Tanimoto distance VAE dissimilarity
                                Diversity         0.478 ± 0.011     0.388 ± 0.040
                             SumDiversity         0.478 ± 0.011     0.388 ± 0.040
                                Diameter          0.179 ± 0.031     0.112 ± 0.022
                             SumDiameter          0.228 ± 0.028     0.201 ± 0.029
                               Bottleneck        -0.293 ± 0.015    -0.298 ± 0.027
                            SumBottleneck         0.821 ± 0.010     0.527 ± 0.013
                                     DPP         -0.183 ± 0.021    -0.244 ± 0.030
                                                            Reference-based
                                                      Fgragment
                                        #FG           0.421 ± 0.033
                                        #RS           0.574 ± 0.025
                                       #BM            0.610 ± 0.028
                                                          Locality-based
                                               Tanimoto distance VAE dissimilarity
                                   #Circles       0.831 ± 0.008       0.745 ± 0.014
                                                   SMILES
                                   Richness      -0.207 ± 0.025


{Si = {x1 , . . . , xi }}ni=1 . For both the gold standard GS and a chemical space measure µ, we record
their values as S grows into a time series. , e.g., {(i, µ(Si ))}ni=1 . Comparing the trajectory of a
chemical space measure with the trajectory of the gold standard, we can observe which measure
behaves more similarly to GS. We quantitatively estimate the similarity of their trajectories with the
dynamic time warping (DTW) distance of the two time series.
In this experiment, we repeat Algorithm 2 for ten times to obtain reliable DTW distances.

Algorithm 2 Calculating chemical space measures for random subsets with growing sizes.
  Input: The maximum subset size n; The bio-activity dataset {(xi , yi )}10K
                                                                           i=1 where yi ∈ Y are
  bio-activity labels and |Y| = 50; K chemical space measures {µk }K k=1 .
  Sample a number m uniformly from {1, . . . , 50}.
  Sample m labels Y ′ from Y.
  for i in {1, . . . , n} do
    Sample an unseen molecule xi whose label is in Y ′ .
    Set Si := {x1 , . . . , xi }
    Compute GS(Si ) and µk (Si ) for k ∈ [K].
  end for
  Plot chemical space measure curves for GS and {µk }K
                                                     k=1 where the x axes are i ∈ {1, . . . , n} and
  the y axes are chemical space measure values GS(Si ) and µk (Si ).
  Transform the cumulative curves into incremental ones.
  Calculate DTW distances between incremental curves.


Experiment results.          To mimic the way in which generation models propose new molecules,
in Algorithm 2, we require the newly sampled molecule xi to be similar to the already sampled
molecules {x1 , . . . , xi−1 }. The specific implementation can be found in our code4 . Moreover, we
also test the following two cases: (1) All molecules are sampled uniformly; (2) The newly sampled
molecule xi have to be most similar to the already sampled molecules {x1 , . . . , xi−1 }. The results of
DTW distances for these two cases are shown in Figure 10.
   4
       The code will be released after publication.


                                                          26
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                   Diversity
                SumDiversity
                   Diameter
                SumDiameter
                  Bottleneck
               SumBottleneck
                         DPP
                        #FG
                        #RS
                        #BM
                    #Circles
                   Richness
                               1        2     3     5        10                   50
                                                    DTW distance
                (a) The new molecule xi is uniformly sampled from all unseen molecules.
                   Diversity
                SumDiversity
                   Diameter
                SumDiameter
                  Bottleneck
               SumBottleneck
                         DPP
                        #FG
                        #RS
                        #BM
                    #Circles
                   Richness
                               1         2    3        5       10                      50
                                                    DTW distance
              (b) The new molecule xi needs to be similar to the already sampled ones
              x1 , . . . , xi=1 .
                   Diversity
                SumDiversity
                   Diameter
                SumDiameter
                  Bottleneck
               SumBottleneck
                         DPP
                        #FG
                        #RS
                        #BM
                    #Circles
                   Richness
                               1         2    3        5       10                      50
                                                    DTW distance
              (c) The new molecule xi needs to be most similar to the already sampled ones
              x1 , . . . , xi=1 .

Figure 10: DTW distances between the gold standard GS and chemical space measures in the
growing-size random subset setting. The maximum size is set as n = 1000. A smaller distance
indicates the better. The average results are obtained by running experiments independently for ten
times.


From Figure 10 we can see that, #Circles performs the best. Also, as the new molecules to add
become more similar to the existing ones, the advantage of #Circles over other measures becomes
larger. This makes #Circles especially suitable for measuring molecular generation models.


                                                  27
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                              10

                              5

                              0                                         Bottleneck
                                                                        DPP
                                                                        Richness
                                                                        SumDiversity
                                                                        SumDiameter
                                                                        SumBottleneck
                                                                        #BM
                                                                        GS
                                                                        #Circles
                                                                        #FG
                                                                        #RS
                                                                        Diversity
                                                                        Diameter

                                         #Circles
                                        Richness
                                     SumDiversity


                                             #FG
                                             #RS
                                        Diversity
                                       Bottleneck
                                              DPP


                                     SumDiameter
                                    SumBottleneck
                                             #BM
                                               GS


                                        Diameter
Figure 11: DTW distances between chemical space measures in the growing-size random subset
setting. The maximum size is set as n = 1000, and the new molecule needs to be similar to the
already samples ones. A smaller distance indicates the better. The average results are obtained by
running experiments independently for ten times.



                             15
              DTW distance


                             10

                              5

                              0.4    0.5     0.6         0.7         0.8         0.9
                                              Threshold t
Figure 12: DTW distances between the gold standard GS and the #Circles measure in the growing-
size random subset setting with different threshold t. The maximum size is set as n = 1000, and the
new molecule needs to be similar to the already samples ones. A smaller distance indicates the better.
The average results are obtained by running experiments independently for ten times.



DTW distances between chemical space measures. We visualize the pairwise DTW distances
between chemical space measures in Figure 11. From the figure we can see that, the gold standard
GS and the #Circles measure are most similar with each other in the growing-size setting.
In addition, we find the Richness, SumDiversity, SumDiameter, SumBottleneck, and #BM are
forming a large cluster, while #FG and #RS tend to be similar with each other.


                                                   28
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Threshold t for #Circles. The #Circles threshold t is selected to minimize the DTW distance
to the gold standard GS. Taking the second scenario as an example, we test different t values as
Figure 12 displays and select t = 0.76 as the threshold. For the first and the third scenarios, the
threshold is set as t = 0.84 and t = 0.78 respectively.

Distance metric d.       We also study the impact of distance metric d. In Table 4, we listed the
experiment results for both fingerprint-based Tanimoto distance and VAE-based latent space dissim-
ilarity (Samanta et al., 2020). We find the experiment results obtained with the VAE dissimilarity
remain consistent with the results obtained with the Tanimoto distance.
Table 4: DTW distances between the gold standard and chemical space measures in the growing-size
random subset setting. The maximum size is set as n = 1000, and the new molecule needs to be
similar to the already samples ones. A smaller distance indicates the better.

                                                 Aggregation-based
                                         Tanimoto distance VAE dissimilarity
                           Diversity       18.668 ± 6.973    30.063 ± 4.284
                        SumDiversity        5.425 ± 0.404     5.484 ± 0.296
                           Diameter        17.299 ± 4.801    28.071 ± 3.917
                        SumDiameter         5.328 ± 0.396     5.472 ± 0.297
                          Bottleneck       38.668 ± 5.769    37.168 ± 5.422
                       SumBottleneck        5.167 ± 0.353     5.432 ± 0.293
                                DPP        18.845 ± 3.962    12.052 ± 2.176
                                                  Reference-based
                                            Fgragment
                                  #FG       3.797 ± 0.295
                                  #RS       4.382 ± 0.247
                                 #BM        5.365 ± 0.396
                                                    Locality-based
                                         Tanimoto distance VAE dissimilarity
                              #Circles      2.173 ± 0.910       2.470 ± 0.629
                                             SMILES
                             Richness       5.454 ± 0.347



F     M EASURING M OLECULAR DATABASES
F.1   M OLECULAR DATABASES

We measure the chemical space coverage for five molecular databases that are commonly used in
virtual screening and generative model training:

(1) ZINC-250k5 is a random subset of the ZINC database (Irwin & Shoichet, 2005) and consists of
    249K commercially-available compounds from different vendors for virtual screening;
(2) MOSES (Polykovskiy et al., 2020) is another sub-collection of ZINC molecules. It contains
    approximately 2M molecules in total, filtered by molecular weights (ranged range from 250
    to 350 Daltons), the number of rotatable bonds (not greater than 7), water-octanol partition
    coefficient (logP, less or equal than 3.5), atom types (C, N, S, O, F, Cl, Br, and H), ring cycle
    sizes (no larger than 8), medicinal chemistry filters (MCFs), and PAINS filters.
(3) ChEMBL (Gaulton et al., 2017) is a manually curated database of 2M bioactive molecules
    with known experimental data, especially with the inhibitory and binding properties against
    macromolecule targets. This database contains not only drug and drug-like molecules, but also
    natural products and biopolymers.
(4) GDB-17 (Ruddigkeit et al., 2012) enumerates chemical structures that contain up to 17 atoms
    of C, N, O, S, and halogens, overlapping with the molecular weight range typical for lead
  5
    ZINC-250k: https://www.kaggle.com/datasets/1379f2461e75ef7a11d0c5ff3dd0c2
440a6bcf33531bc0d303e8eac81a3a4b17.


                                                 29
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Database     Richness        #Circles (0.7)    #Circles (0.75) #Circles (0.8)    Diversity           SumBottleneck #FG              #RS              #BM
ZINC-250k           249455             10281             3683             1035               0.871         1523.23           3490             5075          136439
                                       10210             3670             1033               0.871         1587.14
                                       10295             3653             1020               0.871         1602.87
ENAMINE             460160              5145             1705              377               0.853         2611.66            150             1435          206497
                                        5154             1675              387               0.853         2570.52
                                        5115             1678              370               0.853         2555.70
MOSES              1936962              8095             2496              623               0.856         9316.20           1158             5816          449026
                                        8142             2496              644               0.857         9325.26
                                        8178             2496              634               0.857         9264.65
ChEMBL             2304875             32583            10956             2510               0.879        12003.99          17006            44814          716657
                                       32656            11173             2674               0.878        12076.51
                                       32518            11082             2708               0.879        12019.48
GDB-17            11487778           175380             29092             3296               0.898        73699.70          82060          1932562         3539100
                                     175393             29061             2842               0.898        73513.72
                                                        29116             2848               0.898        73730.85


                                   Figure 13: Measuring results on original databases.

Database        Richness             #Circles (0.75) Diversity                   SumBottleneck #FG                          #RS                  #BM
ZINC-250k                173731                     2035                0.861                1106.10                 1952                 2940              92715
                                                    2084                0.861                1096.43
                                                    2040                0.863                1115.64
ENAMINE                  427366                     1229                0.851                2461.75                  142                 1268             187742
                                                    1275                0.851                2402.39
                                                    1263                0.851                2375.03
MOSES                   1846492                     1714                0.856                8832.55                  938                 4513             413521
                                                    1698                0.855                8955.37
                                                    1720                0.855                8971.22
ChEMBL                   967322                     4570                0.872                5423.73                 6304             14004                317255
                                                    4631                0.872                5464.92
                                                    4543                0.873                5368.94
GDB-17                  1621490                     8094                0.889            10733.83                    5969            167795                425582
                                                    8136                0.889            10670.31
                                                    8114                0.889            10770.83


                                    Figure 14: Measuring results on filtered databases.


        compounds. The lead-like subset filters 11M compounds with lead-like properties (100-350 MW
        & 1-3 clogP).
(5) Enamine is a company that provides compound libraries for high-throughput screening (HTS).
    The Enamine Hit Locator Library6 is their largest diversity library with high MedChem
    tractability, and the compounds in the library are readily available for purchase and are guaranteed
    synthesizable at a reasonable cost.

F.2      R ESULTS ON C HEMICAL S PACE M EASURES

The measuring results are listed in Figure 13 and 14.


G        M OLECULAR G ENERATION E XPERIMENT D ETAILS

G.1        M ODEL I MPLEMENTATION

We implement the models with the official repositories7 . All hyperparameters are set as default.
    6
    ENAMINE diversity libraries: https://enamine.net/compound-libraries/diversity-l
ibraries.
  7
    RationaleRL: https://github.com/wengong-jin/multiobj-rationale.
    DST: https://github.com/futianfan/DST.
    JANUS: https://github.com/aspuru-guzik-group/JANUS.
    MARS: https://github.com/bytedance/markov-molecular-sampling.


                                                                                30
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


G.2    MARS VARIANTS

The terms incorporated into objectives are computed as follows8 :


                                                             1 X
                               NoveltyDiversity (x, S) :=        d(x, y)                            (11)
                                                            |S|
                                                               y∈S

                           NoveltySumBottleneck (x, S) := min d(x, y)                               (12)
                                                          y∈S

                               Novelty#Circles (x, S) := min d(x, y) > t                            (13)
                                                            y∈S


For the model variants, we test different α values from {0.1, 0.3, 1.0, 3.0} and report the best
performance. Specifically, we use α = 1.0 for MARS+Diversity, α = 0.3 for MARS+SumBottlenck,
and α = 0.1 for MARS+#Circles. The threshold we use for the #Circles measure is t = 0.60.

G.3    R ESULTS ON OTHER M EASURES
Table 5: Measuring results of the chemical space explored by molecular generation methods. In each
chemical space measure, the larger value the better. Bold indicates the best performance in each
measure.
           Method          SumBottleneck      #FG              #RS            #BM
           Databases       280                58               132            502
           RationaleRL     9 ± 0.3%           39 ± 0.0%        207 ± 0.0%     442 ± 2.3%
           DST             8                  5                9              26
           JANUS           76 ±               93 ±             73 ±           133 ±
           MARS            535 ± 7.9%         346 ± 16.0%      67 ± 3.5%      19.5K ± 23.1%
           +Diversity      715 ± 12.9%        463 ± 17.2%      67 ± 1.9%      20.1K ± 25.2%
           +SumBot         926 ± 12.5%        868 ± 15.3%      66 ± 2.3%      14.0K ± 20.8%
           +#Circles       742 ± 12.9%        601 ± 35.0%      69 ± 5.5%      18.9K ± 15.3%

The results on other chemical space measures are listed in Table 5.

G.4    M OLECULAR P ROPERTY AND B INDING A FFINITY D ISTRIBUTIONS

To investigate how incorporating chemical space measures into the objective as Eq. 11-13 can influ-
ence the optimization for molecular properties, we examine the property distributions of molecules
generated by MARS and its variants.
As shown in Figure 15-16, our resulting libraries from the joint optimizations with chemical space
measures (i.e., MARS+#Circles and MARS+Diversity) are not showing a significant downward shift
on JNK3 binding affinity as well as QED scores and SA scores. It is expected that compared with
vanilla MARS, the property scores of molecules generated by MARS variants would decrease slightly,
because instead of solely optimizing the property scores, the model needs to make sacrifices for a
more diverse library. However, this sacrifice would be insignificant compared to the diversity gain
in the resulting library. In practice, these molecules would pass the scoring threshold and would be
considered qualified in these regards. In Table 2, the experiment results show that by incorporating
chemical space measures into optimization objectives, the richness of discovered qualified molecules
(JNK3 ≥ 0.5, QED ≥ 0.6, and SA ≤ 4) got significantly improved.

G.5    V ISUALIZATION

To provide a more intuitive view of the effect that adding a joint objective of exploration can encourage
the molecular generation model to discover a wider space, we visualize the chemical space explored
by the baseline (MARS) and MARS+SumBottleneck as well as MARS+#Circles in Figure 17, where
   8
     Equations 11-13 are approximations of [µ(S ∪ {x}) − µ(S)] defined to avoid numerical issues and for
computational efficiency.


                                                    31
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                  JNK3 Prediction Scores (All Samples)                                                       rDock Docking Scores (30k Samples)
                            1.0

                                                                                                                        10

                            0.9


                                                                                Interactive Docking Score (kcal/mol)
                                                                                                                         0
 Predicted Activity Score


                            0.8



                                                                                                                       −10
                            0.7


                            0.6                                                                                        −20


                            0.5
                                                                                                                       −30



                            0.4
                                    MARS      MARS+#Circles   MARS+Diversity                                                   MARS     MARS+#Circles   MARS+Diversity


Figure 15: Left: Distributions of JNK3 machine learning model predicted score. We observe a
downward trend in the MARS variant models, which are jointly optimized with a chemical space
measure. However, all generated molecules are above the score threshold, and in practice, due to the
limitation of the prediction model, they should be considered equally qualified candidates for further
analysis. Right: Distributions of interaction scores of the ligands and the receptor docking (lower
energy score indicates more favorable interactions). For the docking experiments, we randomly
sampled 30K molecules from each generated library and performed molecular docking on the JNK3
target (PDB: 7KSI) using rDock (Ruiz-Carmona et al., 2014). The distributions of docking scores
show that the joint optimizations on chemical space measures do not affect the binding affinity
significantly when predicted by in silico docking.


we show the 2D layout of the Morgan fingerprints of the functional groups in the molecules generated
through principal component analysis (PCA). The larger number of unique functional groups and the
wider spread of the data points obtained by adding exploration-based novelty terms indicate more
diverse structures being explored.
We show the molecular clustering results in Figure 18. Clusters are calculated based on Morgan
fingerprints of the generated molecules and their Tanimoto similarity. Compared to the baseline
model, a larger number of clusters can be obtained from MARS+SumBottleneck.
Figure 19 shows the dynamics of measures for MARS and its variants.

H                            FAST A PPROXIMATION OF #C IRCLES
The computation of #Circles is combinatorial and the running time is exponential in theory. We
implement two fast approximations by sacrificing accuracy as Algorithm 3 and Algorithm 4.

Algorithm 3 Approximation of #Circles (sequential).
          Input: The molecular set S to be measured, the distance metric d, the distance threshold t.
          Randomly reorder the molecular set S.
          Initialize an empty set C.
          Set n := |S|.
          for i in {1, . . . , n} do
             Add Si to C if miny∈C d(x, y) > t.
          end for
          Return: |C| and C.


                                                                               32
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                                                                                                                                  0.95
                                               0.95


                                                                                                 Normalized Synthetic Accessibility Score (SAS)
 Quantitative Estimate of Druglikeness (QED)
                                               0.90                                                                                               0.90

                                               0.85
                                                                                                                                                  0.85
                                               0.80

                                                                                                                                                  0.80
                                               0.75


                                               0.70                                                                                               0.75


                                               0.65
                                                                                                                                                  0.70

                                               0.60

                                                                                                                                                  0.65
                                                      MARS   MARS+#Circles     MARS+Diversity                                                            MARS   MARS+#Circles     MARS+Diversity



                                               550
                                                                                                                                                     7

                                               500
                                                                                                                                                     6

                                               450                                                                                                   5

                                               400                                                                                                   4
         Molecular Weight


                                                                                                                                LogP
                                               350                                                                                                   3


                                               300                                                                                                   2


                                               250                                                                                                   1


                                                                                                                                                     0
                                               200

                                                                                                                                                   −1
                                               150

                                                      MARS   MARS+#Circles     MARS+Diversity                                                            MARS   MARS+#Circles     MARS+Diversity


Figure 16: Selected molecular property distributions. Except for SAS (normalized from 0 to 1, the
larger the better), all property distributions do not show significant changes across different models.
The downward shift of the SAS is likely due to the increased diversity in the molecular libraries.


                                                                             MARS                                                                                     MARS
                                                                             +SumBottleneck                                                                           +#Circles


Figure 17: Optimizing chemical space measures encourages the molecular generation model to
explore a larger span of the chemical space. This figure shows principal component analysis (PCA)
of functional groups discovered by different models.

Algorithm 4 Approximation of #Circles (recursive).
                            Input: The molecular set S to be measured, the distance metric d, the distance threshold t,
                            maximum number of recursive layers L, number of processors m.
                            Call Algorithm 3 with arguments (S, d, t) if L = 0.
                            Randomly reorder the molecular set S.
                            Evenly split S into m subsets S1 , . . . , Sm .
                            Call Algorithm 4 with arguments (Si , d, t, L − 1, m) for i = 1, . . . , m and collect the returns Ci .
                            Set C := C1 ∪ · · · ∪ Cm .
                            Return: Results obtained by calling Algorithm 3 with arguments (C, d, t).



                                                                                                33
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


     4

     3

     2

     1

     0
                                                                              MARS
     4

     3

     2

     1

     0
                                                   MARS+SumBottleneck
Figure 18: Hierarchical clustering results of generated molecules. Different colors stand for different
clusters. The clustering threshold is set as 0.7× the height of the highest linkage in accordance with
SciPy’s default value.


                                                                                                                      0.8
                                                 #Circles (t=0.75)


           200K                                                      30
                                                                                                                      0.6
Richness


                                                                                                          Diversity


           150K
                                                                     20                                                                      MARS
                                                                                                                      0.4
           100K                                                                                                                              +Diversity
                                                                     10                                                                      +SumBottleneck
           50K                                                                                                        0.2
                                                                                                                                             +#Circles
              0                                                       0                                               0.0
                  0   500   1000   1500   2000                            0   500    1000   1500   2000                     0   500   1000   1500         2000
                            Step                                                     Step                                             Step


Figure 19: The dynamics of chemical space measures over generated molecules. Incorporating
chemical measures into generation objectives increases the exploration of the chemical space.


                                                                                    34
