Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


U NPACKING L ARGE L ANGUAGE M ODELS WITH C ON -
CEPTUAL C ONSISTENCY

 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                           A BSTRACT

         If a Large Language Model (LLM) answers “yes” to the question “Are moun-
         tains tall?” then does it know what a mountain is? Can you rely on it respond-
         ing correctly or incorrectly to other questions about mountains? The success of
         Large Language Models (LLMs) indicates they are increasingly able to answer
         queries like these accurately, but that ability does not necessarily imply a general
         understanding of concepts relevant to the anchor query. We propose conceptual
         consistency to measure a LLM’s understanding of relevant concepts. This novel
         metric measures how well a model can be characterized by finding out how con-
         sistent its responses to queries about conceptually relevant background knowledge
         are. To compute it we extract background knowledge by traversing paths between
         concepts in a knowledge base and then try to predict the model’s response to the
         anchor query from the background knowledge. We investigate the performance
         of current LLMs in a commonsense reasoning setting using the CSQA dataset
         and the ConceptNet knowledge base. While conceptual consistency, like other
         metrics, does increase with the scale of the LLM used, we find that popular mod-
         els do not necessarily have high conceptual consistency. Our analysis also shows
         significant variation in conceptual consistency across different kinds of relations,
         concepts, and prompts. This serves as a step toward building models that humans
         can apply a theory of mind to, and thus interact with intuitively.



1   I NTRODUCTION

Large Language Models (LLMs) have had many exciting recent successes. These include high
performance and even emergent capabilities using just zero or few-shot prompting (Brown et al.,
2020; Wei et al., 2022a), but overall performance is still low compared to humans on a wide range
of tasks for even the largest models (Srivastava et al., 2022), and our understanding of these models
work is still limited. A popular explanation of low performance and inconsistencies is that LLMs
are simply learning to mimic the data used to train them, and this basic pattern recognition limits
generalizability, in the case of LLMs exposing the limits of any understanding (Zhang et al., 2022a;
Bender & Koller, 2020). We would use a similar line of reasoning to guess how a LLM would
answer the following question: “Can GPT-3 see?”
If it performed well on examples from the same distribution we would say it is likely to get it
right or vice-versa if performed poorly on those examples. Though valid, this explanation is in-
complete because it is completely agnostic to the specific content of the statement. We would ap-
ply the exact same reasoning and come to the same conclusion for similar statements about say
blood banks or mock trials, as long as they were from the same distribution (in this example, the
CSQA2 dataset (Talmor et al., 2021)). This is in contrast to our day to day life, where our Theory
of Mind allows us to understand other agents (people) by attributing beliefs, intentions, and desires
to them (Premack & Woodruff, 1978) in a way that allows us to usefully predict their behavior (Ra-
binowitz et al., 2018; Dennett, 1991). Beliefs are most relevant here, and should be conceptual in
order to best support human understanding (Yeh et al., 2021). Ideally we would also be able to apply
this kind of understanding to LLMs, predicting that the model is more likely correct about GPT-3’s
sight if it knows about GPT-3 generally than if it does not. This would be a conceptual model of the
LLM that allows us to predict its behavior.


                                                  1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Figure 1: Example target question with relevant and irrelevant background knowledge. A model is
conceptually consistent when its knowledge of relevant background information – sharing concepts
with the target – is consistent with its ability to answer questions correctly.
We want to build models for which that kind of understanding is possible, so in this work we take
a step toward that goal by modeling the conceptual knowledge of a LLM and predicting when the
LLM will be correct from that model. Our conceptual model is based on a LLM’s answers to ques-
tions about background knowledge relevant to a particular anchor task (e.g., question answering),
which we assume to be a reasonable though imperfect measurement of what the LLM can be said
to “know.” From this and a measurement of question answering performance we compute concep-
tual consistency (Figure 1), quantifying whether a model’s knowledge of relevant background is
consistent with its ability to perform the anchor task. Unlike standard approaches to evaluation this
approach relies on example specific context.
Defining background knowledge is key to our approach because we need it to be relevant enough to
establish meaningful consistency. Given the target query “Can GPT-3 see?” a relevant background
query might be “Was GPT-3 built by OpenAI?” while “Is the sky blue?” would be an irrelevant
query. Instead requiring a background fact to logically support the target query in some way, we
say a background fact is relevant if it can tell us something about how a typical human language
user would respond. Given a ground truth response Y to the target with human response Ŷ and
respective responses YK and ŶK to a potentially relevant background fact we define relevance using
a conditional probability. If P (Y = Ŷ |YK = ŶK ) ̸= P (Y = Ŷ ) then the background fact is
relevant because it is not independent of the target and gives us information about whether the
speaker will be right or wrong. Knowing GPT-3 was built by OpenAI makes it more likely that
someone will also know GPT-3 cannot see because it is true and involves relevant concepts. While
knowing the color of the sky is laudable, there’s no conceptual overlap with GPT-3’s ability to see.
In this paper, we focus on this kind of conceptual relevance.
After extracting background knowledge we use prompting to measure how a given LLM handles
the background knowledge and how it performs at the anchor task. For this we study three varieties
of generative language models across multiple scales up to 66 billion parameters and use a majority
vote style prompting procedure to maximize the robustness of our approach to linguistic variations.
Our core contributions are

      • We extract conceptually relevant background knowledge with respect to examples from an
        anchor task and map them onto background knowledge questions.
      • We use a novel majority vote style zero-shot prompting procedure applied to generative
        language models to measure LLM performance.
      • We measure conceptual consistency, focusing on generative language models and showing
        that consistency is low though it does increase with model size up to 66 billion parameters.
      • We report conceptual patterns in model behavior that fall out of our analysis.

2   R ELATED W ORKS
Much work has been devoted to studying the limits of large language models beginning with
BERT Devlin et al. (2019). Typical evaluation of language models measures performance on datasets
of labeled examples across a range of tasks, such as those that constitute the amalgamated BIG
Bench benchmark (Srivastava et al., 2022). In general they are explained as simply mimicking
the data they were trained with. Low level critiques question the ability of LLMs to reason log-
ically (Zhang et al., 2022a) or pass adapted psychological tests of language in humans (Ettinger,


                                                 2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


2020). High level critiques question the ability of LLMs to understand anything at all (Bender &
Koller, 2020), though one alternative avoids this by defining meaning based on conceptual role (Pi-
antadosi & Hill, 2022).

Consistency Most relevant here is the large literature that studies failures in consistency of these
models. A common approach is to verify an expectation about how the outputs of two different
prompts should be related. For example, the prompts “Is the rose red?” and “What color is the
rose?” with the expectation that answering “no” to the first question is inconsistent with answering
“red” to the second (Ribeiro et al., 2019). CheckList (Ribeiro et al., 2020) offers a taxonomy that
can be applied to these approaches. Invariance based consistency considers two versions of the
input (often paraphrases) where the output is expected to be the same for both versions (Kassner
& Schütze, 2020; Elazar et al., 2021; Ray et al., 2019; Jang et al., 2021; Ribeiro et al., 2020).
Directional expectation consistency expects a specific change in the output based on how the inputs
are constructed (Ribeiro et al., 2019; Wu et al., 2021; Kassner & Schütze, 2020; Jang et al., 2021;
Ribeiro et al., 2020) – e.g., that one output should be the negation of the other. These works generally
find that the models they study are often inconsistent, with varying degrees for various kinds of
consistency. Many also improve their consistency measure by fine-tuning the studied models for it.
These kinds of consistencies are constructive rather than conceptual. They establish and improve
the degree to which language models can be said to have beliefs (Hase et al., 2021), but in order for
beliefs to support a theory of mind they should be actionable in that they should support predictions
about another agent’s behavior (Rabinowitz et al., 2018; Dennett, 1991). That a LLM has logically
consistent outputs does not imply it will be right, but a theory of mind can provide evidence for
or against correctness. This looser definition of consistency also makes the idea more general.
In contrast, previous work, especially for more complex definitions of consistency, has relied on
domain specific and expensive annotated datasets to measure consistency.
Furthermore, in this work we focus on large generative language models as opposed to the masked
language models where most prior work on consistency is focused. Some of the greatest success has
come from scaling generative LLMs (Hoffmann et al., 2022; Wei et al., 2022a), however most ex-
isting work on consistency focuses on smaller scale models (mostly masked style language models)
because large scale generative models were not openly available until recently (Zhang et al., 2022b),
and also because fine-tuning the larger models is prohibitively expensive, making it infeasible as a
way to improve consistency. It may be that even though performance increases with scale consis-
tency does not, so in this work we study model scale to the degree possible with open source models
and a limited compute budget.

Explanations and Interpretability Explaining neural net decisions has been studied for a long
time, but recent work has shifted focus towards concept based explanations (Yeh et al., 2021). For
example, derivatives can be used to quantify conceptual influence in neural nets (Kim et al., 2018)
and model the causal importance of concepts (Goyal et al., 2019). Another line of work links theory
of mind to explanations (Chandrasekaran et al., 2017; Shvo et al., 2020). We use concepts to explain
LLMs from a theory of mind perspective.

3     P ROPOSED M ETHOD
To measure conceptual consistency we need to measure background knowledge and QA perfor-
mance then predict the latter from the former. First we describe extraction of background knowledge
in the form of questions with known answers, second we describe how we use prompting to answer
both background and anchor questions, and finally we describe the conceptual consistency metric
which correlates the two by predicting one from the other.

3.1   BACKGROUND K NOWLEDGE E XTRACTION

Here we focus on question answering (QA) problems and assume a knowledge base of content
relevant to the specific QA task is available. Examples in our QA dataset consist of a question Q
with corresponding choices S = {s1 , . . . , s|S| }, one of which is the correct answer A. These choices
can be single words or short phrases. We call (Q, S, A) the anchor query because our first task is to
find conceptually relevant background knowledge with respect to that information.


                                                   3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


The background knowledge for a given anchor corresponds to a list of facts in a knowledge base. We
assume each fact F = (c1 , r, c2 ) is represented by two concepts c1 and c2 , and a relation r between
those concepts. Our task is to extract a set B = {f1 , . . . , f|B| } of facts conceptually relevant to the
anchor and then map those facts onto questions that can be asked to roughly determine whether the
LLM knows the background knowledge.

Extracting Background Facts We conceive of the knowledge base as a graph that connects con-
cepts as nodes and relations as edges. To extract a list of concepts from a given text snippet we
employ basic tokenization then remove stop words and keep only nouns, verbs, adjectives, and
adverbs, following the pipeline from Ma et al. (2019). We construct the set of concepts C as all con-
cepts that appear in any part of the anchor query (Q, S, A) (including incorrect answers) and have
overlap (> 50% of words match) with a concept word or phrase from the knowledge base. For two
different concepts c1 , c2 ∈ C we consider all tuples from all paths length L or less which connect
those concepts in the knowledge base, forming a cloud of relational information which constitutes
the background knowledge for the anchor given by the selected knowledge base.
In practice this list of background knowledge tuples is too large, so we need to restrict it to a more
manageable yet still relevant list. We do this by setting the maximum path length L to 1, essentially
looking for concepts which appear in the anchor and are directly related to each other in the knowl-
edge base. This case follows Ma et al. (2019), where they were interested in extracting knowledge
tuples to be inserted into neuro-symbolic models.

Background Questions In order to measure how well a LLM already knows the content captured
by these tuples we automatically translate them into natural language questions. Consider a fact
tuple (c1 , r, c2 ). We substitute its three variables into a natural language template designed for the
specific relation r. For example, the tuple (book, used for, school) would be translated into
“Are book used for school?” Note that because the tuple exists in the knowledge base we know the
correct answer to be some version of “yes”. These templates are included in Table 2 of the appendix.

Relevance This construction is likely to result in facts that are more relevant than irrelevant be-
cause each background query will share at least one concept with the target. Consider a human’s
response Ŷ to a target query given their response ŶK to a background query extracted by this pro-
cedure. By construction our background query shares at least one concept with the target query.
Since we assume that answers to questions are reflective of knowledge, answering the background
query correctly indicates some knowledge of the background concepts, so it also indicates some
knowledge of at least one of the concepts in the target query. As a result we expect the difference
|P (Y = Ŷ |YK = ŶK ) − P (Y = Ŷ )| for a human language user to be positive for most back-
ground queries. We do not claim that all background queries extracted will be highly relevant or
that all background queries put together will always be enough to determine the LLM’s response
confidently. Nevertheless, we do think our background knowledge should be predictive of target
responses. Future work could try to increase the relevance of extracted background knowledge.

Negative Background Knowledge In all tuples so far the relation r really does exist between c1
and c2 , so the correct answer is always “yes.” Language models are often biased towards certain
outputs and in this case we found a “yes” bias to be particularly strong in some models, especially
the smaller versions of OPT (Figure 6a). As a result those smaller models can outperform the larger
ones even when they understand the background knowledge less, just because they are prone to
saying “yes” to everything. We fix this by extracting negative background knowledge tuples – to
which the correct answer is some version of “no” – to mirror the positive ones.
We frame the problem in a pairwise fashion: given a positive tuple (c1 , r, c2 ) the negative tuple
generation task is to find an alternative c̄2 for which the correct answer is “no.” The pairwise nature
ensures that we measure background knowledge in a balanced fashion to best address the “yes” (or
“no”) bias issue. As depicted in Figure 2, we form a set of choices C̄ 2 that includes every concept c̄
in the knowledge base that meets 3 criteria:
      1. c̄ does not form a valid tuple (c1 , r, c̄),
      2. c̄ is not cyclic (i.e., not equal to to c1 ), and
      3. c̄ is in the English dictionary.

                                                       4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Figure 2: Facts from knowledge bases are true by virtue of being in the knowledge base. We
mine negative background facts by finding concept pairs without an edge to ensure our extracted
background knowledge is balanced.

Our final choice for c̄2 is a single sample from the uniform distribution over C̄ 2 . The amount
of concepts in the English dictionary is quite large, hence we curate the distribution space of C̄ 2
after applying criteria 1 and 2 to keep most frequently used concepts. We make this choice in
advance, treating background tuples as a dataset, so that even if a positive background tuple is used
for multiple anchor queries it is always paired with the same negative tuple. However, if there are
multiple choices of c2 for the same c1 and r then we sample c̄2 independently for each of those
choices. The final set of background tuples for an anchor query includes all positive tuples that
match that anchor along with all negative tuples that are paired with the positives. Examples of
extracted negative background facts can be found in the appendix at Table 3.

3.2   A NSWERING BACKGROUND AND A NCHOR Q UESTIONS WITH P ROMPTING

Now we need to actually extract an answer to a given background question or anchor question from
the model. We could simply provide the resulting text as input to the language model, see what
most likely word it generates next, and take the result as the LM’s answer. However, in experiments
mainly with the OPT models we found this process to be highly noisy, with inconsistent perfor-
mance across models and relations. This is probably due to inconsistencies in the models them-
selves (Elazar et al., 2021), but also the simple nature of our templating procedure which doesn’t
always get the grammar correct. We are interested in measuring the language model’s conceptual
consistency, not linguistic consistency, so we implemented a majority-vote-style procedure to make
our prompting procedure more robust.
Instead of using just one question and one answer we consider many variations on the same question
and many potential answers, taking the combination assigned the highest likelihood by the model
as its predicted answer to the question. To vary the question presentation we substitute the question
generated from our templates into 6 meta-prompts, which are minor variations on how to ask the
question as reported in Table 1. To vary answer presentation we chose a list of 14 positive and
negative words as potential answers including {(Yes, No), (True, False), (Right, Wrong), (Correct,
Incorrect), (Positive, Negative), (Pass, Fail), (On, Off)}. This results in 6 × 14 = 84 model inputs
for each query, and we evaluate the model’s likelihood of each potential answer word. Note that
no sampling is required because we only use single answer words. The final answer to a question
is positive if the input with the highest likelihood used a positive answer word, and otherwise the
answer is negative.
We found this variation to be essential for achieving some consistency across linguistic variations
when experimenting with the OPT language models (Zhang et al., 2022b). Voting over multiple
variations is similar to the strategies adopted in a number of recent approaches. In Shwartz et al.
(2020) clarifying statements and answers to questions are chosen by taking a maximum over like-
lihood scores of different possibilities, but they do not use this to account for linguistic variation in
prompts. Similarly, in Elazar et al. (2021) knowledge base tuples are completed by picking a choice
from a restricted candidate set; here it is not used to control linguistic variation in order to study
another variable, but is used to study linguistic variation itself. More recently majority vote has been
used to evaluate generative models when generating longer snippets of text (Wang et al., 2022; Wei


                                                   5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023

                         Table 1: Meta-prompts utilized for question generation.

 Meta-Prompts
 1. <question>?
 2. <question>. Is this true?
 3. Answer this question as ’<label a>’ or ’<label b>’. Question: <question>?
 4. Each item is a question and answer. Answer is one of ’<label a>’ or ’<label b>’. Question: <question>? Answer:
 5. Pick ’<label a>’ or ’<label b>’. Question: <question>?Answer:
 6. Question: <question>? Answer:


et al., 2022b). These works use the approach to account for linguistic variation, but in the model
outputs (more than just a few words) rather than in the inputs (i.e., the prompts). In comparison to
all those studies, our majority-vote-style procedure is used to account for linguistic variation in the
prompts themselves.

3.3   M EASURING C ONCEPTUAL C ONSISTENCY

Now we are almost ready to measure conceptual consistency. Till now we have extracted answers
Âi,b                                            i,b
  B for the bth background knowledge question QB for the ith example in the anchor task dataset.
The anchor questions and answers are QiA and ÂiA . We translate these questions and answers into
scores that measure how well the model knows the background knowledge and how well it performs
at the anchor task. These background and task scores are defined respectively for each anchor
example using accuracy
                               h               i          h                 i
                  i
                 SB = Eb∈Pi [[Ai,b         i,b                 i,b
                                  B == ÂB ]] + Eb∈Ni [[AB == ÂB ]]
                                                                        i,b
                                                                               /2             (1)
                   i
                  SA = [[AiA == ÂiA ]]                                                                          (2)
where AB and AA are the correct answers, Ni is the set of negative background tuples for anchor
example i, Pi is the set of positive background tuples for anchor example i, and [[.]] is the indicator
function. Note that the background score weights negative and positive tuples evenly.
Finally we compute the conceptual consistency of a model on a given dataset and knowledge base
by predicting the task score from the background score and reporting average precision
                                              CC = AP (SA , SB )                                                 (3)
where AP (·) measures the average precision of the SB predictor. Intuitively, this score will be high
when the model answered more background knowledge questions correctly, so we are predicting
that the model will perform better when it knows relevant background knowledge.

4     E XPERIMENT S ETUP
Dataset and Knowledge Base We conduct zero-shot evaluation on the CommonsenseQA
(CSQA) (Talmor et al., 2019) task. CommonsenseQA covers a broad range of common sense
concepts, with each entry containing a question and 5 answer choices. We choose ConceptNet as
our knowledge base because CommonsenseQA is derived from it, although other knowledge bases
would also be valid design choices. We use a subset of 14 out of the 36 available relations most rele-
vant to common sense, including “antonym”, “at location”, “capable of”, “causes”, “desires”, “form
of”, “has a”, “is a”, “made of”, “part of”, “related to”, “similar to”, “synonym”, and “used for”. Our
experiments used the development set, since test set answers are not publicly available. No model
training or hyperparameter tuning was applied to our pre-trained LLMs. Most of our development
effort went into creating stable prompts.

Models We probe for conceptual consistency using three publicly available model fami-
lies, including OPT-{350M, 1.3B, 13B, 30B, 66B} (Zhang et al., 2022b), GPT(EleutherAI)-
{125M, 2.7B, 6B} (Black et al., 2022) and T0-{3B, 11B} (Sanh et al., 2022). The OPT and
GPT(EleutherAI) models were chosen because they are some of the largest publicly available models
and have a range of checkpoints over sizes. We use T0 because it was tuned specifically for zero-
shot prompting setting and achieved competitive results in zero-shot generalization. The prompts
and general approach remain the same for all models, though we did most of the development using
OPT models.


                                                         6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


5   R ESULTS

Here we report the conceptual consistency of the models we study, analyze the individual back-
ground and task components of that score, show qualitatively how performance on relations and
concepts varies, and analyze bias related to our prompting approach.

Conceptual Consistency We compute the conceptual consistency (Equation 3) for each LLM
and report the results in Figure 3. In absolute terms average precision is on the lower end,
showing significant conceptual inconsistency. A model’s knowledge of background informa-
tion is somewhat predictive of its question answering correctness. Our results show that con-
ceptual consistency generally grows with the scale of the model across all model classes,
indicating that bigger models are not just
more accurate, but also more consistent.
A notable exception is between OPT-30B
and OPT-66B, where there is no improve-
ment from increased size. Both achieve
the highest consistency among all mod-
els, but this one data point suggests there
may be diminishing returns. OPT mod-
els perform best, with GPT models close
behind and T0 demonstrating much worse
performance. This indicates that OPT and
GPT are much more conceptually consis-
tent than T0. The difference could be
                                             Figure 3: Conceptual Consistency of Language Mod-
due to the decoder only nature of OPT
                                             els. This measures our ability to predict whether a lan-
and GPT. It could also reflect a degree of
                                             guage model will be correct from its knowledge of rel-
forgetting in T0 due to supervised fine-
                                             evant background information.
tuning, but this is doubtful because one of
the many datasets T0 was trained on was CSQA. However, it may also reflect the fact that our
prompts are not designed specifically for T0.


(a) Background knowledge performance: how good (b) Anchor Task (CommonsenseQA question answer-
language models are at verifying whether our extracted ing) performance measured by our zero-shot prompt-
background facts are true/false. Averaged over 14 re- ing approach.
lations.

           Figure 4: Aggregated background performance and anchor task performance.

Background and Task Performance We also measure the components of conceptual consistency
in Figure 4. For background knowledge we compute Equation 1 averaged per relation and then
averaged over all 14 relations. This is reported with a 95% confidence interval in Figure 4a. There
is an imbalance in how often these relations occur in the data, so this approach weights relations
equally just for the purpose of assesing background knowledge. For task knowledge we report the
anchor score (Equation 2) in Figure 4b, which is CSQA accuracy in these experiments. In both
cases our prompting approach is able to extract correct answers from our LLMs. The trend in both
cases is again an increase in performance with model size. This was expected in both cases, but it is
interesting to note that the range of performance is smaller for background knowledge, suggesting
that increasing size helps task knowledge more than background knowledge, though the opposite is


                                                   7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


(a) OPT models with our majority style prompting and               (b) GPT and T0 Bias
with a single prompt.

           Figure 6: Background knowledge performance for negative and positive facts.

true for T0. Intuitively question answering is a more complex skill that builds on the less complex
background knowledge completion skill. From that perspective these results are also an evidence
of a skill hierarchy like Bloom’s Taxonomy (Sahu et al., 2021), where simpler skills are learned
before more complex ones. As for conceptual consistency, OPT models have higher performance
compared to GPT and T0 models, and this is likely due to the same reasons discussed previously. It
is however notable that the gap between T0 and the other models is much smaller for background
knowledge. Also, we see a marginal increase in performance between OPT-30B and OPT-66B for
both task and background knowledge, though it may not be significant.

Background vs Consistency
Next we ask where back-
ground knowledge and con-
sistency diverge.       In Fig-
ure 5 we plot background
score versus conceptual con-
sistency for 6 relations that
seemed to be more like out-
liers. Smaller models tend
to be further from the diago-
nal, either being inconsistent
but knowledgeable or consis-
tent without knowing much.
Relations also behave differ-
ently. Small models don’t
know the “desires” relation
very well, but they are some-
what conceptually consistent
                                 Figure 5: Scatter plot of Background Knowledge vs Conceptual
about it, to the point that even
                                 Consistency.
though large models get to
know the relation better they do not get more consistent about it. In the reverse direction, all model
scales know roughly the same amount about “causes” background information, but the larger models
are much more conceptually consistent about it.

Prompting Bias In Figure 6 we analyze our majority-vote-style prompting and prompting biases
we found in our LLMs. Each figure reports the background score (Equation 1) restricted to either the
set of negative background facts or positive background facts, so accuracy reduces to the percentage
of times the model said a version of “no” or “yes,” respectively. Figure 6a reports this metric for the
majority-vote-style prompting we used (Majority Prompt Style) and a previous version where we
tried to find a single best meta-prompt and answer pair (Single Prompt Style). In our single prompt
experiments we found that the two smaller OPT models had a strong “yes” bias as shown by the red
dashed line in Figure 6a. We introduced negative background knowledge, which detected this prob-
lem (green dashed line), but we also found that our majority-vote-style prompting helped ameliorate
the issue (solid lines). Even with majority-vote-style prompting both T0 and GPT(EleutherAI) still
display a significant “yes” (T0) and “no” (GPT) bias at smaller scales.


                                                       8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                            (a) By Relation


                                            (b) By Concept

Figure 7: Conceptual consistency computed for different subsets of CSQA examples partitioned
according to whether the background facts for an example contain the relation or concept.
Concept and Relation Level Consistency We analyze the conceptual consistency at the level of
relations and concepts in Figure 7. Figure 7a shows consistency for all relations. In case of Figure 7b,
we picked 14 most occurring concepts with minimum occurrence count of 28. Though the overall
trend is that larger models know more background knowledge, there are variations in which concepts
and relations a model is consistent about. In some cases you don’t need a larger model, or at least
larger models can have sub-par performance. For example, our largest models (OPT-66B and OPT-
30B) are outperformed by smaller versions of OPT, GPT(EleutherAI), and even T0 on the “Similar
To” relation. Less extreme differences occur for other relations like “Made Of”, and again lesser
differences occur for concepts like “Play”. This sensitivity of relations indicates our prompts, which
we design per relation, could be a factor. Another observation is that the increase in performance
with size is robust for GPT and T0, but that trend is more often violated for the OPT models. In
general, trends in concept consistency are more robust than trends in relation consistency.


6   C ONCLUSIONS

In this paper we built a kind of theory of mind about LLMs to study their conceptual consistency,
whether their knowledge of relevant background information is consistent with their ability to an-
swer questions correctly. For a question we extracted background knowledge from a knowledge
base of related concepts and used prompting to measure whether popular open source LLMs knew
that background information. We also measured their ability to answer common sense questions
correctly. This set us up to measure conceptual consistency by predicting correctness from our
background knowledge measure. We found that LLMs have a moderate amount of conceptual con-
sistency, and that it increases with scale. We also found that while knowledge of background infor-
mation increases with model scale it does not increase nearly as much as correctness or conceptual
consistency, indicating that models size has a larger impact on difficult tasks than simpler ones and
providing evidence of a hierarchy of related skills. In the future we would like to study whether this
measure of consistency can be used to guide how humans understand LLMs. We also want to focus
further on the hierarchy of skills by creating a dataset that tests multiple levels of comprehension.


                                                   9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


AUTHOR C ONTRIBUTIONS
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

R EFERENCES
Emily M. Bender and Alexander Koller. Climbing towards nlu: On meaning, form, and understand-
  ing in the age of data. In ACL, 2020.
Sidney Black, Stella Biderman, Eric Hallahan, Quentin Anthony, Leo Gao, Laurence Golding, Ho-
  race He, Connor Leahy, Kyle McDonell, Jason Phang, Michael Pieler, Usvsn Sai Prashanth, Shiv-
  anshu Purohit, Laria Reynolds, Jonathan Tow, Ben Wang, and Samuel Weinbach. GPT-NeoX-
  20B: An open-source autoregressive language model. In Proceedings of BigScience Episode #5
  – Workshop on Challenges & Perspectives in Creating Large Language Models, pp. 95–136,
  virtual+Dublin, May 2022. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/2022.
  bigscience-1.9. URL https://aclanthology.org/2022.bigscience-1.9.
Tom B. Brown, Benjamin Mann, Nick Ryder, Melanie Subbiah, Jared Kaplan, Prafulla Dhari-
  wal, Arvind Neelakantan, Pranav Shyam, Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, Sandhini Agarwal,
  Ariel Herbert-Voss, Gretchen Krueger, T. J. Henighan, Rewon Child, Aditya Ramesh, Daniel M.
  Ziegler, Jeff Wu, Clemens Winter, Christopher Hesse, Mark Chen, Eric Sigler, Mateusz Litwin,
  Scott Gray, Benjamin Chess, Jack Clark, Christopher Berner, Sam McCandlish, Alec Rad-
  ford, Ilya Sutskever, and Dario Amodei. Language models are few-shot learners. ArXiv,
  abs/2005.14165, 2020.
Arjun Chandrasekaran, Deshraj Yadav, Prithvijit Chattopadhyay, Viraj Prabhu, and Devi Parikh. It
  takes two to tango: Towards theory of ai’s mind. ArXiv, abs/1704.00717, 2017.
Daniel C. Dennett. Two contrasts: Folk craft vs folk science and belief vs opinion. In John D.
  Greenwood (ed.), The Future of Folk Psychology, pp. 135–148. Cambridge University Press,
  1991.
Jacob Devlin, Ming-Wei Chang, Kenton Lee, and Kristina Toutanova. Bert: Pre-training of deep
  bidirectional transformers for language understanding. In NAACL, 2019.
Yanai Elazar, Nora Kassner, Shauli Ravfogel, Abhilasha Ravichander, Eduard H. Hovy, Hinrich
  Schütze, and Yoav Goldberg. Measuring and improving consistency in pretrained language mod-
  els. Transactions of the Association for Computational Linguistics, 9:1012–1031, 2021.
Allyson Ettinger. What bert is not: Lessons from a new suite of psycholinguistic diagnostics for
  language models. Transactions of the Association for Computational Linguistics, 8:34–48, 2020.
Yash Goyal, Amir Feder, Uri Shalit, and Been Kim. Explaining classifiers with causal concept effect
  (cace). ArXiv, abs/1907.07165, 2019.
Peter Hase, Mona T. Diab, Asli Celikyilmaz, Xian Li, Zornitsa Kozareva, Veselin Stoyanov, Mohit
  Bansal, and Srini Iyer. Do language models have beliefs? methods for detecting, updating, and
  visualizing model beliefs. ArXiv, abs/2111.13654, 2021.
Jordan Hoffmann, Sebastian Borgeaud, Arthur Mensch, Elena Buchatskaya, Trevor Cai, Eliza
  Rutherford, Diego de Las Casas, Lisa Anne Hendricks, Johannes Welbl, Aidan Clark, Tom Hen-
  nigan, Eric Noland, Katie Millican, George van den Driessche, Bogdan Damoc, Aurelia Guy,
  Simon Osindero, Karen Simonyan, Erich Elsen, Jack W. Rae, Oriol Vinyals, and L. Sifre. Train-
  ing compute-optimal large language models. ArXiv, abs/2203.15556, 2022.
Myeongjun Jang, Deuk Sin Kwon, and Thomas Lukasiewicz. Accurate, yet inconsistent? consis-
 tency analysis on language understanding models. ArXiv, abs/2108.06665, 2021.
Nora Kassner and Hinrich Schütze. Negated and misprimed probes for pretrained language models:
  Birds can talk, but cannot fly. In ACL, 2020.
Been Kim, Martin Wattenberg, Justin Gilmer, Carrie J. Cai, James Wexler, Fernanda B. Viégas,
  and Rory Sayres. Interpretability beyond feature attribution: Quantitative testing with concept
  activation vectors (tcav). In ICML, 2018.


                                                10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Kaixin Ma, Jonathan Francis, Quanyang Lu, Eric Nyberg, and Alessandro Oltramari. Towards gen-
  eralizable neuro-symbolic systems for commonsense question answering. ArXiv, abs/1910.14087,
  2019.

Steven T. Piantadosi and Felix Hill. Meaning without reference in large language models. ArXiv,
  abs/2208.02957, 2022.

David Premack and Guy Woodruff. Does the chimpanzee have a theory of mind? Behavioral and
  Brain Sciences, 1:515 – 526, 1978.

Neil C. Rabinowitz, Frank Perbet, H. Francis Song, Chiyuan Zhang, S. M. Ali Eslami, and
  Matthew M. Botvinick. Machine theory of mind. In ICML, 2018.

Arijit Ray, Karan Sikka, Ajay Divakaran, Stefan Lee, and Giedrius Burachas. Sunny and dark
  outside?! improving answer consistency in vqa through entailed question generation. ArXiv,
  abs/1909.04696, 2019.

Marco Tulio Ribeiro, Carlos Guestrin, and Sameer Singh. Are red roses red? evaluating consistency
 of question-answering models. In ACL, 2019.

Marco Tulio Ribeiro, Tongshuang Sherry Wu, Carlos Guestrin, and Sameer Singh. Beyond accu-
 racy: Behavioral testing of nlp models with checklist. In ACL, 2020.

Pritish Sahu, Michael Cogswell, Ajay Divakaran, and Sara Rutherford-Quach. Comprehension
  based question answering using bloom’s taxonomy. In Proceedings of the 6th Workshop on Rep-
  resentation Learning for NLP (RepL4NLP-2021), pp. 20–28, Online, August 2021. Association
  for Computational Linguistics.

Victor Sanh, Albert Webson, Colin Raffel, Stephen H. Bach, Lintang A. Sutawika, Zaid Alyafeai,
  Antoine Chaffin, Arnaud Stiegler, Teven Le Scao, Arun Raja, Manan Dey, M Saiful Bari, Can-
  wen Xu, Urmish Thakker, Shanya Sharma, Eliza Szczechla, Taewoon Kim, Gunjan Chhablani,
  Nihal V. Nayak, Debajyoti Datta, Jonathan Chang, Mike Tian-Jian Jiang, Han Wang, Matteo
  Manica, Sheng Shen, Zheng Xin Yong, Harshit Pandey, Rachel Bawden, Thomas Wang, Trishala
  Neeraj, Jos Rozen, Abheesht Sharma, Andrea Santilli, Thibault Févry, Jason Alan Fries, Ryan
  Teehan, Stella Rose Biderman, Leo Gao, Tali Bers, Thomas Wolf, and Alexander M. Rush. Mul-
  titask prompted training enables zero-shot task generalization. ArXiv, abs/2110.08207, 2022.

Maayan Shvo, Toryn Q. Klassen, and Sheila A. McIlraith. Towards the role of theory of mind in
 explanation. Explainable, Transparent Autonomous Agents and Multi-Agent Systems, 12175:75 –
 93, 2020.

Vered Shwartz, Peter West, Ronan Le Bras, Chandra Bhagavatula, and Yejin Choi. Unsupervised
  commonsense question answering with self-talk. ArXiv, abs/2004.05483, 2020.

Aarohi Srivastava, Abhinav Rastogi, Abhishek B Rao, Abu Awal Md Shoeb, Abubakar Abid,
  Adam Fisch, Adam R. Brown, Adam Santoro, Aditya Gupta, Adrià Garriga-Alonso, Agnieszka
  Kluska, Aitor Lewkowycz, Akshat Agarwal, Alethea Power, Alex Ray, Alex Warstadt, Alexan-
  der W. Kocurek, Ali Safaya, Ali Tazarv, Alice Xiang, Alicia Parrish, Allen Nie, Aman Hussain,
  Amanda Askell, Amanda Dsouza, Ameet Annasaheb Rahane, Anantharaman S. Iyer, Anders Jo-
  han Andreassen, Andrea Santilli, Andreas Stuhlmuller, Andrew M. Dai, Andrew D. La, An-
  drew Kyle Lampinen, Andy Zou, Angela Jiang, Angelica Chen, Anh Vuong, Animesh Gupta,
  Anna Gottardi, Antonio Norelli, Anu Venkatesh, Arash Gholamidavoodi, Arfa Tabassum, Arul
  Menezes, Arun Kirubarajan, Asher Mullokandov, Ashish Sabharwal, Austin Herrick, Avia Efrat,
  Aykut Erdem, Ayla Karakacs, Bridget R. Roberts, Bao Sheng Loe, Barret Zoph, Bartlomiej Bo-
  janowski, Batuhan Ozyurt, Behnam Hedayatnia, Behnam Neyshabur, Benjamin Inden, Benno
  Stein, Berk Ekmekci, Bill Yuchen Lin, Blake Stephen Howald, Cameron Diao, Cameron Dour,
  Catherine Stinson, Cedrick Argueta, C’esar Ferri Ram’irez, Chandan Singh, Charles Rathkopf,
  Chenlin Meng, Chitta Baral, Chiyu Wu, Chris Callison-Burch, Chris Waites, Christian Voigt,
  Christopher D. Manning, Christopher Potts, Cindy Tatiana Ramirez, Clara Rivera, Clemen-
  cia Siro, Colin Raffel, Courtney Ashcraft, Cristina Garbacea, Damien Sileo, Daniel H Gar-
  rette, Dan Hendrycks, Dan Kilman, Dan Roth, Daniel Freeman, Daniel Khashabi, Daniel Levy,


                                               11
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


  Daniel Gonz’alez, Danny Hernandez, Danqi Chen, Daphne Ippolito, Dar Gilboa, David Do-
  han, D. Drakard, David Jurgens, Debajyoti Datta, Deep Ganguli, Denis Emelin, Denis Kleyko,
  Deniz Yuret, Derek Chen, Derek Tam, Dieuwke Hupkes, Diganta Misra, Dilyar Buzan, Dim-
  itri Coelho Mollo, Diyi Yang, Dong-Ho Lee, Ekaterina Shutova, Ekin Dogus Cubuk, Elad Segal,
  Eleanor Hagerman, Elizabeth Barnes, Elizabeth P. Donoway, Ellie Pavlick, Emanuele Rodolà,
  Emma FC Lam, Eric Chu, Eric Tang, Erkut Erdem, Ernie Chang, Ethan A. Chi, Ethan Dyer,
  Ethan Jerzak, Ethan Kim, Eunice Engefu Manyasi, Evgenii Zheltonozhskii, Fan Xia, Fatemeh
  Siar, Fernando Mart’inez-Plumed, Francesca Happ’e, François Chollet, Frieda Rong, Gaurav
  Mishra, Genta Indra Winata, Gerard de Melo, Germán Kruszewski, Giambattista Parascandolo,
  Giorgio Mariani, Gloria Wang, Gonzalo Jaimovitch-L’opez, Gregor Betz, Guy Gur-Ari, Hana
  Galijasevic, Han Sol Kim, Hannah Rashkin, Hanna Hajishirzi, Harsh Mehta, Hayden Bogar,
  Henry Shevlin, Hinrich Schütze, Hiromu Yakura, Hongming Zhang, Hubert Wong, Ian Aik-
  Soon Ng, Isaac Noble, Jaap Jumelet, Jack Geissinger, John Kernion, Jacob Hilton, Jaehoon Lee,
  Jaime Fernández Fisac, J. Brooker Simon, James Koppel, James Zheng, James Zou, Jan Koco’n,
  Jana Thompson, Jared Kaplan, Jarema Radom, Jascha Narain Sohl-Dickstein, Jason Phang, Ja-
  son Wei, Jason Yosinski, Jekaterina Novikova, Jelle Bosscher, Jenni Marsh, Jeremy Kim, Jeroen
  Taal, Jesse Engel, Jesujoba Oluwadara Alabi, Jiacheng Xu, Jiaming Song, Jillian Tang, Jane W
  Waweru, John Burden, John Miller, John U. Balis, Jonathan Berant, Jorg Frohberg, Jos Rozen,
  José Hernández-Orallo, Joseph Boudeman, Joseph Jones, Joshua B. Tenenbaum, Joshua S. Rule,
  Joyce Chua, Kamil Kanclerz, Karen Livescu, Karl Krauth, Karthik Gopalakrishnan, Katerina Ig-
  natyeva, Katja Markert, Kaustubh D. Dhole, Kevin Gimpel, Kevin Ochieng’ Omondi, Kory Wal-
  lace Mathewson, Kristen Chiafullo, Ksenia Shkaruta, Kumar Shridhar, Kyle McDonell, Kyle
  Richardson, Laria Reynolds, Leo Gao, Li Zhang, Liam Dugan, Lianhui Qin, Lidia Contreras-
  Ochando, Louis-Philippe Morency, Luca Moschella, Luca Lam, Lucy Noble, Ludwig Schmidt,
  Luheng He, Luis Oliveros Col’on, Luke Metz, Lutfi Kerem cSenel, Maarten Bosma, Maarten
  Sap, Maartje ter Hoeve, Madotto Andrea, Maheen Saleem Farooqi, Manaal Faruqui, Mantas
  Mazeika, Marco Baturan, Marco Marelli, Marco Maru, M Quintana, Marie Tolkiehn, Mario
  Giulianelli, Martha Lewis, Martin Potthast, Matthew Leavitt, Matthias Hagen, M’aty’as Schu-
  bert, Medina Baitemirova, Melissa Arnaud, Melvin Andrew McElrath, Michael A. Yee, Michael
  Cohen, Mi Gu, Michael I. Ivanitskiy, Michael Starritt, Michael Strube, Michal Swkedrowski,
  Michele Bevilacqua, Michihiro Yasunaga, Mihir Kale, Mike Cain, Mimee Xu, Mirac Suzgun,
  Monica Tiwari, Mohit Bansal, Moin Aminnaseri, Mor Geva, Mozhdeh Gheini, T MukundVarma,
  Nanyun Peng, Nathan Chi, Nayeon Lee, Neta Gur-Ari Krakover, Nicholas Cameron, Nicholas S.
  Roberts, Nicholas Doiron, Nikita Nangia, Niklas Deckers, Niklas Muennighoff, Nitish Shirish
  Keskar, Niveditha Iyer, Noah Constant, Noah Fiedel, Nuan Wen, Oliver Zhang, Omar Agha,
  Omar Elbaghdadi, Omer Levy, Owain Evans, Pablo Antonio Moreno Casares, Parth Doshi, Pas-
  cale Fung, Paul Pu Liang, Paul Vicol, Pegah Alipoormolabashi, Peiyuan Liao, Percy Liang, Pe-
  ter W. Chang, Peter Eckersley, Phu Mon Htut, Pi-Bei Hwang, P. Milkowski, Piyush S. Patil, Pouya
  Pezeshkpour, Priti Oli, Qiaozhu Mei, QING LYU, Qinlang Chen, Rabin Banjade, Rachel Etta
  Rudolph, Raefer Gabriel, Rahel Habacker, Ram’on Risco Delgado, Raphaël Millière, Rhythm
  Garg, Richard Barnes, Rif A. Saurous, Riku Arakawa, Robbe Raymaekers, Robert Frank, Rohan
  Sikand, Roman Novak, Roman Sitelew, Ronan Le Bras, Rosanne Liu, Rowan Jacobs, Rui Zhang,
  Ruslan Salakhutdinov, Ryan Chi, Ryan Lee, Ryan Stovall, Ryan Teehan, Rylan Yang, Sahib J.
  Singh, Saif M. Mohammad, Sajant Anand, Sam Dillavou, Sam Shleifer, Sam Wiseman, Samuel
  Gruetter, Sam Bowman, Samuel S. Schoenholz, Sanghyun Han, Sanjeev Kwatra, Sarah A. Rous,
  Sarik Ghazarian, Sayan Ghosh, Sean Casey, Sebastian Bischoff, Sebastian Gehrmann, Sebas-
  tian Schuster, Sepideh Sadeghi, Shadi S. Hamdan, Sharon Zhou, Shashank Srivastava, Sherry
  Shi, Shikhar Singh, Shima Asaadi, Shixiang Shane Gu, Shubh Pachchigar, Shubham Toshniwal,
  Shyam Upadhyay, Shyamolima Debnath, Siamak Shakeri, Simon Thormeyer, Simone Melzi, Siva
  Reddy, Sneha Priscilla Makini, Soo hwan Lee, Spencer Bradley Torene, Sriharsha Hatwar, Stanis-
  las Dehaene, Stefan Divic, Stefano Ermon, Stella Rose Biderman, Stephanie C. Lin, Stephen
  Prasad, Steven T. Piantadosi, Stuart M. Shieber, Summer Misherghi, Svetlana Kiritchenko, Swa-
  roop Mishra, Tal Linzen, Tal Schuster, Tao Li, Tao Yu, Tariq A. Ali, Tatsuo Hashimoto, Te-Lin
  Wu, Theo Desbordes, Theodore Rothschild, Thomas Phan, Tianle Wang, Tiberius Nkinyili, Timo
  Schick, T. N. Kornev, Timothy Telleen-Lawton, Titus Tunduny, Tobias Gerstenberg, Trenton
  Chang, Trishala Neeraj, Tushar Khot, Tyler O. Shultz, Uri Shaham, Vedant Misra, Vera Dem-
  berg, Victoria Nyamai, Vikas Raunak, Vinay Venkatesh Ramasesh, Vinay Uday Prabhu, Vishakh
  Padmakumar, Vivek Srikumar, William Fedus, William Saunders, William Zhang, W Vossen, Xi-
  ang Ren, Xiaoyu F Tong, Xinyi Wu, Xudong Shen, Yadollah Yaghoobzadeh, Yair Lakretz, Yang


                                               12
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


  Song, Yasaman Bahri, Ye Ji Choi, Yichi Yang, Yiding Hao, Yifu Chen, Yonatan Belinkov, Yu Hou,
  Yu Hou, Yushi Bai, Zachary Seid, Zhao Xinran, Zhuoye Zhao, Zi Fu Wang, Zijie J. Wang, Zirui
  Wang, Ziyi Wu, Sahib Singh, and Uri Shaham. Beyond the imitation game: Quantifying and
  extrapolating the capabilities of language models. ArXiv, abs/2206.04615, 2022.
Alon Talmor, Jonathan Herzig, Nicholas Lourie, and Jonathan Berant. Commonsenseqa: A question
  answering challenge targeting commonsense knowledge. In Proceedings of the 2019 Conference
  of the North American Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Human Lan-
  guage Technologies, Volume 1 (Long and Short Papers), pp. 4149–4158, 2019.
Alon Talmor, Ori Yoran, Ronan Le Bras, Chandrasekhar Bhagavatula, Yoav Goldberg, Yejin Choi,
  and Jonathan Berant. Commonsenseqa 2.0: Exposing the limits of ai through gamification. In
  NeurIPS Datasets and Benchmarks, 2021.
Xuezhi Wang, Jason Wei, Dale Schuurmans, Quoc Le, Ed Chi, and Denny Zhou. Self-consistency
  improves chain of thought reasoning in language models. ArXiv, abs/2203.11171, 2022.
Jason Wei, Yi Tay, Rishi Bommasani, Colin Raffel, Barret Zoph, Sebastian Borgeaud, Dani Yo-
  gatama, Maarten Bosma, Denny Zhou, Donald Metzler, Ed Chi, Tatsunori Hashimoto, Oriol
  Vinyals, Percy Liang, Jeff Dean, and William Fedus. Emergent abilities of large language models.
  ArXiv, abs/2206.07682, 2022a.
Jason Wei, Xuezhi Wang, Dale Schuurmans, Maarten Bosma, Ed Chi, Quoc Le, and Denny Zhou.
  Chain of thought prompting elicits reasoning in large language models. ArXiv, abs/2201.11903,
  2022b.
Tongshuang Sherry Wu, Marco Tulio Ribeiro, Jeffrey Heer, and Daniel S. Weld. Polyjuice: Gener-
  ating counterfactuals for explaining, evaluating, and improving models. In ACL, 2021.
Chih-Kuan Yeh, Been Kim, and Pradeep Ravikumar. Human-centered concept explanations for
  neural networks. In Neuro-Symbolic Artificial Intelligence, 2021.
Honghua Zhang, Liunian Harold Li, Tao Meng, Kai-Wei Chang, and Guy Van den Broeck. On the
  paradox of learning to reason from data. ArXiv, abs/2205.11502, 2022a.
Susan Zhang, Stephen Roller, Naman Goyal, Mikel Artetxe, Moya Chen, Shuohui Chen, Christo-
  pher Dewan, Mona Diab, Xian Li, Xi Victoria Lin, Todor Mihaylov, Myle Ott, Sam Shleifer, Kurt
  Shuster, Daniel Simig, Punit Singh Koura, Anjali Sridhar, Tianlu Wang, and Luke Zettlemoyer.
  Opt: Open pre-trained transformer language models. ArXiv, abs/2205.01068, 2022b.


                                               13
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


A     A PPENDIX
We prepared different prompt templates for the picked 14 relations used in our experiments shown
in Table 2.
        Table 2: All the relations with its corresponding prompt style with a sample example.

               Relation           Prompt Style                        Sample Instance
               Is A               Is c1 a c2 ?                        Is security a department?
               Has A              Does c1 has a c2 ?                  does house has a basement?
               Antonym            Is c1 an antonym of c2 ?            Is clever an antonym of dull?
               Cause              Does c1 cause c2 ?                  does fencing cause small cuts?
               Desires            Does a c1 desires c2 ?              does a dog desires affection?
               Form Of            Is c1 a form of c2 ?                Is partying a form of of party?
               Made Of            Is the c1 made of c2 ?              Is the car made of metal?
               Part Of            Is c1 a part of c2 ?                Is book a part of library?
               Related To         Is c1 related to c2 ?               Is doctor related to illness?
               Similar To         Is c1 similar to c2 ?               Is ridiculous similar to silly?
               Synonym            Is c1 a synonym of c2 ?             Is reply a synonym of answer?
               Used For           Are c1 used for c2 ?                Are clothes used for wearing?
               At Location        Is c1 at location c2 ?              Is door at location library?
               Capable Of         Is a c1 capable of c2 ?             Is a child capable of form opinions?


In Table 3, we showcase few instances of the negative background facts created from the process
described in subsection 3.1.
               Table 3: Examples of negative background knowledge task for each relation.

 Relation       Negative Background Facts
 Is A           [Is drill a clamp?, Is ocean a shame?, Is space a micrometer?]
 Has A          [does mammals has a watch?, does pen has a unicycle?, does oceans has a uncle?]
 Antonym        [Is wash an antonym of detached?, Is bad an antonym of nightdress?, Is shade an antonym of improvement?]
 Cause          [does going into coma cause company?, does standing in queue cause shrinking?, does doing housework cause mermaid?]
 Desires        [does a person desires schizophrenia?, does a children desires unemployed?, does a tree desires criticism?]
 Form Of        [Is recycled a form of burned?, Is bath room a form of interrupted?, Is storing a form of bleeding?]
 Made Of        [Is the ocean made of uncomfortableness?, Is the car made of rain?, Is the plants made of bicycle?]
 Part Of        [Is gulf a part of round?, Is shower a part of anger?, Is bell a part of congress?]
 Related To     [Is class related to cornstarch?, Is room related to jordan?, Is cable related to tilemaking?]
 Similar To     [Is lie similar to botany?, Is ridiculous similar to aspirin?, Is distant similar to physiology?]
 Synonym        [Is heart a synonym of volition?, Is station a synonym of subordination?, Is part a synonym of undermine?]
 Used For       [Are hair used for council?, Are theatre used for desk?, Are disk used for pain?]
 At Location    [Is monkey at location fuzzball?, Is piano at location macaroni?, Is table at location gauging?]
 Capable Of     [Is a computer capable of pillow?, Is a band capable of overmodulation?, Is a tiger capable of fireman?]


                                                                 14
