Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023



L EARNING H ARMONIC M OLECULAR R EPRESENTA -
TIONS ON R IEMANNIAN M ANIFOLD

 Yiqun Wang1 , Yuning Shen1 , Shi Chen2∗, Lihao Wang1 , Fei Ye1 , Hao Zhou3
 1
   ByteDance Research, 2 University of Wisconsin-Madison,
 3
   Institute for AI Industry Research (AIR), Tsinghua University
 {yiqun.wang, yuning.shen, wanglihao.1217, yefei.joyce}@bytedance.com,
 schen636@wisc.edu, zhouhao@air.tsinghua.edu.cn



                                                A BSTRACT
             Molecular representation learning plays a crucial role in AI-assisted drug discov-
             ery research. Encoding 3D molecular structures through Euclidean neural net-
             works has become the prevailing method in the geometric deep learning commu-
             nity. However, the equivariance constraints and message passing in Euclidean
             space may limit the network expressive power. In this work, we propose a Har-
             monic Molecular Representation learning (H MR) framework, which represents
             a molecule using the Laplace-Beltrami eigenfunctions of its molecular surface.
             H MR offers a multi-resolution representation of molecular geometric and chem-
             ical features on 2D Riemannian manifold. We also introduce a harmonic mes-
             sage passing method to realize efficient spectral message passing over the surface
             manifold for better molecular encoding. Our proposed method shows compara-
             ble predictive power to current models in small molecule property prediction, and
             outperforms the state-of-the-art deep learning models for ligand-binding protein
             pocket classification and the rigid protein docking challenge, demonstrating its
             versatility in molecular representation learning.


1       I NTRODUCTION
Molecular representation learning is a fundamental step in AI-assisted drug discovery. Obtaining
good molecular representations is crucial for the success of downstream applications including pro-
tein function prediction (Gligorijević et al., 2021) and molecular matching, e.g., protein-protein
docking (Ganea et al., 2021). In general, an ideal molecular representation should well integrate
both geometric (e.g., 3D conformation) and chemical information (e.g., electrostatic potential). Ad-
ditionally, such representation should capture features in various resolutions to accommodate dif-
ferent tasks, e.g., high-level holistic features for molecular property prediction, and fine-grained
features for describing whether two proteins can bind together at certain interfaces.
Recently, geometric deep learning (GDL) (Bronstein et al., 2017; 2021; Monti et al., 2017) has been
widely used in learning molecular representations (Atz et al., 2021; Townshend et al., 2021). GDL
captures necessary information by performing neural message passing (NMP) on common struc-
tures such as 2D/3D molecular graph (Klicpera et al., 2020; Stokes et al., 2020), 3D voxel (Liu
et al., 2021),and point cloud (Unke et al., 2021). Specifically, GDL encodes: a) geometric features
by modeling atomic positions in the Euclidean space, and b) chemical features by feeding atomic
information into the message passing networks. High-level features could then be obtained by ag-
gregating these atom-level features, which has shown promising results empirically.
However, we argue that current molecular representations via NMP in the Euclidean space is not
necessarily the optimal solution, which suffers from several drawbacks. First, current GDL ap-
proaches need to employ equivariant networks (Thomas et al., 2018) to guarantee that the molecular
representations transform accordingly upon rotation and translation (Fuchs et al., 2020), which could
undermine the network expressive power (Cohen et al., 2018; Li et al., 2021). Therefore, developing
a representation that could properly encode 3D molecular structure while bypassing the equivari-
ance requirement is desirable. Second, current molecular representations in GDL are learned in a
    ∗
        This work was conducted during internship at ByteDance Research.


                                                       1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023



bottom-up manner, which are hardly able to provide features in different resolutions for different
tasks. Specifically, NMP in Euclidean space typically achieves long-range communication between
distant atoms by stacking deep layers or increasing the neighborhood radius. This would hinder the
effective representation of macromolecules with tens of thousands of atoms (Battiston et al., 2020;
Boguna et al., 2021). To remedy this, residue-level graph representations are commonly used for
large molecules (Jumper et al., 2021; Gligorijević et al., 2021). Hence designing efficient multi-
resolution message passing mechanisms would be ideal for encoding molecules with distinct sizes.
On the other hand, the molecular surface is a high-level representation of a molecule’s shape, which
has been widely used to study inter-molecular interactions (Richards, 1977; Shulman-Peleg et al.,
2004). Intuitively, the interaction between molecules is commonly described as a “key-lock pair”,
where both shape complementarity (Li et al., 2013) and chemical interactions (e.g., hydrogen bond)
determine whether the key matches the lock molecule. It has been shown that the molecular surface
holds key information about inter-molecular interactions (Gainza et al., 2020), which makes it an
ideal candidate for molecular representation learning (Sverrisson et al., 2021; Somnath et al., 2021).
Inspired by the idea of Shape-
DNA (Reuter et al., 2006), hereby we
propose Harmonic Molecular Represen-
tation learning (H MR) by utilizing the
Laplace-Beltrami eigenfunctions on the
molecular surface (a 2D manifold). Our
representation has the following advan-
tages: a) H MR works on 2D Riemannian
manifold instead of in the 3D Euclidean
space, thus the resulting molecular rep-                      reduced spatial resolution
resentation is by design roto-translation
                                                         truncated Laplace-Beltrami eigenfunctions
invariant; b) H MR represents a molecule
in a top-down manner, and is capable Figure 1: Multi-resolution molecular surface represen-
of offering multi-resolution features that tation. Showing the electrostatic potential (blue regions
accommodate various target molecules being negatively charged, PDB ID: 3V6F) at different
(i.e., from small molecules to large resolutions under our representation. See Appendix B
proteins), thanks to the smooth nature for technical details about tuning resolution.
of the Laplace-Beltrami eigenfunctions
(Fig. 1); c) H MR naturally integrates geometric and chemical features – the molecular shape defines
the Riemannian manifold (i.e., the underlying domain equipped with a metric), and the atomic
configurations determine the associated functions distributed on the manifold (e.g., electrostatics).
To demonstrate that H MR is generally applicable to different downstream tasks including molecu-
lar property prediction and molecular matching, we propose two specific techniques: (1) manifold
harmonic message passing for realizing holistic molecular representations, and (2) learning regional
functional correspondence for molecular surface matching. Without loss of generality, we apply the
proposed techniques to solve three drug discovery-related problems: QM9 small molecule property
regression, ligand-binding protein pocket classification, and rigid protein docking pose prediction.
Our proposed method shows comparable performance for small molecule property prediction to
NMP-based models, while outperforming the state-of-the-art deep learning models in protein pocket
classification and the rigid protein docking challenge.



2   R ELATED W ORK

Molecular Surface Representation The molecular surface representation is commonly adopted
for tasks involving molecular interfaces (Duhovny et al., 2002), where non-covalent interactions
(e.g., hydrophobic interactions) play a decisive role (Sharp, 1994). Non-Euclidean convolutional
neural networks (Monti et al., 2017) and point cloud-based learning models (Sverrisson et al., 2022)
have been applied to encode the molecular surface for downstream applications, e.g., protein binding
site prediction (Mylonas et al., 2021). However, existing methods apply filters with fixed sizes and
are highly dependent on the surface mesh quality, which limit the expressive power for molecular
shape representation across different spatial scales (Somnath et al., 2021; Isert et al., 2022).


                                                  2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023



Geometry Processing Our work was inspired by some pioneering work for shape encoding and
shape matching in the geometry processing research community (Litman & Bronstein, 2013; Bi-
asotti et al., 2016). The surface of a 3D object is typically discretized into a polygon mesh with
vertices and faces. Intrinsic properties of the surface manifold are used to encode the shape (Sun
et al., 2009; Bronstein & Kokkinos, 2010). Functional maps (Ovsjanikov et al., 2012; Litany et al.,
2017b) have been proposed to establish spectral-space functional correspondence between two man-
ifolds. Recently, deep learning has been applied to learn representative features to facilitate shape
recognition and matching (Litany et al., 2017a; Donati et al., 2020; Attaiki et al., 2021).
Spectral Message Passing Our proposed method decomposes surface functions/features as the
linear combination of some basis functions (hence the name “harmonic”) and realizes message pass-
ing by applying various spectral filters. Graph convolutional network (GCN) is closely related to our
proposed method, which operates in the graph Laplacian eigenspace (Kipf & Welling, 2016; Shen
et al., 2021). The major difference is that graph is discrete by construction, while our method works
with continuous Riemannian manifold (Coifman & Lafon, 2006). In other words, the underlying
manifold and its spectrum remain the same with different surface discretizations, hence is a robust
representation of the surface shape (Coifman et al., 2005). See “Shape-DNA” in Sec. 3.

3       P RELIMINARIES

The goal of this work is to propose a representation learning method using the molecular surface,
which could properly encode both geometric and chemical features. Intuitively, the molecular sur-
face defines the shape of a molecule in 3D Euclidean space (i.e., geometry), while chemical features
(e.g., hydrophobicity) can be treated as functions distributed on the molecular surface. The surface
and these associated functions co-determine the underlying molecular properties, e.g., whether an
antibody could bind with an antigen. Therefore, we propose to represent a molecule as a set of
(learned) functions/features defined on its surface.
Before moving on, we first explain some basic concepts behind our proposed representation learning
framework. In Sec. 3.1, we introduce molecular “Shape-DNA” and a set of basis functions inherent
to the surface manifold. In Sec. 3.2, we illustrate how to apply harmonic analysis to decompose
a function (defined on the molecular surface) into the linear combination of its “Shape-DNA” ba-
sis functions, as shown in Fig. 2. These concepts enable us to represent a molecular surface as a
2D Riemannian manifold with associated functions, which form the cornerstone of our proposed
framework.



                        =                           +                              +                           + ...
                electrostatic
                  potential


Figure 2: Illustrating manifold harmonic analysis. Left-hand side: the simulated electrostatic poten-
tial function on the protein surface. Right-hand side: the linear combination of its Laplace-Beltrami
eigenfunctions (ϕ1 , . . . , ϕ10 , . . .) with corresponding coefficients (cϕ1 , . . . , cϕ10 , . . .). Only a few
selected terms are explicitly shown from the infinite sum. Note that these eigenfunctions exhibit
different spatial frequencies (resolutions).


3.1       T HE S HAPE -DNA

The molecular surface 1 can be viewed as a 2D Riemannian manifold (M), which adopts a discrete
set of eigenfunctions (ϕ) that solves
                                             ∆ϕi = λi ϕi ,       i = 0, 1, . . .                                       (1)
Here, ∆ is the Laplace-Beltrami (LB) operator acting on surface scalar fields, defined as ∆f =
−div(∇f ). ϕ0 , ϕ1 , . . . are a set of orthonormal eigenfunctions (i.e., ⟨ϕi , ϕj ⟩M = δij ). And 0 =
λ0 ≤ λ1 ≤ . . . are the corresponding eigenvalues. These set of eigenvalues {λi } of the LB operator
    1
        For instance, an isosurface of its electron density field, or the solvent-accessible/exclusive surface, etc.


                                                             3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023



are called the “Shape-DNA” and their corresponding eigenfunctions {ϕi } are unique to each shape.
2
 . In other words, different molecules adopt different LB eigenfunctions. Notably, two different 3D
conformations of the same molecule may not have the same LB eigenfunctions, but a pair of chiral
molecules (i.e., mirror image of each other) share the same LB spectrum.
Fig. 2 shows a few selected eigenfunctions (ϕ1 , ϕ10 , ϕ100 ) of a protein surface manifold on the
right-hand side. These eigenfunctions are intrinsic properties of the surface manifold, which remain
invariant under rigid transformations to the molecule. The eigenvalues λi reflect the surface Dirich-
let energy (defined as ⟨∆f, f ⟩M ), which measures the smoothness of eigenfunction ϕi over M.
The eigenvalues increase linearly, whose slope is roughly inversely proportional to the surface area
(known as Weyl’s asymptotic law). See Appendix A for more details about the “Shape-DNA”.

3.2   BASICS OF M ANIFOLD H ARMONIC A NALYSIS

Now, we introduce basic manifold harmonic analysis, a merit of using the Riemannian manifold
representation. “Harmonic analysis” refers to the representation of functions as the superposition
of some basic waves. Specifically in our case, given the molecular surface manifold M and its
LB eigenfunctions {ϕi }∞
                       i=0 , any scalar-valued function f that is square-integrable on M can be
decomposed into a generalized Fourier series:
                                               ∞
                                               X
                                     f (x) =         ⟨f, ϕi ⟩M ϕi (x) .                            (2)
                                               i=0

In other words, f can be represented as the linear combination of the LB eigenfunctions. The linear
combination coefficient ⟨f, ϕi ⟩M can be interpreted as the “projection” of f onto the eigenfunction
ϕi , which reflects the contribution of this particular eigenfunction to synthesizing function f .
Interestingly, it is easy to notice that these eigenfunctions display different spatial frequencies
(Fig. 2), i.e., ϕ1 varies slowly over the surface, while ϕ100 oscillates at a much higher frequency.
This is analogous to the set of sin(kx) functions in the 1D case, where high frequency waves with
larger k values exhibit more oscillations within the period of length 2π. Hereafter we refer to LB
eigenfunctions with (relatively) small/large eigenvalues as the low/high frequency components.
Therefore, by manipulating the linear combination coefficients, we could control the contribution of
different frequency components to synthesizing function f . For instance, with only low frequency
components, the synthesized function will have a lower spatial resolution on the surface (i.e., more
smoothed out, Fig. 1 right panel, see Appendix B for technical details.), and vice versa. Synthesizing
a new function f with some selected frequency components is commonly known as wave filtering in
signal processing, which will be applied in our representation learning framework to realize multi-
resolution encoding of the molecular surface. We refer the readers to some excellent review papers
for more details about geometry processing (Bronstein et al., 2017; Rosenberg, 1997).

4     M ETHODOLOGY
We realize that the aforementioned geometry processing methods are suitable for molecular surface
representation. However, a clear distinction between the 3D objects used in geometry processing
research and the molecular systems is that molecules are not simply shapes – their underlying atomic
structures beneath the surface govern the molecular functionality. In other words, both geometry
(i.e., shape) and chemistry have to be considered for molecular encoding. It has been shown that the
molecular surface displays chemical and geometric patterns which fingerprint a protein’s mode of
interactions with other biomolecules (Gainza et al., 2020). Therefore, we formulate both geometric
and chemical properties of a molecule as functions distributed on its surface manifold.
Then comes the question: how do we properly learn these geometric and chemical features on the
molecular surface? One viable solution is to emulate the message passing framework commonly
used in GNNs, whose goal is to propagate information between distant surface regions to encode
surface features at different scales. To that end, we present two methods under the H MR frame-
work. In Sec. 4.1, we introduce manifold harmonic message passing, which makes use of harmonic
    2
      Two shapes may share the same LB eigendecomposition (isometries). The uniqueness of eigendecompo-
sition up to isometries is associated with the question “Can One Hear the Shape of a Drum?” (Kac, 1966)


                                                      4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023



                                                                                          Propagated
                                                                                           Functions
                                            frequency filters         heat operator
                            Feature
                           Extraction
                                                                                      +     Feed
                                                                                           Forward
                          Eigenfunction


                                                                ...
                          Computation


                                            Manifold Harmonic Message Passing

Figure 3: H MR workflow. Given a molecular surface mesh with N vertices, we compute the first k
Laplace-Beltrami eigenfunctions (column-wise stacked into an array Φ, and Φ+ denotes its Moore-
Penrose pseudo-inverse, see Appendix B for discrete calculations) with ascending eigenvalues, and
extract n initial surface features Finp through MLP. Then, we apply neural network-learned spectral
filters to propagate the features over the surface to achieve message passing. Note that each feature
channel has a unique Gaussian frequency filter and propagation time t. Relevant tensor sizes are
indicated in parentheses. Multiple message passing blocks can be stacked for better representations.

analysis techniques to allow efficient multi-range communication between regions on the molecu-
lar surface regardless of its size. This enables H MR to encode information within a molecule and
be applied to molecule-level prediction tasks. In Sec. 4.2, we propose a H MR-powered rigid pro-
tein docking pipeline. We use this docking challenge to demonstrate the potential of our proposed
representation learning method for modeling interactions between large biomolecules.

4.1   L EARNING H ARMONIC M OLECULAR R EPRESENTATIONS

Given the 3D atomic structure of a molecule, H MR returns (1) a discretized molecular surface man-
ifold (i.e., a triangle mesh) with N vertices {x1 , . . . , xN } ⊂ R3 and the corresponding faces; (2) a
set of n per-vertex features, F ∈ RN ×n , which can be viewed as n learned surface functions. The
discretized surface manifold as well as these features represent the geometry and chemistry of the
underlying molecule, and can be used for various downstream prediction tasks.
Surface Preparation We use MSMS (Ewing & Hermisson, 2010) to compute the molecular
solvent-excluded surface as a triangle mesh with N vertices. Then, we compute the first k LB
eigenfunctions {ϕi }k−1
                    i≥0 with ascending eigenvalues as described in Reuter et al. (2009), and stack
them into an array Φ ∈ RN ×k , where each column stores an eigenfunction.
Geometric features can be readily calculated given the surface mesh. We compute the per-vertex
mean curvature, Gaussian curvature, and the Heat Kernel Signatures as described in Sun et al.
(2009). Local chemical environment is captured using a simple multilayer perceptron (MLP). For
each vertex, we encode its neighboring atoms within a predefined radius (e.g., 6 Å) through MLP,
then sum over the neighbors to obtain its chemical embedding. We use another MLP to combine the
per-vertex initial features Finp ← MLP(concat(Fgeom , Fchem )), Finp ∈ RN ×n . These n features
reflect the local geometric and chemical environment of each surface vertex, which will be used as
input to the harmonic message passing module. See more implementation details in Appendix C.
The output of the surface preparation module includes (1) the molecular surface triangle mesh, (2)
the surface Laplace-Beltrami eigenfunctions Φ, and (3) the per-vertex features Finp .
Harmonic Message Passing Our proposed harmonic message passing mechanism is closely re-
lated to the heat diffusion process on an arbitrary surface. Joseph Fourier developed spectral analysis
methods to solve the heat equation ∂f /∂t + ∆f = 0, where f is some heat distributed on the sur-
face. This concise partial differential equation describes how a heat distribution f evolves over time,
whose solution can be expressed using the heat operator exp(−∆t), i.e., f (t) = exp(−∆t)f0 for
initial heat distribution f0 at t = 0. Intuitively, heat will flow from hot regions to cool regions on the
surface. As time approaches infinity, the heat distribution f will converge to a constant value (i.e.,
the global average temperature on the surface), assuming that total energy is conserved.
In fact, heat diffusion can be thought of as a message passing process, where surface regions with
different temperatures communicate with each other and propagate the initial heat distribution de-
terministically. The heat exchange rate is dependent on the difference in temperature (determined
by the LB operator), while the message passing distance is determined by the heat diffusion time t.


                                                      5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023



Following this idea, we generalize the heat diffusion process by proposing a function propagation
operator P with neural network-learned frequency filter Fθ (λ):
                                             X
                                      Pf =        Fθ (λi )⟨f, ϕi ⟩M ϕi ,                               (3)
                                              i

                                  (λ − µ)2

                   Fθ (λ) = exp −            · exp(−λt)             where θ = (µ, σ, t) .              (4)
                                     σ2
As shown in Eq. 3, the input function f is first expanded as the linear combination of the LB eigen-
functions with coefficients ⟨f, ϕi ⟩M . We then learn a spectral-space frequency filter Fθ (λ), which
is a function of the corresponding eigenvalue λ. Here we abuse the usage of frequency, which actu-
ally refers to the LB eigenvalues. The filter Fθ (λ) consists of two components (Eq. 4): a Gaussian
frequency filter (with parameters µ and σ), and the heat operator part e−λt (with parameter t). The
matrix representation of the function propagation operator P is plotted in Fig. 3.
For each input function f within Finp , the neural net-
work learns a unique set of parameters (µ, σ, t) through                                    All-frequency
backpropagation. In Fig. 4, we showcase a few exam-
ples of surface functions obtained by applying different
frequency filters to an initial delta function.
The Gaussian frequency filter allows the network to prop-
agate the input function along some selected eigenfunc-                                     High-frequency

tions with eigenvalues close to µ, while the number of
selected eigenfunctions is determined by the filter width
σ. Owing to the multi-resolution nature of the LB eigen-
functions with different spatial frequencies, this filter will
                                                                                            Low-frequency
help capture surface functions at different resolutions.
The heat operator part governs the communication dis-
tance. With longer propagation time, function f will be
more averaged out towards the global mean, leading to a
                                                            Figure 4: Examples of versatile mes-
smoothed function. In addition, the heat operator is by
                                                            sage passing outcomes using different
definition a low-pass filter, where components with larger
                                                            frequency filter settings.
eigenvalues decay faster. This makes eigenfunctions with
large eigenvalues contribute less significantly during mes-
sage passing. Therefore, the combination of the Gaussian frequency filter and heat operator could
help the network focus on some higher frequency components (Aubry et al., 2011).
As demonstrated, H MR is able to represent a variety of surface functions through harmonic message
passing. The output of this module has the same size as the input, Fmp ∈ RN ×n , where each
channel respectively contains the propagated version of its input function. These features represent
the neighboring geometric and chemical environment across multiple spatial scales, and can be used
for surface property-related tasks, e.g., protein binding site prediction (see Sec. 4.2). In addition,
molecule-level representations could be obtained through global pooling (see Sec. 5.1).

4.2   L EARNING S URFACE C ORRESPONDENCE FOR R IGID P ROTEIN D OCKING

In this section, we demonstrate how to learn surface correspondence for molecular matching. Specif-
ically, we introduce a surface-based rigid protein docking workflow (Fig. 5) powered by H MR. Rigid
protein docking is a significant problem in structural biology, whose goal is to predict the pose of the
protein complex based on the structure of the ligand and receptor proteins. It has been shown that
protein-protein interfaces exhibit similar geometric and chemical patterns (Gainza et al., 2020). In
other words, two proteins may interact if part of their surfaces display similar shapes and chemical
functions (i.e., functional correspondence). This is similar to solving a puzzle problem, where both
shape and pattern of the missing piece have to match in order to complete the puzzle.
Following this idea, we propose to realize rigid protein docking in two consecutive steps: (1) given
two protein surfaces, predict the region where binding might occur (i.e., binding site prediction, lo-
cating the missing piece); (2) establish functional correspondence between the ligand/receptor bind-
ing surfaces, and convert it to real-space vertex-to-vertex correspondence (shape/pattern matching).
Rigid docking could then be achieved by aligning the corresponding binding site surface vertices.


                                                      6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023



                       Binding Site Prediction Module                       Rigid Docking Module
                                                                    receptor interface

                 Surface       HMR         Cross     Binding Site
               Preparation     Layer     Attention    Classifier

receptor                                                                                                               Kabsch
                                                                                                                       rotation +
                                                                                                                       translation


                 Surface       HMR         Cross     Binding Site                        Functional      Interface
ligand
               Preparation     Layer     Attention    Classifier                       Correspondence Correspondence          Predicted Protein
                                                                    ligand interface                                          Complex Structure



Figure 5: The rigid protein docking pipeline. Given the surface of the ligand and receptor proteins,
we apply multiple H MR and cross attention layers to allow communication within and between
the surfaces. The learned surface representations are then used to predict the binding interfaces and
establish functional correspondence using functional maps. Rigid docking is achieved by converting
the functional correspondence to rigid transformations which aligns the predicted interfaces.

Binding Site Prediction Given the ligand and receptor protein surface meshes, we first predict
the regions where they interact, which is a per-vertex binary classification problem. We iteratively
apply H MR and cross-attention layers (Fig. 5) to encode the surfaces with intra- and inter-surface
communications. Next, we use the learned features on each vertex to classify whether it belongs to
the binding interface. Detailed descriptions of this module are available in Appendix D.
The output of the binding site prediction module includes: a) the Receptor (Ligand) surface mesh of
the binding interface, which is a submanifold of the entire protein surface, represented as MR (ML )
with NR (NL ) vertices, and b) neural network-learned features or so-called surface functions FMR
and FML distributed on the receptor and ligand binding interfaces, respectively.
Rigid Docking with Functional Maps We know that protein interfaces MR and ML exhibit
similar geometry and also adopt a set of n corresponding functions FMR ∈ RNR ×n and FML ∈
RNL ×n (Fig. 5). Intuitively, if we could somehow align these set of corresponding functions, then
we have found a way to align the protein binding interfaces. To that end, we employ functional maps
to “align” FMR and FML in spectral domain.
Specifically, given the truncated LB eigenfunctions ΦMR ∈ RNR ×k and ΦML ∈ RNL ×k of the re-
ceptor and ligand interface manifolds, we respectively compute the spectral representation of learned
functions as A = (ΦMR )+ FMR , and B = (ΦML )+ FML , where + denotes the Moore-Penrose
pseudo-inverse, and A, B ∈ Rk×n . Functional correspondence (C) can be obtained by minimizing:
                                              C = arg min ∥CA − B∥F ,
                                                     C∈Rk×k

where ∥ · ∥F denotes the Frobenius norm. Once the functional mapping (i.e., the C matrix) is
recovered through numerical optimization, vertex-to-vertex correspondence between the receptor
and ligand surfaces can be established by mapping indicator functions of vertices on MR to those
on ML . In practice, we adopted a slightly more complicated functional maps approach, which is
illustrated in Appendix E. Finally, we perform rigid docking by aligning the proteins according to
the vertex-to-vertex surface correspondence using the Kabsch algorithm (Kabsch, 1976).

5        E XPERIMENTS
                                                                                 Table 1: QM9 Mean Absolute Error
5.1        QM9 M OLECULAR P ROPERTY R EGRESSION
                                                                           Task                  α   ∆ε εHOMO                   µ      Cv
We employ H MR to perform property regression tasks
                                                                           Unit                bohr3 meV meV                    D cal/(mol K)
on the QM9 dataset (Ramakrishnan et al., 2014).
We use the same data split and atomic features as                          SchNet               .235     63        41         .033        .033
Satorras et al. (2021). We compare our results with                        NMP                  .092     69        43         .030        .040
both invariant and equivarient networks as shown                           Cormorant            .085     61        34         .038        .026
in Table 1, including SchNet (Schütt et al., 2018),                       SE(3)-Tr.            .142     53        35         .051        .054
                                                                           SEGNN                .060     42        24         .023        .031
NMP (Gilmer et al., 2017), Cormorant (Anderson
et al., 2019), SE(3)-Transformer (Fuchs et al., 2020),                     H MR                 .102     59        37         .037        .040


                                                               7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023



and SEGNN (Brandstetter et al., 2021). See Appendix F for the complete table and experimental
setup. Interestingly, despite H MR completely discards the bonding information and only performs
massage passing over the molecular surface, it still shows comparable performance in predicting
these molecular properties.

5.2    L IGAND - BINDING P OCKET C LASSIFICATION
                                                                                                        HMR             MaSIF­ligand
Next, we showcase the representation power of H MR in                               1.0
predicting the ligand-binding preference of protein pock-                                 0.81


                                                                Balanced Accuracy
                                                                                    0.8          0.74
ets. The preference of a protein binding to a specific small                                                                 0.71
                                                                                                          0.66                      0.65
molecule (ligand) is associated with the geometric and                              0.6                          0.55
chemical environment at the binding region (i.e., bind-
ing pocket). As defined in Gainza et al. (2020), we clas-                           0.4
sify a protein pocket as one of seven ligand-binding types
(ADP, COA, FAD, HEM, NAD, NAP, and SAM) using its                                   0.2
surface information. The dataset contains 1,634 training,                           0.0
202 validation, and 418 test cases. We compare the per-                                     G+C               Geom            Chem
formance of H MR to MaSIF-ligand (Gainza et al., 2020),
which is a geodesic convolutional neural network-based          Figure 6: Balanced accuracy of ligand-
model. A set of features similar to MaSIF-ligand are used       binding protein pocket classification.
in our model: hydrophobicity score and partial charge as        Models with different input features are
chemical features; mean/Gaussian curvature and the Heat         compared: “G+C” includes both ge-
Kernel Signatures as geometric features.                        ometric and chemical features, while
                                                                “Geom”/“Chem” only contains geomet-
As shown in Fig. 6, the balanced accuracy of our model          ric/chemical features.
is consistently better than that reported in Gainza et al.
(2020), suggesting that the proposed H MR framework can more effectively encode protein surface
information through harmonic message passing over the molecular surface Riemannian manifold.
In addition, we draw a similar conclusion that both geometric and chemical information of the
binding pockets are important in predicting the type of its binding molecules. See Appendix G for
implementation details and more result analysis.
5.3    R IGID P ROTEIN D OCKING

Finally, we evaluate H MR on a more challenging task: rigid protein docking.
Experimental setup H MR is trained on a modified version of Database of Interacting Protein
Structures (DIPS) (Townshend et al., 2019) and evaluated on the gold-standard Docking Bench-
mark 5.5 (DB5.5) (Guest et al., 2021). We compare our model with the state-of-the-art GNN-based
deep learning model E QUI D OCK (Ganea et al., 2021) and two traditional docking methods, AT-
TRACT (de Vries et al., 2015) and H DOCK (Yan et al., 2020). To evaluate docking performance,
we compute the Complex and Interface root-mean-square deviation (RMSD) following Ganea et al.
(2021), and calculate DockQ following Basu & Wallner (2016). We also report the success rate in-
dicating whether the result achieves “Acceptable” or higher according to Lensink & Wodak (2013).
Results Model performance are summarized in Table 2 and Fig. 7a. H MR (Top 1) outperforms
GNN-based E QUI D OCK model under all metrics. Notably, H MR achieves a much higher success
rate, indicating more test cases have results close to the ground truth complex structure. We note
that traditional methods still exceed in terms of docking performance but at greater computational

                     Table 2: Rigid Prediction Results on Docking Benchmark 5.5

                     Complex RMSD ↓ Interface RMSD ↓           DockQ ↑                           Success rate ↑          Inference
      Model          Median   Mean     Median     Mean     Median Mean (≥ Acceptable) time (sec)
      H MR (Top 1)   12.01    12.09     10.90     11.43      0.06                    0.22               0.28                5.8
      H MR (Top 3)    8.44     9.68      7.50      8.70      0.10                    0.26               0.33                6.6
      E QUI D OCK*   15.90    17.18     14.45     14.85      0.02                    0.04               0.00                3.9
      ATTRACT         8.99    11.11     10.31     11.67      0.07                    0.42               0.44               882.7
      H DOCK          0.39     5.97      0.32      5.68      0.97                    0.71               0.73               884.9
          *E QUI D OCK model is trained on DIPS, provided by the authors


                                                     8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023



a                                                                   1.0
                                                                                                                  b
                   50

                                                                    0.8
                                                                                                                                0.8                                                0.8


Complex RMSD (Å)
                   40
                                                                                                                                0.6                                                0.6


                                                                                                                                                                     Pearson's r
                                                                                                                  Pearson's r
                                                            DockQ
                                                                    0.6
                   30
                                                                                                                                0.4                                                0.4
                   20                                               0.4

                                                                                                                                0.2                                                0.2
                   10                                               0.2

                                                                                                                                0.0                                                0.0
                    0                                               0.0
                        Ours   EquiDock   ATTRACT   HDOCK                 Ours   EquiDock   ATTRACT   HDOCK                             0.4     0.6    0.8     1.0                       Acceptable     Medium        High
                                                                                                                                               DockQ                                                  CAPRI ranking
c
                                                                       functional
                                                                    correspondence                        180°

                                                                                                                                                             PDB ID: 1R8S
                                                                                                                                                             Complex RMSD: 0.55 Å                       DockQ: 0.95
                                                                                                                                                             Interface RMSD: 0.42 Å                     CAPRI ranking: High



                         Receptor                              Predicted Interfaces                                                   Ligand


Figure 7: Rigid docking performance analysis. a. Distribution of Complex RMSD and DockQ
scores for poses predicted using H MR (ours, Top 1), E QUI D OCK, H DOCK, and ATTRACT. b. Cor-
relations between learned functions on the predicted ligand-receptor interfaces. For each test case,
we calculate the correlation as the Pearson’s r between the learned function values on ligand inter-
face vertices and their nearest receptor vertices (corresponding vertices), averaged over 128 hidden
channels. c. A showcase of functional correspondence between interfaces for a well-docked case.

cost (Table H.1). Further experiments show that the harmonic message passing mechanism learns to
propagate information at different scales (Fig. H.1) and is critical to the effectiveness of the model
(Table H.2). Our feature ablation studies show that chemical information is particularly important in
the rigid protein docking task (Table H.3). Compared to E QUI D OCK, the novel framework of H MR
and optimized training dataset collaboratively contribute to the higher performance (Table H.4).
We further examine the learned features at the predicted binding interfaces. As shown in Fig. 7bc,
surface functions on the two binding sites are highly correlated, confirming the good alignment
achieved using functional maps. Cases with higher docking quality show stronger interface feature
correlations, suggesting our H MR is able to learn complex surface interaction patterns, which also
supports the claims in Gainza et al. (2020) about the significant role of protein surface.
H MR predicts multiple binding sites for some proteins (either due to certain protein symmetries or
model uncertainty). Therefore, we also assess the model performance by including candidate poses
from top 3 binding site pairs, ranked by the mean probability predicted by the binding site classifer.
The best scores from top 3 poses show that the performance of H MR is competitive to ATTRACT.
See Appendix H for more detailed analysis on the rigid protein docking experiment.

6                       C ONCLUSIONS AND O UTLOOK
We presented H MR, a powerful surface manifold-based molecular representation learning frame-
work. By integrating geometric and chemical properties as functions distributed on the molecular
surface manifold, and applying harmonic message passing in spectral domain, we achieve multi-
resolution molecular representations. H MR shows promising performance in molecular property
prediction, protein pocket classification, and molecular matching tasks. Our work highlights an im-
portant aspect of molecular “structure-activity” relationship, that is – “shape-activity” relationship.
We think this is particularly significant for large biomolecules, where the surface shape and chemical
patterns determine some fundamental biological activities, such as protein-protein interactions.
The H MR framework could serve as a complementary method to GNN/NMP-based models in solv-
ing challenges for complex biological systems, which exhibits its unique advantages and shortcom-
ings. One of the foreseeable challenges in further developing the H MR framework is the efficient
computation of the “Shape-DNA” (i.e., solving a second-order partial differential equation) in or-
der to incorporate protein dynamics. Since either a change of the protein backbone or some side
chains near the surface may alter the entire “Shape-DNA”, which needs to be recomputed upon pro-
tein conformational change. This is particularly important for large biomolecules where the surface
shape undergoes significant changes (e.g., the Complementarity-Determining Regions of an anti-
body upon binding with an antigen, or the allosteric site of some enzymes). To that end, we call for
more research attention to surface manifold-based molecular representation learning.


                                                                                                              9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023



ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
The authors thank Dr. Hang Li and Dr. Quanquan Gu for their insightful comments. Hao Zhou is
supported by Vanke Special Fund for Public Health and Health Discipline Development, Tsinghua
University (NO.20221080053), Guoqiang Research Institute General Project, Tsinghua University
(No. 2021GQG1012).

R EPRODUCIBILITY S TATEMENT
The code and data are available at https://github.com/GeomMolDesign/HMR. QM9 raw
dataset is provided at https://springernature.figshare.com/ndownloader/
files/3195389. The dataset for the ligand-binding pocket classification is provided at
https://zenodo.org/record/2625420 and the split used by MaSIF is at https:
//github.com/LPDI-EPFL/masif/tree/master/data/masif_ligand/lists.
DIPS dataset can be downloaded from the following website https://github.com/
BioinfoMachineLearning/DIPS-Plus. E QUI D OCK model and checkpoints can be
downloaded from       https://github.com/octavian-ganea/equidock_public.
ATTRACT can be downloaded from https://github.com/sjdv1982/attract.
H DOCK is implemented using its local version HDOCKlite, which can be downloaded
from http://huanglab.phys.hust.edu.cn/software/hdocklite/. DockQ can
be downloaded from https://github.com/bjornwallner/DockQ/.

R EFERENCES
Brandon Anderson, Truong Son Hy, and Risi Kondor. Cormorant: Covariant molecular neural
  networks. Advances in neural information processing systems, 32, 2019.
Souhaib Attaiki, Gautam Pai, and Maks Ovsjanikov. DPFM: Deep partial functional maps. In 2021
  International Conference on 3D Vision (3DV), pp. 175–185. IEEE, 2021.
Kenneth Atz, Francesca Grisoni, and Gisbert Schneider. Geometric deep learning on molecular
  representations. Nature Machine Intelligence, 3(12):1023–1032, 2021.
Mathieu Aubry, Ulrich Schlickewei, and Daniel Cremers. The wave kernel signature: A quantum
 mechanical approach to shape analysis. In 2011 IEEE international conference on computer
 vision workshops (ICCV workshops), pp. 1626–1633. IEEE, 2011.
Sankar Basu and Björn Wallner. DockQ: A Quality Measure for Protein-Protein Docking Models.
  PLOS ONE, 11(8):e0161879, 2016.
Federico Battiston, Giulia Cencetti, Iacopo Iacopini, Vito Latora, Maxime Lucas, Alice Patania,
  Jean-Gabriel Young, and Giovanni Petri. Networks beyond pairwise interactions: structure and
  dynamics. Physics Reports, 874:1–92, 2020.
Silvia Biasotti, Andrea Cerri, Alex Bronstein, and Michael Bronstein. Recent trends, applications,
   and perspectives in 3d shape similarity assessment. In Computer graphics forum, volume 35, pp.
   87–119. Wiley Online Library, 2016.
Marian Boguna, Ivan Bonamassa, Manlio De Domenico, Shlomo Havlin, Dmitri Krioukov, and
 M Serrano. Network geometry. Nature Reviews Physics, 3(2):114–135, 2021.
Johannes Brandstetter, Rob Hesselink, Elise van der Pol, Erik Bekkers, and Max Welling. Ge-
  ometric and physical quantities improve e (3) equivariant message passing. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2110.02905, 2021.
Michael M Bronstein and Iasonas Kokkinos. Scale-invariant heat kernel signatures for non-rigid
 shape recognition. In 2010 IEEE computer society conference on computer vision and pattern
 recognition, pp. 1704–1711. IEEE, 2010.
Michael M Bronstein, Joan Bruna, Yann LeCun, Arthur Szlam, and Pierre Vandergheynst. Geomet-
 ric deep learning: going beyond Euclidean data. IEEE Signal Processing Magazine, 34(4):18–42,
 2017.


                                               10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023



Michael M Bronstein, Joan Bruna, Taco Cohen, and Petar Veličković. Geometric deep learning:
 Grids, groups, graphs, geodesics, and gauges. arXiv preprint arXiv:2104.13478, 2021.
Taco S Cohen, Mario Geiger, Jonas Köhler, and Max Welling. Spherical CNNs. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:1801.10130, 2018.
Ronald R Coifman and Stéphane Lafon. Diffusion maps. Applied and computational harmonic
  analysis, 21(1):5–30, 2006.
Ronald R Coifman, Stephane Lafon, Ann B Lee, Mauro Maggioni, Boaz Nadler, Frederick Warner,
  and Steven W Zucker. Geometric diffusions as a tool for harmonic analysis and structure defini-
  tion of data: Diffusion maps. Proceedings of the national academy of sciences, 102(21):7426–
  7431, 2005.
Sjoerd J. de Vries, Christina E. M. Schindler, Isaure Chauvot de Beauchêne, and Martin Zacharias.
  A Web Interface for Easy Flexible Protein-Protein Docking with ATTRACT. Biophysical Journal,
  108(3):462–465, February 2015.
Todd J Dolinsky, Jens E Nielsen, J Andrew McCammon, and Nathan A Baker. Pdb2pqr: an au-
  tomated pipeline for the setup of poisson–boltzmann electrostatics calculations. Nucleic acids
  research, 32(suppl 2):W665–W667, 2004.
Nicolas Donati, Abhishek Sharma, and Maks Ovsjanikov. Deep geometric functional maps: Ro-
  bust feature learning for shape correspondence. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on
  Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 8592–8601, 2020.
Dina Duhovny, Ruth Nussinov, and Haim J Wolfson. Efficient unbound docking of rigid molecules.
  In International workshop on algorithms in bioinformatics, pp. 185–200. Springer, 2002.
Gregory Ewing and Joachim Hermisson. Msms: a coalescent simulation program including recom-
  bination, demographic structure and selection at a single locus. Bioinformatics, 26(16):2064–
  2065, 2010.
Fabian Fuchs, Daniel Worrall, Volker Fischer, and Max Welling. SE(3)-Transformers: 3D roto-
  translation equivariant attention networks. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems,
  33:1970–1981, 2020.
Pablo Gainza, Freyr Sverrisson, Frederico Monti, Emanuele Rodola, D Boscaini, MM Bronstein,
  and BE Correia. Deciphering interaction fingerprints from protein molecular surfaces using geo-
  metric deep learning. Nature Methods, 17(2):184–192, 2020.
Octavian-Eugen Ganea, Xinyuan Huang, Charlotte Bunne, Yatao Bian, Regina Barzilay, Tommi
  Jaakkola, and Andreas Krause. Independent SE(3)-equivariant models for end-to-end rigid protein
  docking. arXiv preprint arXiv:2111.07786, 2021.
Justin Gilmer, Samuel S Schoenholz, Patrick F Riley, Oriol Vinyals, and George E Dahl. Neural
  message passing for quantum chemistry. In International conference on machine learning, pp.
  1263–1272. PMLR, 2017.
Vladimir Gligorijević, P Douglas Renfrew, Tomasz Kosciolek, Julia Koehler Leman, Daniel Beren-
  berg, Tommi Vatanen, Chris Chandler, Bryn C Taylor, Ian M Fisk, Hera Vlamakis, et al. Structure-
  based protein function prediction using graph convolutional networks. Nature communications,
  12(1):1–14, 2021.
Johnathan D. Guest, Thom Vreven, Jing Zhou, Iain Moal, Jeliazko R. Jeliazkov, Jeffrey J. Gray,
  Zhiping Weng, and Brian G. Pierce. An expanded benchmark for antibody-antigen docking and
  affinity prediction reveals insights into antibody recognition determinants. Structure, 29(6):606–
  621.e5, June 2021.
Clemens Isert, Kenneth Atz, and Gisbert Schneider. Structure-based drug design with geometric
  deep learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2210.11250, 2022.
Alec Jacobson and Daniele Panozzo. Libigl: Prototyping geometry processing research in c++. In
  SIGGRAPH Asia 2017 courses, pp. 1–172. 2017.


                                                11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023



John Jumper, Richard Evans, Alexander Pritzel, Tim Green, Michael Figurnov, Olaf Ronneberger,
  Kathryn Tunyasuvunakool, Russ Bates, Augustin Žı́dek, Anna Potapenko, et al. Highly accurate
  protein structure prediction with alphafold. Nature, 596(7873):583–589, 2021.

Wolfgang Kabsch. A solution for the best rotation to relate two sets of vectors. Acta Crystallo-
 graphica Section A: Crystal Physics, Diffraction, Theoretical and General Crystallography, 32
 (5):922–923, 1976.

Mark Kac. Can one hear the shape of a drum? The american mathematical monthly, 73(4P2):1–23,
 1966.

Thomas N Kipf and Max Welling. Semi-supervised classification with graph convolutional net-
  works. arXiv preprint arXiv:1609.02907, 2016.

Johannes Klicpera, Janek Groß, and Stephan Günnemann. Directional message passing for molec-
  ular graphs. arXiv preprint arXiv:2003.03123, 2020.

John M Lee. Smooth manifolds. In Introduction to smooth manifolds, pp. 1–31. Springer, 2013.

Marc F. Lensink and Shoshana J. Wodak. Docking, scoring, and affinity prediction in CAPRI.
 Proteins: Structure, Function, and Bioinformatics, 81(12):2082–2095, 2013.

Xianzhi Li, Ruihui Li, Guangyong Chen, Chi-Wing Fu, Daniel Cohen-Or, and Pheng-Ann Heng. A
  rotation-invariant framework for deep point cloud analysis. IEEE Transactions on Visualization
  and Computer Graphics, 2021.

Ye Li, Xianren Zhang, and Dapeng Cao. The role of shape complementarity in the protein-protein
  interactions. Scientific reports, 3(1):1–7, 2013.

Or Litany, Tal Remez, Emanuele Rodola, Alex Bronstein, and Michael Bronstein. Deep functional
  maps: Structured prediction for dense shape correspondence. In Proceedings of the IEEE inter-
  national conference on computer vision, pp. 5659–5667, 2017a.

Or Litany, Emanuele Rodolà, Alexander M Bronstein, and Michael M Bronstein. Fully spectral
  partial shape matching. In Computer Graphics Forum, volume 36, pp. 247–258. Wiley Online
  Library, 2017b.

Roee Litman and Alexander M Bronstein. Learning spectral descriptors for deformable shape cor-
  respondence. IEEE transactions on pattern analysis and machine intelligence, 36(1):171–180,
  2013.

Qinqing Liu, Peng-Shuai Wang, Chunjiang Zhu, Blake Blumenfeld Gaines, Tan Zhu, Jinbo Bi, and
  Minghu Song. OctSurf: Efficient hierarchical voxel-based molecular surface representation for
  protein-ligand affinity prediction. Journal of Molecular Graphics and Modelling, 105:107865,
  2021.

Federico Monti, Davide Boscaini, Jonathan Masci, Emanuele Rodola, Jan Svoboda, and Michael M
  Bronstein. Geometric deep learning on graphs and manifolds using mixture model CNNs. In
  Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition, pp. 5115–5124,
  2017.

Stelios K Mylonas, Apostolos Axenopoulos, and Petros Daras. DeepSurf: a surface-based deep
  learning approach for the prediction of ligand binding sites on proteins. Bioinformatics, 37(12):
  1681–1690, 2021.

Raúl Méndez, Raphaël Leplae, Leonardo De Maria, and Shoshana J. Wodak. Assessment of blind
  predictions of protein–protein interactions: Current status of docking methods. Proteins: Struc-
  ture, Function, and Bioinformatics, 52(1):51–67, 2003.

Raúl Méndez, Raphaël Leplae, Marc F. Lensink, and Shoshana J. Wodak. Assessment of CAPRI
  predictions in rounds 3–5 shows progress in docking procedures. Proteins: Structure, Function,
  and Bioinformatics, 60(2):150–169, 2005.


                                                12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023



Maks Ovsjanikov, Mirela Ben-Chen, Justin Solomon, Adrian Butscher, and Leonidas Guibas. Func-
 tional maps: a flexible representation of maps between shapes. ACM Transactions on Graphics
 (ToG), 31(4):1–11, 2012.
Peter Petersen. Riemannian geometry, volume 171. Springer, 2006.
Raghunathan Ramakrishnan, Pavlo O Dral, Matthias Rupp, and O Anatole Von Lilienfeld. Quantum
  chemistry structures and properties of 134 kilo molecules. Scientific data, 1(1):1–7, 2014.
Jing Ren, Adrien Poulenard, Peter Wonka, and Maks Ovsjanikov. Continuous and orientation-
   preserving correspondences via functional maps. ACM Transactions on Graphics (ToG), 37(6):
   1–16, 2018.
Martin Reuter, Franz-Erich Wolter, and Niklas Peinecke. Laplace–beltrami spectra as ‘shape-dna’of
 surfaces and solids. Computer-Aided Design, 38(4):342–366, 2006.
Martin Reuter, Silvia Biasotti, Daniela Giorgi, Giuseppe Patanè, and Michela Spagnuolo. Discrete
 laplace–beltrami operators for shape analysis and segmentation. Computers & Graphics, 33(3):
 381–390, 2009.
Frederic M Richards. Areas, volumes, packing, and protein structure. Annual review of biophysics
  and bioengineering, 6(1):151–176, 1977.
Steven Rosenberg. The Laplacian on a Riemannian manifold: an introduction to analysis on mani-
  folds. Number 31. Cambridge University Press, 1997.
Vıctor Garcia Satorras, Emiel Hoogeboom, and Max Welling. E(n) equivariant graph neural net-
  works. In International conference on machine learning, pp. 9323–9332. PMLR, 2021.
Kristof T Schütt, Huziel E Sauceda, P-J Kindermans, Alexandre Tkatchenko, and K-R Müller.
  Schnet–a deep learning architecture for molecules and materials. The Journal of Chemical
  Physics, 148(24):241722, 2018.
Kim A Sharp. Electrostatic interactions in macromolecules. Current Opinion in Structural Biology,
  4(2):234–239, 1994.
Yangmei Shen, Wenrui Dai, Chenglin Li, Junni Zou, and Hongkai Xiong. Multi-scale graph convo-
  lutional network with spectral graph wavelet frame. IEEE Transactions on Signal and Information
  Processing over Networks, 7:595–610, 2021.
Alexandra Shulman-Peleg, Ruth Nussinov, and Haim J Wolfson. Recognition of functional sites in
  protein structures. Journal of molecular biology, 339(3):607–633, 2004.
Vignesh Ram Somnath, Charlotte Bunne, and Andreas Krause. Multi-scale representation learning
  on proteins. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 34:25244–25255, 2021.
Jonathan M Stokes, Kevin Yang, Kyle Swanson, Wengong Jin, Andres Cubillos-Ruiz, Nina M
  Donghia, Craig R MacNair, Shawn French, Lindsey A Carfrae, Zohar Bloom-Ackermann, et al.
  A deep learning approach to antibiotic discovery. Cell, 180(4):688–702, 2020.
Jian Sun, Maks Ovsjanikov, and Leonidas Guibas. A concise and provably informative multi-scale
   signature based on heat diffusion. In Computer graphics forum, volume 28, pp. 1383–1392. Wiley
   Online Library, 2009.
Freyr Sverrisson, Jean Feydy, Bruno E Correia, and Michael M Bronstein. Fast end-to-end learning
  on protein surfaces. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
  Recognition, pp. 15272–15281, 2021.
Freyr Sverrisson, Jean Feydy, Joshua Southern, Michael M Bronstein, and Bruno Correia. Physics-
  informed deep neural network for rigid-body protein docking. In ICLR2022 Machine Learning
  for Drug Discovery, 2022.
Nathaniel Thomas, Tess Smidt, Steven Kearnes, Lusann Yang, Li Li, Kai Kohlhoff, and Patrick
  Riley. Tensor field networks: Rotation-and translation-equivariant neural networks for 3d point
  clouds. arXiv preprint arXiv:1802.08219, 2018.


                                               13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023



Raphael J. L. Townshend, Rishi Bedi, Patricia A. Suriana, and Ron O. Dror. End-to-End Learn-
  ing on 3D Protein Structure for Interface Prediction. Technical report, arXiv, December 2019.
  arXiv:1807.01297 [cs, q-bio, stat] type: article.
Raphael JL Townshend, Stephan Eismann, Andrew M Watkins, Ramya Rangan, Maria Karelina,
  Rhiju Das, and Ron O Dror. Geometric deep learning of rna structure. Science, 373(6558):
  1047–1051, 2021.
Oliver Unke, Mihail Bogojeski, Michael Gastegger, Mario Geiger, Tess Smidt, and Klaus-Robert
  Müller. SE(3)-equivariant prediction of molecular wavefunctions and electronic densities. Ad-
  vances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 34:14434–14447, 2021.
Petar Veličković, Guillem Cucurull, Arantxa Casanova, Adriana Romero, Pietro Liò, and Yoshua
  Bengio. Graph Attention Networks, February 2018. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/1710.
  10903. arXiv:1710.10903 [cs, stat].
J Michael Word, Simon C Lovell, Jane S Richardson, and David C Richardson. Asparagine and
  glutamine: using hydrogen atom contacts in the choice of side-chain amide orientation. Journal
  of molecular biology, 285(4):1735–1747, 1999.
Saining Xie, Jiatao Gu, Demi Guo, Charles R Qi, Leonidas Guibas, and Or Litany. Pointcontrast:
  Unsupervised pre-training for 3d point cloud understanding. In European conference on computer
  vision, pp. 574–591. Springer, 2020.
Yumeng Yan, Huanyu Tao, Jiahua He, and Sheng-You Huang. The HDOCK server for inte-
  grated protein–protein docking. Nature Protocols, 15(5):1829–1852, May 2020. doi: 10.1038/
  s41596-020-0312-x. Number: 5 Publisher: Nature Publishing Group.
Q Zhou. Pymesh—geometry processing library for python. Software available for download at
  https://github.com/PyMesh/PyMesh, 2019.


                                               14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023



                                                         Appendix
A              T HE M OLECULAR S HAPE -DNA
Riemannian Manifold A manifold is a space that is locally flat but not necessarily globally flat.
Formally speaking, a d-dimensional manifold M is a topological space where each point p ∈ M
has a neighborhood that is homeomorphic to a d-dimensional Euclidean space (Lee, 2013), which is
equivalent to the tangent space at p and is denoted by Tp M.
We can further assign a positive definite inner product g : Tp M × Tp M → R on every tangent
space, and this inner product is called a Riemannian metric. A manifold equipped with a Riemannian
metric is called a Riemannian manifold. Intuitively, the Riemannian metric provides a measurement
of the velocity when a particle moves on the manifold, and many other quantities     p can therefore be
defined. For example, for any tangent vector Xp ∈ Tp M, the quantity |Xp | := g(Xp , Xp ) can be
interpreted as the traveling speed of a particle when passing through p. Hence, the traveling distance
along a curve (i.e., the length of a curve) can be defined as the integral of |Xp | along the curve. On a
Riemannian manifold, quantities that can be expressed in terms of the Riemannian metric are called
intrinsic (e.g., geodesic distance).
When a manifold is realized in the Euclidean space, a natural Riemannian metric can be induced
from the ambient Euclidean space. We always refer to this induced metric when talking about a
Riemannian manifold in the following appendices.
The Lalpace-Beltrami Operator We denote a real-valued scalar function on the manifold M
R f . Given two functions f1 , f2 on the manifold, we can define the inner product ⟨f1 , f2 ⟩M =
by
 M 1
    f (x)f2 (x)dµ(x), where the area element dµ is induced by the Riemannian metric. We denote
by L2 (M) = {f : M → R | ⟨f, f ⟩M < ∞} the space of square-integrable functions on M. On a
Riemannian manifold M, we can generalize the usual Euclidean gradient ∇f and the positive semi-
definite Laplace operator ∆f = −div(∇f ) to the intrinsic gradient ∇M f and the Laplace-Beltrami
(LB) operator ∆M f , respectively (Petersen, 2006).
The LB operator admits a discrete set of eigenfunctions that solves
                                             ∆M ϕi (x) = λi ϕi (x)   x∈M                           (A.1)
with homogeneous Neumann boundary conditions if M has a boundary. Here, 0 = λ1 ≤ λ2 ≤ . . .
are eigenvalues and ϕ1 , ϕ2 , . . . are the corresponding eigenfunctions. The LB eigenfunctions form
an orthonormal basis of L2 (M), i.e., ⟨ϕi , ϕj ⟩M = δij .
Molecular Shape DNA Intuitively, the LB eigenfunctions are the smoothest functions on the
surface, where smoothness is measured by the Dirichlet energy (⟨∆f, f ⟩M ). Eigenfunctions with
smaller eigenvalues are more smooth (i.e., with lower spatial frequency). However, these eigenfunc-
tions are not directly comparable across different manifolds. Fig. A.1a shows the first 300 eigen-

a                                                                    b     ligand            receptor
               0.6

               0.5

               0.4
 Eigenvalues


               0.3

               0.2

               0.1

               0.0
                     0   50  100     150   200     250   300
                          Number of eigenfunctions

Figure A.1: a Weyl’s asymptotic law, where the protein with larger surface area exhibits a slower
eigenvalue growth rate. b The 10th and 200th eigenfunction of the ligand and receptor surface
manifold, respectively. Eigenfunctions with similar eigenvalues exhibit similar spatial frequencies
regardless of the surface area, since they have similar smoothness in the sense of Dirichlet energy.


                                                               15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023



values of a pair of ligand and receptor protein surfaces (PDB ID: 3V6Z). The protein with smaller
surface area exhibits a larger slope, known as Weyl’s asymptotic law. Fig. A.1b presents a few eigen-
functions with correspondending eigenvalues for the ligand and receptor molecules. Since different
eigenfunctions have their unique spatial resolutions, in our experiments we compute all eigenfunc-
tions with eigenvalues smaller than a predefined value (determined empirically) to guarantee that
molecules of different sizes have the same highest spatial resolution in their eigenfunctions.

B    I MPLEMENTING M ANIFOLD H ARMONIC A NALYSIS
Laplace-Beltrami Eigendecomposition Given a Riemannian manifold M and its Laplace-
Beltrami operator ∆M , the Laplacian eigenvalue problem we consider states as
                                               ∆M f = λf,
with homogeneous Neumann boundary condition.
To realize discrete calculations, we approximate the manifold with a triangle mesh consisting of
N vertices {xi }Ni=1 ⊂ M, and the corresponding faces. We then solve the discretized eigenvalue
problem using a linear finite element method (FEM) (Reuter et al., 2009). The discretized equation
we obtain is the following generalized eigenvalue problem
                                                                    N
                                    Acot f = λBf,     f := (f (xi ))i=1 ,                               (B.1)
where Acot is the stiffness matrix with cotagent weights,
                                   1
                                   
                                   
                                    2 (cot αij + cot βij ) if (i, j) is an edge
                                   
                                   
                                    P
                     Acot (i, j) := − k∈N (i) Acot (i, k) if i = j
                                   
                                   
                                   
                                   
                                   
                                     0                      otherwise ,
                                   

and B is an N × N sparse mass matrix which is associated with the weight of each surface vertex,
                                 1
                                  12 (|t1 | + |t2 |) if (i, j) is an edge
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                  P
                       B(i, j) := 16 tk ∈T (i) |tk | if i = j
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                 
                                   0                  otherwise .
                                 

Here αij and βij are the two angles opposite to the edge (i, j), and N (i) denotes the vertices that
are adjacent to vertex i. The set T (i) contains all the triangles that have i as its vertex, and |ti | is the
area of the triangle ti . We also use t1 and t2 to denote the triangles that share the edge (i, j).
Such generalized symmetric eigenvalue problem can be solved with commonly used numerical sim-
ulaiton packages (e.g., scipy). We can find non-negative eigenvalues Λ and eigenvectors Z such
that
                                 Z⊤ Acot Z = Λ, Z⊤ BZ = I.
I is the identity matrix, Λ := diag(λ0 , λ1 , . . . ) is the diagonal matrix of the eigenvalues, and the
matrix Z ∈ RN ×N has the eigenvectors of Eq. B.1 as its column vectors. Note that, unlike other
conventional orthonormal basis (i.e., Q⊤ Q = I), here Z forms an orthonormal basis w.r.t. the mass
matrix B, that is, Z⊤ BZ = I.
Practically, we do not need to store the entire N × N eigenvector matrix Z. Just like in Fourier series
expansion, a truncated Fourier basis with finite terms can be used to approximate the original signal.
The number of basis that we keep determines the resolution of the synthesized signal, where typi-
cally high-frequency components are truncated. In our case, we empirically determine the number
of eigenvectors to keep for different molecular systems, which is also task-dependent.


                                                     16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023



Resolution Tuning with Harmonic Analysis We now explain how to realize surface resolution
tuning under our representation framework (e.g., how to make Fig. 1).
Given a molecular surface triangle mesh, we first compute its Laplace-Beltrami eigendecomposition
as described above. Under the discrete setting, we refer to the eigenfunctions as eigenvectors. We
obtain a set of truncated Laplace-Beltrami eigenvectors Z ∈ RN ×k (k is the number of eigenvectors
we keep), the associated k eigenvalues {λi }k−1
                                            i=0 , and the sparse mass matrix B ∈ R
                                                                                   N ×N
                                                                                        .
Let f ∈ RN be the initial function of interest (stored as an N -dimensional array), which is distributed
on the underlying molecular surface (e.g., electrostatic potential, a scalar value at each surface ver-
tex). The spectral representation of function f can be calculated as
                                      f spec = Z⊤ Bf,     f spec ∈ Rk ,
which is similar to a discrete Fourier transform. To project the function back to real space (inverse
Fourier transform), we simply do
                                        f ′ = Zf spec ,   f ′ ∈ RN .

Resolution tuning is achieved by controlling the number of basis we use (i.e., tuning k) in spectral
space. As shown in Fig. 1, the electrostatic potential function resolution can be tuned by manipulat-
ing the number of Laplace-Beltrami eigenfunctions.
However, what about the resolution of the shape itself? In Fig. 1, we see that the surface smoothness
can also be tuned. It is important to realize that manifold is an abstract concept, which does not
necessarily have a particular realization in the Enclidean space. The surfaces that we visualize
in Fig. 1 are realizations of the underlying manifold in the Euclidean space, where each surface
vertex is associated with some Cartesian coordinates. These coordinates are extrinsic properties of
the manifold, thus can be treated in the same way as other surface functions (e.g., the electrostatic
potential). Therefore, in order to reconstruct the molecular surface with a lower spatial resolution,
we can simply calculate the smoothed Cartesian coordinates:
                                         x′ = Zxspec = ZZ⊤ Bx,
and do the same for y and z to obtain the smoothed surface coordinates (x′ , y′ , z′ ). In short, we realize
resolution tuning with a series of (sparse) matrix multiplications bringing the surface functions back-
and-forth between the real space and the generalized Fourier space.

C    S URFACE P REPARATION
The raw input to the H MR framework is simply the 3D atomic structures (e.g., xyz files for small
molecules, or PDB files for proteins). In other words, we only need to know where these atoms
are and their atomic species. For proteins with only heavy atoms (since hydrogen atoms are almost
invisible under X-ray diffraction detectors), we use reduce (Word et al., 1999) (or alternatively
PDB2PQR (Dolinsky et al., 2004)) software to add hydrogen atoms.
Next, we employ MSMS (Ewing & Hermisson, 2010) to calculate the solvent-excluded surface of the
molecule (with probe radius 1.5 Å, sampling density 3.0 for small molecules and 1.0 for proteins) as
a triangle mesh. We use PyMesh (Zhou, 2019) to further refine the surface mesh in order to reduce
the number of vertices and fix poorly meshed areas. Degenerate vertices or disconnected surfaces
would lead to numerical issues for solving the generalized eigenvalue problem in the next step,
thus should be fixed beforehand. We then compute the truncated Laplace-Beltrami eigenvectors,
eigenvalues, and the mass matrix as described in Appendix B.
Initial geometric features can be directly calculated given the surface triangle mesh, where we use
the libigl (Jacobson & Panozzo, 2017) package to calculate the mean and Gaussian curvatures,
and compute the Heat Kernel Signatures as described in Sun et al. (2009). These geometric fea-
tures capture shape-related properties of the molecular surface, and are stored as a scalar-type array
Fgeom ∈ RN ×p , where p is the number of initial geometric features (a user defined variable).
Chemical features are projected from atoms to their neighboring surface vertices. We first obtain an
initial descriptor vector u for each atom (e.g., atomic number, charge, etc.). Then, for each surface


                                                     17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023



vertex xi , we compute its ν nearest neighbor atoms centered at {ai1 , . . . , aiν } with features {ui1 , . . . ,
uiν }. We apply a multilayer perceptron (MLP) to the vector [ uiν , 1/∥xi − aiν ∥] for each neighboring
atom, then compute the average over the neighbors to obtain the chemical feature vector Fchem ∈
RN ×q , where q is a user defined variable indicating the dimension of initial chemical features. In
short, the initial chemical features of each surface vertex are determined by its neighboring atomic
species and their distance, which is learned by a MLP.
We use another MLP to combine the per-vertex initial features

                        Finp ← MLP(concat(Fgeom , Fchem )),              Finp ∈ RN ×n .
These n features reflect the local geometric and chemical environment of each surface vertex, which
will be used as the input to the harmonic message passing module.
The output of the surface preparation module includes (1) the truncated Laplace-Beltrami eigenvec-
tors Z ∈ RN ×k , the corresponding eigenvalues {λi }k−1
                                                    i=0 , and the sparse mass matrix B ∈ R
                                                                                             N ×N
                                                                                                  ,
                                inp   N ×n
(2) per-vertex scalar features F ∈ R       .


D     T HE B INDING S ITE P REDICTION M ODULE

First, we define the binding site as the protein surface region which is within 3 Å to its counterpart
surface, and obtain the set of all corresponding surface points P as the nearest neighbor vertices
between the ground truth protein interfaces.
The binding site prediction module stacks two feature propagation blocks, each consists of three
H MR layers (introduced in Sec. 4.1) and a cross attention layer. Given the propagated receptor
features F and ligand features G, the cross attention layer enables communication between proteins:

                                              (FWQ )(GWK )⊤

                              ′
                            F = softmax             √             (GWV ),
                                                       dk
                                              (GWQ )(FWK )⊤

                            G′ = softmax            √             (FWV ),
                                                       dk

where F ∈ RNR ×dk , G ∈ RNL ×dk denotes the propagated features on the receptor/ligand protein
surface, dk denotes the dimension of features, and WQ , WK and WV are the parameter matrices for
the query, key, and value in attention computation, respectively.
The loss function consists of two components. The first is a binary cross entropy loss, which en-
courages the model to correctly predict the binding site:
                             Lbce (i) = −[yi log xi + (1 − yi ) log(1 − xi )],
where yi and xi are the label and predicted probability of whether vertex i belongs to the binding
site.
The second term is a PointInfoNCE loss (Xie et al., 2020), a contrastive matching loss that mini-
mizes the distance between the features of corresponding surface points and maximizes the distance
between non-corresponding point features:
                                            X                  exp(fi · gj / τ )
                           Lmatch = −               log P                             ,
                                          (i,j)∈P           (·,k)∈P exp(fi · gk / τ )


where P is the set of all corresponding surface points and τ is the temperature factor (a hyperparam-
eter). Here fi and gj are the neural network-learned feature vectors at point i and j, which belong
the the receptor and ligand surface, respectively.
The total loss is the weighted sum of the two loss terms:
                                           L = Lbce + λLmatch ,
where empirically we set λ to 0.1 in our docking experiments.


                                                       18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023



E    D ETAILS ON F UNCTIONAL M APS

In this section, we present the details of functional maps used in Sec. 4.2.
Let us be given two manifolds M and N . The aim of functional maps is to find a bijective mapping
T : M → N to align these two manifolds. Unlike traditional methods that try to recover the point-
to-point correspondence directly, functional maps lift the mapping T to a correspondence between
the functional spaces on the two manifolds. Formally, let L2 (·) be the functional space of square
integrable functions on a manifold, we infer the functional correspondence TF : L2 (M) → L2 (N )
induced by the mapping T , and is defined by TF f = f ◦ T −1 for any f ∈ L2 (M).
To compute the functional correspondence, we need to utilize the Laplace-Beltrami basis on the
manifolds. Actually, such functional correspondence has a concise expression in spectral domain:
                                                       k1                N k2
given the respective truncated LB eigenfunctions {ϕM
                                                   j }j≥0 on M and {ϕi }i≥0 on N , the func-
tional correspondence TF can be (approximately) represented as a change of basis matrix:

                              C = (cij )k2 ×k1 = (⟨ϕN       M
                                                    i , TF ϕj ⟩N )k2 ×k1 .

Now given a set of q corresponding functions {f1 , . . . , fq } ⊂ L2 (M) and {g1 , . . . , gq } ⊂ L2 (N ),
we denote their spectral representations by coefficients A = (aij )k1 ×q , where aij = ⟨ϕM      i , fj ⟩M ,
and B = (bij )k2 ×q , where bij = ⟨ϕN
                                    i , gj ⟩N . The matrix C can be obtained by solving the following
quadratic minimization problem:
                                                                       q
                                                                       X
 C = argminC∈Rk2 ×k1 ∥C · A − B∥2F + α∥C · δM − δN · C∥2F + β                 ∥C · ΛiM − ΛiN · C∥2F , (E.1)
                                                                        i=1

where ∥ · ∥F denotes the Frobenius norm, and the first term on the right hand side is the change of
basis constraint. Two more regularization terms are introduced into the formula with tunable weights
α, β > 0. ∥C · δM − δN · C∥F enforces the isometry of the two manifolds where the matrices δM
and δN are the spectral representation of the LB operators. The matrices ΛiM and ΛiN are called the
orientation operator (Ren et al., 2018) and are defined by the functions fi and gi , respectively. The
commutator with the orientation operator incorporates extrinsic properties into the formulation and
enforces the orientation of functional maps (i.e., which side of the 2D surface is pointing “outward”).
Once the functional mapping (i.e., the C matrix) is recovered, point-to-point correspondence T
between manifold M and N can be obtained by mapping indicator functions of vertices on M to
the corresponding functions on N because TF δm = δT (m) for any vertex m ∈ M (Ovsjanikov
et al., 2012).


F    D ETAILS ON QM9 P ROPERTY R EGRESSION

Dataset For the QM9 molecular property regression task, we align our input data with
EGNN (Satorras et al., 2021) (with a total of 130,831 instances). 181 molecules failed during molec-
ular surface extraction (MSMS failed to generate reasonable surface mesh for some molecules). We
follow the same data split as EGNN, leading to 130,650 instances (99,862 for training, 17,719 for
validation, and 13,069 for test). Only the atomic number and atomic positions are used as the ini-
tial molecular information, no extra handcrafted features are involved. We compute the molecular
surface as described in Appendix C, with an average of 439 vertices and 47 eigenfunctions per
molecular surface.
Model Architecture and Performance Different from other graph-based models, we do not ex-
plicitly encode inter-atomic distance or chemical bonding information. Instead, we feed the molec-
ular surface manifold as the model input, which contains local chemical information (Appendix C).
Surface geometric features (i.e., curvature and the Heat Kernel Signatures) are not included, since
we find these features have no contribution to predicting molecular properties. We stack 6 layers of
H MR, followed by a global average pooling layer to aggregate information from all surface points
to make a final property prediction. Batch normalization is applied to all MLPs. The mean absolute
prediction error of all 12 properties are shown in Table F.1, results averaged over three independent
runs with different random seeds.


                                                    19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023



  Table F.1: Model performance on the QM9 dataset, reporting the Mean Absolute Error (MAE).

    Task         α       ∆ ε εHOMO εLUMO      µ          Cν     G     H     r2       U    U0   ZPVE
                     3                                                           2
    Units       bohr     meV   meV   meV      D     cal/(mol K) meV meV bohr         meV meV meV
    NMP         .092     69    43     38     .030        .040   19    17   .180      20   20   1.50
    SchNet      .235     63    41     34     .033        .033   14    14   .073      19   14   1.70
    Cormorant   .085     61    34     38     .038        .026   20    21   .961      21   22   2.02
    SE(3)-Tr.   .142     53    35     33     .051        .054    –     –     –       –    –     –
    EGNN        .071     48    29     25     .029        .031   12    12   .106      12   12   1.55
    SEGNN       .060     42    24     21     .023        .031   15    16   .660      13   15   1.62
    H MR        .102     59    37     31     .037        .040   40    41   .653      44   42   2.97



Resource Consumption Computing the molecular surface and its Laplace-Beltrami eigenfunc-
tions is computationally intensive. We performed data preprocessing in parallel on 64 CPUs, where
molecular surface computation took 198 seconds, surface mesh refinement took 59 minutes, and
solving eigenfunctions took 4.5 hours. With an average of 439 mesh vertices and 47 eigenfunc-
tions, the entire QM9 dataset consumes 12.1 GB disk space (approximately 100 kB per molecule).
The model for production contains 356,609 learnable parameters, most of which are linear trans-
formation coefficients in MLPs. However, manifold harmonic message passing involves matrix
multiplications bringing features back-and-forth between the real space and the generalized Fourier
space, which is performed in a serial manner (instead of batch processing). This is because the num-
ber of surface vertices and Laplace-Beltrami eigenfunctions are different across different molecules.
Therefore, we only perform batch operations on the MLPs, but not on message passing layers. We
trained our model on NVIDIA A100 GPUs with 80 GB memory with a batch size of 32, which on
average takes 240 seconds to train a single epoch (99,862 molecules), and 16 seconds for inference
on the test set (13,069 molecules). For each molecule we keep its N × n feature matrix F (N ver-
tices and n features), and the N × k eigenvectors (Z matrix) and its inverse matrix (Z⊤ B matrix, see
Appendix B), which does not consume much GPU memory.


G     D ETAILS ON L IGAND - BINDING P OCKET C LASSIFICATION

Dataset The dataset is obtained from Gainza et al. (2020) with 1,438 non-redundant protein struc-
tures that each corresponds to a list of bound ligands with their atom coordinates. We first generate
protein surface meshes as described in Appendix C. To extract ligand binding pockets, we identify
pocket vertices on the surface mesh that are within 4 Å to any atom of the ligand and extract the
largest connected component of pocket vertices as the binding pocket. Binding pockets that contain
< 100 vertices are removed and the LB eigenfunctions for the remaining pocket surfaces are calcu-
lated. 3 protein complexes failed in protein surfaces generation and 63 protein complexes failed in
binding pocket extraction due to disconnected surface or too few vertices after surface refinement.
In total, 2,254 binding pockets are extracted that bind to one of seven ligands: ADP (634), HEM
(396), FAD (338), COA (263), NAD (232), SAM (222), and NAP (169). On average, 1,199 ver-
tices and 190 eigenfunctions per pocket surface are obtained. The same training, validation, and
test split as Gainza et al. (2020) are used and we obtained 1,634 training pockets (in 986 protein
complexes), 202 validation pockets (in 112 protein complexes), and 418 test pockets (in 274 pro-
tein complexes). Similar to Gainza et al. (2020), we provide chemical information (hydrophobicity
score, partial charge) as well as local geometric information (mean/Gaussian curvature and the Heat
Kernel Signatures) as input features.
Model Architecture and Performance The H MR-based classification model contains 6 layers of
H MR propagation layers followed by a global average pooling to aggregate information from all
surface points of a pocket. A simple 2-layer MLP is used to classify pockets into seven ligand-
binding classes. H MR is trained to minimize the cross-entropy loss for 400 epochs (approx. 20,000
iterations with a batch size of 32) and the one with the best balanced accuracy score on the validation
set is selected. To compare with MaSIF-ligand, we calculated the balanced accuracy for multi-class
classification (Fig. 6). Per class performance of our full model (geometric + chemical features) is
shown as a confusion matrix (Fig. G.1).


                                                    20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                   COA ADP
                                             0.92   0.00   0.01   0.02   0.03   0.00   0.02

                                             0.07   0.62   0.00   0.12   0.10   0.07   0.00   0.8

                                             0.00   0.04   0.87   0.03   0.04   0.01   0.00


                                   FAD
                         Ground truth
                                                                                              0.6


                                   NAD HEM
                                             0.00   0.00   0.01   0.99   0.00   0.00   0.00
                                                                                              0.4
                                             0.05   0.05   0.00   0.00   0.77   0.03   0.10


                                   SAM NAP
                                             0.05   0.05   0.00   0.00   0.18   0.73   0.00   0.2

                                             0.14   0.00   0.00   0.00   0.07   0.00   0.79
                                                                                              0.0
                                             ADP    COA    FAD    HEM    NAD    NAP    SAM
                                                              Predicted
       Figure G.1: Confusion matrix of ligand specificity predicted by H MR on the test set.


Resource Consumption Similar to QM9, we performed data preprocessing in parallel on 64
CPUs. For all 2,254 protein pocket cases: the protein surface computation took 306 seconds, surface
pocket extraction and refinement took 330 seconds, and solving the eigenfunctions for the extracted
pockets took 26 minutes. The processed dataset (N=2,254) takes 2.4 GB disk space (about 1.1 MB
per protein pocket). The full model contains 407,047 trainable parameters. We trained our model
on NVIDIA A100 GPUs with 80 GB memory with a batch size of 32, which on average takes 33
seconds to train a single epoch (1,634 protein pockets), and 9 seconds for inference on the test set
(418 protein pockets). The model structure is almost identical to QM9 that shares the same batch
processing design and has similar GPU memory consumption.

H     D ETAILS ON R IGID P ROTEIN D OCKING

H.1   DATASET

The original DIPS dataset (Townshend et al., 2019) contains interacting protein chains extracted
from experimentally determined complex structures in the RCSB PDB database (https://www.
rcsb.org/). While DIPS is designed to represent the interactions in protein complexes including
homomeric proteins (i.e., protein complexes composed of identical proteins), we are particularly
interested in interactions between different proteins in biological processes (e.g., antibody-antigen,
enzyme-inhibitor, enzyme-substrates, etc.). To better resemble such interactions, we apply a modi-
fied pipeline based on DIPS, referred as DIPS-Het.
Specifically, we include the PDB entries in DIPS as well as newly deposited entries from the RCSB
PDB database that (1) are determined using diffraction-based methods or electron microscopy, (2)
have < 3.5 Å resolution, (3) are not hybrid protein complexes (e.g., protein-DNA complexes are
excluded), and (4) have < 5 protein chains. Different from the original DIPS pipeline, we a) further
remove the PDB entries with only homomeric interfaces (i.e., interactions between identical pro-
teins), and b) adopt a one-vs-rest strategy that uses each one of the protein chains in the complex
as the “ligand protein” and the rest protein chains as the “receptor protein” to form ligand-receptor
pairs.
Similar to Ganea et al. (2021), we remove the cases with any protein chain sharing the same protein
sequence clusters (at 30% sequence similarity) with DB5.5. Finally, we cluster proteins based on
protein chain sequence similarity and separate these clusters into the training and validation set. This
sequence-based split helps selecting a model with better generalizability. After removing proteins
failed in surface mesh generation, DIPS-Het contains 11,373 training cases and 508 validation cases.

H.2   E VALUATION M ETRICS

We evaluate the rigid protein docking results using four metrics: Complex RMSD, Interface RMSD,
DockQ, and Success rate. Complex RMSD and Interface RMSD are used in Ganea et al. (2021): let


                                                                   21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023



Z∗ ∈ R3×(n+m) and Z ∈ R3×(n+m) be the α-carbon coordinates of the ground truth and predicted
protein complexes, respectively, were m and n are the number of α-carbons in the receptor and
ligand protein. After superimposing
                       q            the complex structures using the Kabsch algorithm, Complex
                            1
RMSD is calculated as n+m ||Z − Z||2F . Similarly, Interface RMSD is calculated using the same
                                 ∗

procedure but with the α-carbon coordinates of interface residues (< 8 Å to the other protein’s
residues). Smaller RMSD value means the predicted structure is closer the ground truth structure.
In addition, we evaluate the overall quality of docking using DockQ (Basu & Wallner, 2016) and
the success rate of achieving “Acceptable” or higher according to Méndez et al. (2003; 2005).
Both metrics are based on three standardized criteria used by Critical Assessment of PRedicted
Interactions (CAPRI): Lrms is the ligand (the smaller protein) RMSD calculated based on backbone
atoms, after superimposing receptor’s backbone atoms; Irms is the backbone RMSD of interface
residues, after superimposing the interface residues (residues with any atom is < 10 Å to atoms in
the other protein); and fnat is the recall in recovering residue-residue contacts between the proteins,
where two residues are “in contact” if any pair of atoms from two residues has distance < 5 Å.
DockQ is a continuous score between 0 and 1 (the higher the better), derived from Lrms , Irms , and
fnat . A docking result is considered as a “success” if it is ranked “Acceptable” or higher according
to CAPRI’s criteria, that is
                               fnat ≥ 0.1 ∧ (Lrms ≤ 10.0 ∨ Irms ≤ 4.0)
                                                  OR
                                              fnat ≥ 0.3
Both DockQ score and CAPRI ranking is calculated using the DockQ package (https://
github.com/bjornwallner/DockQ/).

H.3    R ESOURCE C ONSUMPTION

Dataset We report the rigid protein docking resource consumption using the Docking Benchmark
5.5 (DB5.5) dataset (Guest et al., 2021), which contains 253 pairs of representative protein complex
structures. This is the gold-standard test set to evaluate protein docking model performance.
We preprocessed the DB5.5 dataset in parallel on 64 CPUs. Adding hydrogen atoms to the PDB data
took 34 seconds (using reduce), computing the solvent-excluded molecular surface with MSMS
took 6 seconds, triangle mesh refinement by PyMesh took 3.4 minutes, and computing the Laplace-
Beltrami eigenfunctions took 18 minutes with scipy (eigsh)3 . The average number of vertices
per protein (i.e., ligand or receptor) is 3,380, with 215 calculated Laplace-Beltrami eigenfunctions
(maximum eigenvalue capped to 0.3, which is determined empirically). The total storage space for
the processed dataset is 2 GB (about 8 MB per protein, much larger than QM9 molecules). For our
training set with 11,781 protein complexes, the storage space is 101 GB.
Inference The H MR inference time in predicting DB5.5 proteins complexes is shown in Table H.1,
in comparison to E QUIDOCK, H DOCK, and ATTRACT. For H MR, data preprocessing took 80% of
inference time, functional maps (docking pose prediction) took 19%, while binding site prediction
took only 1% of time.

Table H.1: Rigid protein docking inference time on DB5.5 dataset (per protein complex docking
time averaged over 253 cases).

                                           Method          Time
                                           HDock         884.9 sec
                                         ATTRACT         882.7 sec
                                         EquiDock         3.9 sec
                                        H MR (Top 1)      5.8 sec
                                        H MR (Top 3)      6.6 sec

  3
    Solving the generalized eigenvalue problem should be done with less parallel processes to allocate more
CPU resources to each solver for better efficiency.


                                                    22
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023



H.4   D ISTRIBUTIONS OF LEARNED PROPAGATION PARAMETER

We visualize the distribution of propagation parameters: propagation time t, frequency filter mean
µ and variance σ, learned from data. The histogram of selected layers are shown in Fig. H.1.

                                                                         Propagation Layer 1
                                                                 30
                                                                                                               60
                     30
          Channels


                                                      Channels


                                                                                                    Channels
                                                                 20                                            40
                     20
                     10                                          10                                            20
                      0                                           0                                             0
                          0       20             40                0.0        0.2        0.4                    0.0    0.1   0.2      0.3   0.4
                              Propagation time t                                Filter                                       Filter

                                                                         Propagation Layer 3
                     40                                          40                                            75
          Channels


                                                      Channels


                                                                                                    Channels
                                                                                                               50
                     20                                          20
                                                                                                               25
                      0                                           0                                             0
                          0       20             40                0.0        0.2        0.4                    0.0    0.1   0.2      0.3   0.4
                              Propagation time t                                Filter                                       Filter

                                                                         Propagation Layer 6
                                                                                                             100
                     30                                          40
          Channels


                                                      Channels


                                                                                                  Channels
                     20                                                                                        50
                                                                 20
                     10
                      0                                           0                                             0
                          0       20             40                0.0        0.2        0.4                    0.0    0.1   0.2      0.3   0.4
                              Propagation time t                                Filter                                       Filter


Figure H.1: Distribution of learned propagation time t and frequency filter (µ and σ) at selected
propagation layers.


H.5   A NALYSIS OF D IFFERENT M ESSAGE PASSING M ECHANISMS

We study the effectiveness of proposed Harmonic Message Passing mechanism by comparing it
with spatial graph message passing, a “Graph Message Passing” model where Harmonic Massage
Passing is replaced by Graph Attention Network (Veličković et al., 2018), and with a “No Message
Passing” model where only a multilayer perceptron (MLP) is used to encode per-vertex features.
Experimental results show that the Harmonic Message Passing model outperforms Graph Message
Passing and No Message Passing models, suggesting its higher efficiency in propagating information
on protein surface meshes.

      Table H.2: Rigid Protein Docking Performance with Different Message Passing Models

                                                            Complex RMSD Interface RMSD                                               DockQ
       Model                                                     Median        Mean       Median                    Mean     Median           Mean
       Harmonic Message Passing                                  12.01         12.09           10.90                11.43       0.06          0.22
       Graph Message Passing                                     15.41         15.67           13.38                14.37       0.03          0.08
       No Message Passing                                        16.44         17.23           14.11                16.11       0.02          0.04


H.6   A BLATION S TUDIES ON I NPUT F EATURES

To assess the importance of input chemical and geometric features for rigid protein docking, we
compare the performance of H MR (“Full model”) to models trained with only chemical or geo-
metric features: the “Chem only” model only includes chemical features (i.e., atom types, residue
types, residue’s hydrophobicity, and whether the atom is an α-carbon); the “Geom only” model only
contains features related to manifold geometry, including Gaussian curvature, mean curvature, and
Heat Kernel Signatures. Table H.3 shows that the model performance drops upon removing either
chemical or geometric features. And the chemical features is more critical for H MR in the rigid
protein docking task.


                                                                              23
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023



                           Table H.3: Ablation studies on input features

                               Complex RMSD Interface RMSD                    DockQ
                  Model        Median Mean Median Mean Median Mean
                  Full model 12.01         12.09     10.90        11.43     0.06    0.22
                  Chem only 13.96          13.95     12.73        13.33     0.04    0.17
                  Geom only 17.87          19.15     16.58        18.46     0.01    0.03



H.7   C ROSS EXPERIMENTS WITH E QUI D OCK

Compared to E QUI D OCK, H MR differs both in the model and the dataset used for training. To un-
derstand which aspect contributes more to the performance of H MR, we conduct cross experiments
to train H MR on the original DIPS (used in E QUI D OCK) and E QUI D OCK trained on DIPS-Het (pro-
posed by us, used in H MR). The same training and validation sets are used, and all models are
evaluated on DB5.5. As summarized in Table H.4, model structure and training dataset are both
important: H MR achieved higher performance than E QUI D OCK when both models are trained on
DIPS dataset; the performance of H MR further improves when it is trained on DIPS-Het dataset.

         Table H.4: Compare E QUI D OCK and H MR trained on DIPS or DIPS-Het datasets

                                       Complex RMSD Interface RMSD                    DockQ
          Model         Training data Median Mean Median Mean Median Mean
                            DIPS          15.68     16.04        14.81     15.38    0.02     0.07
          H MR
                          DIPS-Het        12.01     12.09        10.90     11.43    0.06     0.22
                            DIPS          17.27     18.09        15.04     16.11    0.02     0.03
          E QUI D OCK
                          DIPS-Het        17.22     17.65        14.27     14.76    0.02     0.04



H.8   DB5.5 TEST CASES FROM E QUI D OCK

For a fair comparison, we further compare H MR with E QUI D OCK on the 25 cases in DB5.5 selected
as a test set in Ganea et al. (2021). We report the E QUI D OCK model fine-tuned on DB5.5, as orig-
inally reported in Ganea et al. (2021). As shown in Table H.5, H MR still outperforms E QUI D OCK,
despite not being fine-tuned on DB5.5.

                     Table H.5: Rigid docking performance on DB5.5 test set

                        Complex RMSD Interface RMSD                  DockQ          Success rate
         Model          Median Mean Median Mean Median Mean (≥ Acceptable)
         H MR (Top 1) 13.10       12.42     11.05        11.68      0.07     0.15          0.20
         H MR (Top 3) 11.35       11.18     10.02        10.03      0.08     0.16          0.20
         E QUI D OCK 14.13        14.72     11.97        13.23      0.04     0.05          0.00



H.9   M ODEL PERFORMANCE AT DIFFERENT RESOLUTIONS

We perform the rigid docking experiment using H MR at different resolutions. Specifically, we cap
the largest eigenvalue of the ligand and receptor protein surface manifolds used in the model. Since
eigenfunctions with larger eigenvalues exhibit higher spatial resolutions, restricting the eigenvalues
effectively constrains the model resolution. The results are shown in Table H.6. In general, we
observe worse model performance with fewer eigenfunctions for harmonic message passing and
functional maps. Interestingly, the metrics of the binding site prediction module (i.e., AUC and AP)


                                                    24
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023



are less sensitive to resolution than the rigid docking module (powered by functional maps). This
means the model could still infer where the binding site is with lower resolution, yet the quality of
learned functional correspondence decreases, leading to worse docking power.

Table H.6: H MR rigid protein docking performance at different spatial resolutions (quantified by
the largest eigenvalue of surface manifold). AUC (area under the receiver operating characteristic
curve) and AP (average precision) are metrics of the binding site prediction module.

                       max eigenvalue                AUC        AP            CRMSD (Top 1)              CRMSD (Top 3)
                                  0.30                  0.84    0.54                   12.11                   8.36
                                  0.25                  0.84    0.53                   13.14                    8.9
                                  0.20                  0.84    0.54                   11.91                   9.53
                                  0.15                  0.83    0.53                   12.19                   9.91
                                  0.10                  0.82    0.52                   12.90                  10.02
                                  0.05                  0.81    0.51                   13.84                  11.32



H.10    T RAINING DETAILS

            Table H.7: Hyperparameter choices of H MR and the training phase settings

           Hyperparameters                                                                                     Values
                                                      Binding Site Prediction Module
           Number of Feature Propagation Blocks                                                                2
           Number of H MR Layers                                                                               3
           Dimension of Propagated Features dk                                                                 128
           Number of Attention Heads                                                                           4
           Dropout Rate                                                                                        0.1
           NCELoss Temperature                                                                                 10
           NCELoss Number of Point Samples                                                                     50
           NCELoss Weight λ                                                                                    0.1
                                                                       Training
           Batch Size                                                                                          4
           Epoch                                                                                               80
           Learning Rate                                                                                       5×10−4
           Optimizer                                                                                           Adam
           Learning Rate Scheduler                                                                             Cosine Annealing


                                              Total loss                                       F­score
                        0.4                                                  0.8
                        0.3                                                  0.7
                Value


                                                                     Value


                        0.2                                                  0.6
                        0.1                                                  0.5                                      Split
                                                AUC                                              AP                      train
                                                                                                                         valid
                                                                             0.9
                       0.95
                                                                             0.8
               Value


                                                                     Value


                       0.90
                                                                             0.7
                       0.85
                                                                             0.6
                              0          20      40        60   80                 0     20      40      60   80
                                                Epoch                                           Epoch

Figure H.2: H MR learning curve for the rigid protein docking task. Model with the best validation
average precision (AP) score in binding site prediction is selected for testing on DB5.5.


                                                                             25
