Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


I NTERPRETATIONS OF D OMAIN A DAPTATIONS VIA
L AYER VARIATIONAL A NALYSIS
 Huan-Hsin Tseng, Hsin-Yi Lin, Kuo-Hsuan Hung, Yu Tsao
 Research Center for Information Technology Innovation, Academia Sinica, Taiwan
 {htseng, hylin, khhung, yu.tsao}@citi.sinica.edu.tw



                                             A BSTRACT
         Transfer learning is known to perform efficiently in many applications empirically,
         yet limited literature reports the mechanism behind the scene. This study establishes
         both formal derivations and heuristic analysis to formulate the theory of transfer
         learning in deep learning. Our framework utilizing layer variational analysis proves
         that the success of transfer learning can be guaranteed with corresponding data
         conditions. Moreover, our theoretical calculation yields intuitive interpretations
         towards the knowledge transfer process. Subsequently, an alternative method
         for network-based transfer learning is derived. The method shows an increase in
         efficiency and accuracy for domain adaptation. It is particularly advantageous when
         new domain data is sufficiently sparse during adaptation. Numerical experiments
         over diverse tasks validated our theory and verified that our analytic expression
         achieved better performance in domain adaptation than the gradient descent method.


1    I NTRODUCTION
Transfer learning is a technique applied to neural networks admitting rapid learning from one (source)
domain to another domain, and it mimics human brains in terms of cognitive understanding. The
concept of transfer learning has been considerably advantageous, and different frameworks have been
formulated for various applications in different fields. For instance, it has been widely applied in image
classification (Quattoni et al., 2008; Zhu et al., 2011; Hussain et al., 2018), object detection (Shin
et al., 2016), and natural language processing (NLP) (Houlsby et al., 2019; Raffel et al., 2019). In
addition to applications in computer vision and NLP, transferability is fundamentally and directly
related to domain adaptation and adversarial learning (Luo et al., 2017; Cao et al., 2018; Ganin et al.,
2016). Another majority field adopting transfer learning is domain adaptation, which investigates
transition problems between two close domains (Kouw & Loog, 2018). A typical understanding is
that transfer learning deals with a general problem where two domains can be rather distinct, allowing
sample space and label space to differ. While domain adaptation is considered a subfield in transfer
learning where the sample/label spaces are fixed with only the probability distributions allowed to be
varied. Several studies have investigated the transferability of network features or representations
through experimentation, and discussed their relation to network structures (Yosinski et al., 2014),
features, and parameter spaces (Neyshabur et al., 2020; Gonthier et al., 2020).
In general, all methods that improve the predictive performance of a target domain, using knowledge
of a source domain, are considered under the transfer learning category (Weiss et al., 2016; Tan et al.,
2018). This work particularly focuses on network-based transfer-learning, which refers to a specific
framework that reuses a pretrained network. This approach is often referred to as finetuning, which
has been shown powerful and widely applied with deep-learning models (Ge & Yu, 2017; Guo et al.,
2019). Even with abundant successes in applications, the understanding of the network-based transfer
learning mechanism from a theoretical framework remains limited.
This paper presents a theoretical framework set out from aspects of functional variation analy-
sis (Gelfand et al., 2000) to rigorously discuss the mechanism of transfer learning. Under the
framework, error estimates can be computed to support the foundation of transfer-learning, and an
interpretation is provided to connect the theoretical derivations with transfer learning mechanism.
Our contributions can be summarized as follows: we formalize transfer learning in a rigorous setting
and variational analysis to build up a theoretical foundation for the empirical technique. A theorem is


                                                    1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


proved through layer variational analysis that under certain data similarity conditions, a transferred
net is guaranteed to transfer knowledge successfully. Moreover, a comprehensible interpretation is
presented to understand the finetuning mechanism. Subsequently, the interpretation reveals that the
reduction of non-trivial transfer learning loss can be represented by a linear regression form, which
naturally leads to analytical (globally) optimal solutions. Experiments in domain adaptation were
conducted and showed promising results, which validated our theoretical framework.

2     R ELATED W ORK
Transfer Learning Transfer learning based on deep learning has achieved great success, and
finetuning a pretrained model has been considered an influential approach for knowledge transfer (Guo
et al., 2019; Girshick et al., 2014; Long et al., 2015). Due to its importance, many studies attempt to
understand the transferability from a wide range of perspectives, such as its dependency on the base
model (Kornblith et al., 2019), and the relation with features and parameters (Pan & Yang, 2009).
Empirically, similarity could be a factor for successful knowledge transfer. The similarity between
the pretrained and finetuned models was discussed in (Xuhong et al., 2018). Our work begins by
setting up a mathematical framework with data similarity defined, which leads to a new formulation
with intuitive interpretations for transferred models.

Domain Adaptation Typically domain adaptations consider data distributions and deviations to
search for mappings aligning domains. Early literature suggested that assuming data drawn from
certain probabilities (Blitzer et al., 2006) can be used to model and compensate for the domain
mismatch. Some studies then looked for theoretical arguments when a successful adaptation can be
yielded. Particularly, (Redko et al., 2020) estimated learning bounds on various statistical conditions
and yielded theoretical guarantees under classical learning settings. Inspired by deep learning, feature
extractions (Wang & Deng, 2018) and efficient finetuning of networks (Patricia & Caputo, 2014;
Donahue et al., 2014; Li et al., 2019) become popular techniques for achieving domain adaptation
tasks. The finetuning of networks was investigated further to see what was being transferred and
learned in (Wei et al., 2018). This will be close to our investigation on weights optimizations.

3     M ATHEMATICAL F RAMEWORK AND E RROR E STIMATES
3.1   F RAMEWORK FOR N ETWORK - BASED T RANSFER L EARNING

To formally address error estimates, we first formulate the framework and notations for consistency.
Definition 3.1 (Neural networks). An n-layer neural network f : R`0 → R`n is a function of the
form:
                                   f = fn ◦ fn−1 ◦ · · · ◦ f1                              (1)
for each j = 1, . . . , n, fj = σj ◦ Aj : R`j−1 → R`j is a layer composed by an affine  function
Aj (z) := Wj z +bj and an activation function σj : R`j → R`j , with Wj ∈ L R`j−1 , R`j , bj ∈ R`j
and L(K, V ) the collection of all linear maps between two linear spaces K → V .

The concept of transfer learning is formulated as follows:
Definition 3.2 (K-layer fixed transfer learning). Given one (large and diverse) dataset D =
{(xi , yi ) ∈ X × Y} and a corresponding n-layer network f = fn ◦ fn−1 ◦ ... ◦ f1 : X → Y
trained by D under loss L(f ), the k-layer fixed transfer learning finds a new network g : X → Y of
the form,
                            g = gn ◦ gn−1 ◦ · · · ◦ gk+1 ◦ fk ◦ · · · ◦ f1 ,                    (2)
                                                            |    {z      }
                                                                 fixed

under loss L(g) when a new and similar dataset D  e = {(e xi , yei ) ∈ X × Y} is given. The first k
layers of f remain fixed and gj := σj ◦ Aj are new layers with affine functions A
                                        e                                         ej to be adjusted
(k < j < n).

The net f trained by the original data D is called the pretrained net and g trained by new data D
                                                                                                e is
called the transferred net or the finetuned net. Transfer learning has the empirical implication of


                                                   2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


“transferring” knowledge from one domain to another by fixing the first few pretrained layers. One
main goal of this study is to characterize the transferring process under layer finetuning.
We utilize the loss function to define the concept of a “well-trained” net, in order to comprehend
the transfer learning mechanism. The losses for the pretrained net f and the transferred net g are
computed on a general label space Y with norm k · kY :
                                 N                                         N
                             1 X                                       1 X
                   L(f ) =         kf (xi ) − yi k2Y ,       L(g) =             xi ) − yei k2Y .
                                                                             kg(e                       (3)
                             N i=1                                     N i=1

Definition 3.3 (Well-trained net). Given a dataset D = {(xi , yi ) ∈ X × Y}, a network h is called
well-trained under data D within error εtrained > 0 if
                                             N
                                             X
                                  L(h) =           kh(xi ) − yi k2Y ≤ ε2trained .                       (4)
                                             i=1


The definition then implies that a well-pretrained net f within error εpretrained is to satisfy

                                              L(f ) ≤ ε2pretrained .                                    (5)
In certain domain adaptation applications, discussions are in terms of probability distributions (Redko
et al., 2020). Our framework is compatible with the usual probabilistic setting under the independent
and identically distributed (i.i.d.) consideration, frequently applied in practice. In this case, Eq. (3) is
equivalent to
                   L(f ) = E(x,y)∼D `2 (f (x), y), L(g) = E(ex,ỹ)∼De `2 (g(e    x), ye)                (6)
where ` is a norm (error) function.
One intuition for successful knowledge transfer is that the previous knowledge base and the new
domain share some common (or similar) features. The resemblance of two datasets D, D       e under
transfer learning in this work is defined by:
Definition 3.4 (Data deviation). The data deviation εdata ≥ 0 of two datasets D and D
                                                                                    e is defined as,
                  n       n                               oo
             max min k(e     xi , yei ) − (xj , yj )kX ×Y    ≤ εdata , (i ≤ |D|,
                                                                             e j ≤ |D|)         (7)
               i      j


Note that the first minimization in Eq. (7) is recognized as performing sample alignment in the
context of domain adaptation. In fact, for each i ≤ |D|  e there exists an index
                                            n                               o
                           ji := arg min k(e   xi , yei ) − (xj , yj )kX ×Y                 (8)
                                         j

such ji then corresponds to the closet sample in D to i. This step is usually referred to as sample
alignment. Domain alignment is then to perform sample alignment over all samples of a given
domain. Consequently, this definition aligns two datasets first and then considers the largest distance
among all aligned pairs. Without loss of generality, in the rest discussions the sample index is
rearranged by Eq. (8) with ji renamed as i for convenience.

3.2   T RANSFER L OSS B OUND VIA L AYER VARIATIONS

Neural networks of the form Eq. (1) with Lipschitz activation functions are Lipschitz continuous.
We utilize Lipschitz constants to control the network propagation and estimate the error of the last
r-layer finetuned nets. The Lipschitz constant of a network h is denoted by Ch in this paper. Let a
pretrained net f be composed of two parts:
                      f = (fn ◦ · · · ◦ fn−r+1 ) ◦ (fn−r ◦ · · · ◦ f1 ) := F ◦ Fn−r                     (9)
where Fn−r = fn−r ◦ · · · ◦ f1 are layers to be fixed and F = fn ◦ ... ◦ fn−r+1 are the last r layers
to be finetuned (1 < r < n). With only two essential definitions above, our main theorem addressing
the validity of the transfer learning technique can be derived:


                                                         3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Theorem 3.5 (Finetuned loss bounded by pretrain loss and data). Let D, D
                                                                       e be two datasets with deviation
εdata and f = F ◦ Fn−r be a well pretrained network under D, then a net finetuning the last r layers
of f with the form g := (F + δF ) ◦ Fn−r has bounded loss on D,     e
                                      N
                                 1 X
                        L(g) =            xi ) − yei k2Y ≤ C1 ε2pretrained + C2 ε2data ,
                                       kg(e                                                            (10)
                                 N i=1
where δF is a Lipschitz function with CδF ≤ εdata . C1 , C2 are two constants depending on CFn−r ,
CF and Cxe := maxi ke xi kX .

Sketch Proof. By g = (F + δF ) ◦ Fn−r and notations in Eq. (8), we have
                                xi ) = (F + δF ) ◦ Fn−r (e
                             g (e                        xi ) = f (xji ) + v1                          (11)
with v1 := δF ◦ Fn−r (e         xi ) − f (xji ). We compute,
                      xi ) + f (e
         N                         N
      1 X                       1 X
               xi ) − yei k2Y =       kf (xji ) − yei + v1 k2Y ≤ 3 ε2pretrained + ε2data + kv1 k2Y ,

            kg(e                                                                                       (12)
      N i=1                     N i=1
with Eq. (5) and the triangle inequality applied in the last inequality. Further, we estimate,

 kv1 k2Y ≤ 2 kδF ◦Fn−r (e  xi ))k2Y +kf (e
                                         xi )−f (xi )k2Y ≤ 2 CδF 2
                                                                    CF2 n−r Cxe2 +CF2 CF2 n−r ε2data . (13)
With Eq. (12) and condition CδF ≤ εdata , the result Eq. (10) can be yielded. For the complete proof,
see Appendix 7.1.

Theorem 3.5 depicts that the finetuned loss is bounded by the pretrained loss and the data difference in
Eq. (10), linking the relation of network functions and data into one. This then explains our intuition
why a well-pretrained net beforehand is necessary, and transfer learning is anticipated to be viable
on datasets with certain similarities. Thus, with minimal conditions and definitions, Theorem 3.5
succinctly addresses when transfer learning guarantees a well-finetuned model under a new dataset.
In fact, the generalization error under finetuning is also bounded (Theorem 7.1 Appendix).
Remark 3.6. For two very different datasets, one has εdata   0. Eq. (10) then indicates such transfer
learning process is generally more difficult as the upper bound becomes large, even with a small
pretraining error εpretrained . Typically in domain adaptation tasks, εdata is not expected to be large.
Remark 3.7. Eq. (10) is regarded as an extension of Eq. (5) whenever D        e=6 D. The two equations
coincide if εdata = 0 where two domains D, D perfectly align.
                                                e


4     I NTERPRETATIONS & C HARACTERIZATIONS OF N ETWORK -BASED
      T RANSFER L EARNING
Inspired by the mathematical framework of Theorem 3.5, an intuitive interpretation of network-based
transfer learning can be derived, which in turn leads to a novel formulation for neural network
finetuning. The derivation begins with the Layer Variational Analysis (LVA), where the effect of data
variation and transmission can be addressed.

4.1     L AYER VARIATIONAL A NALYSIS (LVA)

To clarify the effect of one layer variation (r = 1 in Theorem 3.5), we denote the latent variables zi ,
zei and the last finetuned layer gn from Eq. (2) by,
                           zi := Fn−1 (xi ), zei := Fn−1 (e
                                                          xi ), gn := fn + δfn                         (14)
The target prediction error can be related to the pretrain error via the following expansion,

  kg(e
     xi ) − yei kY = gn (e zi ) − fn (e
                                      zi ) + fn (ezi ) − fn (zi ) + f (xi ) − yi + yi − yei Y (15)
with six self-canceled-out terms added for auxiliary purposes. Note the identities g(e
                                                                                     xi ) = gn (e
                                                                                                zi ),
fn (zi ) = f (xi ) are used and the second grouping can be rewritten by,
                     zi ) − fn (zi ) = J(fn )(zi ) · δzi + δziT · H(fn )(zi ) · δzi + O(δzi3 )
                 fn (e                                                                                 (16)


                                                      4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


where δzi := (e zi − zi ) corresponds to the latent feature shift; J(fn )(zi ) and H(fn )(zi ) are the
Jacobian and the Hessian matrix of fn at zi , respectively. In principle, non-linear activation functions
introduce high order δzi terms to Eq. (16), where by considering regression type problems (assuming
fn purely an affine function) the finetune loss Eq. (15) is allowed to be simplified as,
                                                     N
                                                1 X
                                       L(g) =               zi ) − qi k2Y
                                                      kδfn (e                                                 (17)
                                                N i=1

with δyi := yei − yi and the vector qi ∈ Y defined as
                                  qi := δyi − J(fn )(zi ) · δzi + (yi − f (xi ))                              (18)
which is referred to as transferal residue. Via Transmission of Layer Variations (Appendix 7.3) one
may also write,
                              qi = δyi − J(f )(xi ) · δxi + (yi − f (xi ))                     (19)

4.2    LVA I NTERPRETATIONS & I NTUITIONS
                                                            PN
The equivalent form Eq. (17) of the transfer loss L(g) = N1 i=1 kg(e  xi ) − yei k2Y under LVA renders
an intuitive interpretation for network-based transfer learning. The resulting picture is particularly
helpful for domain adaptations.

Transferal residue: We justify the name transferal residue of Eq. (19). There are two pairs:

                                  qi = δyi − J(f )(xi ) · δxi + (yi − f (xi ))                                (20)
                                                                   pretrain error(?)
                                          domain mismatch (∆)

where the first pair (∆) evaluates domain mismatch; the other measures the pretrain error. To see
this, observe: (a) a perfect pretrain f gives f (xi ) = yi then (?) = 0, and (b) if two domains match
perfectly D = D,e δxi = δyi = 0 then (∆) = 0.

In such a perfect case, qi ≡ 0 and there is nothing new for f to learn/adapt in D.e On the contrary, if f
is ill-pretrained with kδxi k, kδyi k large, qi becomes large too, indicating there is much to adapt in D.
                                                                                                        e
Therefore, the transferal residue characterizes the amount of new knowledge needed to be learned in
the new domain, and hence the name. In short,
                      kqi k → 0 (nothing to adapt),          kqi k → ∞ (much to adapt)

Layer variations to cancel transferal residue: Whenever the transferal residue is nonzero, the
finetune net g adjusts from f to react, as Eq. (17) assigns layer variation δfn to neutralize qi .
Minimizing the adaptation loss L(g) with δfn , we see that
                           no                                      need            ⊗
                qi ≈ 0 ,−−→ δfn ≈ 0,                     qi 6= 0 ,−−−→ δfn ←
                                                                           − min Eq. (17)
                          adapt                                     adapt

In fact, the last adaptation step ⊗ is analytically solvable if δfn is a linear functional with k · kY being
L2 -norm. By Moore-Penrose pseudo-inverse, the minimum is achieved at
                                                          −1 T
                                         δfn = zeT · ze      ze · q                                     (21)
with z̃ := (e
            z1 , . . . , zeN ) and q := (q1 , . . . , qN ). In short, layer variations tend to digest the knowledge
discrepancy due to domain differences.

Knowledge transfer: As qi reflects the amount of new knowledge left to be digested in D,       e we
see a term J(f )(xi )δxi automatically emerges trying to reduce the remainder in qi . Especially, the
Jacobian term appears with a negative sign opposite to f (xi ); it is presented as a self-correction
(self-adaptation) to the new domain. The purpose of J(f )(xi )δxi serves to annihilate the new label
shift δyi Eq. (20) (e.g. Fig. 1) and notice that the self-correction not needed if D = D,
                                                                                       e δxi = 0.
Since the pretrained f contains previous domain information, the term J(f )(xi )δxi indicates the
old knowledge is carried over by f to dissolve the new unknown data. Such quantification then


                                                         5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Figure 1: An illustration of transferal residue Eq. (20). In this example, a pretrained (animal classifier)
f with 1-hot label is adapted from D → D,    e where D is of dog images and D     e is of cat images. The
self-correction term transferring the old knowledge attempts to correct predictions, Eq. (20).


yields an interpretation and renders an intuitive view for network-based transfer learning. The LVA
formulation naturally admits 4 types of domain transitions according to Eq. (20): (a) δxi = δyi = 0,
(b) δxi 6= 0, δyi = 0, (c) δxi = 0, δyi 6= 0 and (d) δxi 6= 0, δyi 6= 0.
The analysis can be extended to multi-layer cases as well as Convolutional Neural Networks (CNN);
only that the analytic computation soon becomes cumbersome. Therefore, only one-layer LVA
finetuning is demonstrated in this work. Further discussions and calculations for LVA of two layers
and CNNs can be found in Appendix 7.2. Although there is no explicit formula for multi-layer
cases to obtain the optimal solution, iterative regression can be utilized recursively to obtain a sub-
optimal result analytically without invoking gradient descent. The LVA formulation not only renders
interesting perspectives in theory but also demonstrates successful knowledge adaptations in practice.

5       E XPERIMENTS
Three experiments in various fields were conducted to verify our theoretical formulation. The first task
was a simulated 1D time series regression, the second was Speech Enhancement (SE) of a real-world
voice dataset; the third was an image deblurring task by extending our formula onto Convolutional
Neural Networks (CNNs). The three tasks demonstrated the LVA had prompt adaptation ability under
new domains and confirmed the calculations Eq. (15)∼(18). The code is available on Github1 . For
detailed implementations and additional results on adaptive image classifications, see Appendix 8.

5.1      T IME SERIES (1D SIGNAL ) REGRESSION

Goal: Train a DNN predicting temporal signal D and adapt it to another signal with noise D.
                                                                                         e

Dataset: Two signals are designed as follows, with D
                                                   e mimicking a noisy signal (a low-quality device)

          D = (ti , sin(5πti )) i , D  e = (ti + 0.05 ξi , γ(ti ) sin(5πti )) + 0.03 ηi )
                                                                                          i
                                                                                               (22)
with {ti | i = 1, . . . , 2000} ∈ [−1, 1] equally distributed, γ(ti ) = 0.4 ti + 1.3998, ξi ∼ N (1.5, 0.8),
ηi ∼ U(−1, 1). N (µ, σ) is a normal distribution of mean µ and variance σ; U as a uniform
distribution [−1, 1].
Implementation: The pretrained model f consists of 3 fully-connected layers of 64 nodes with
ReLu as activation functions. We refer to Appendix for more implementation details.
Result analysis: The adaptation results were compared between the conventional gradient descent
(GD) method and LVA by Eq. (18), (21). The transferred net g from f was finetuned with GD for
12000 epochs, while LVA only requires one step to derive. After adaptation, LVA reached the lowest
L2 -loss compared to GD of same finetuned layer numbers, see Fig. 2(f). This verified the stability
and validity of the proposed framework. In addition to obtaining the lowest loss, the actual signal
    1
        https://github.com/HHTseng/Layer-Variational-Analysis.git


                                                    6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


prediction performance can also be observed improved via visualization Fig. 2(b)∼(e) in the case
of finetuning the last one and two layers. Notably, the finetuning loss of two layers indeed further
decreased than that of one layer, which met the expectation as the two-layer case had more free
parameters to reduce loss. Comparing Fig. 2(b)(c), it showed that the 1-layer case LVA obtained more
accurate signal predictions compared to GD’s predictions. Fig. 2(d)(e) showed the results of 2-layer
finetune by GD and LVA. The 2-layer LVA formulation is derived in Appendix 7.2. Observing that the
LVA formulation equips prompt adaptation ability, we further conduct two real-world applications.


Figure 2: (a) Datasets D and D e given by Eq. (22), (b) 1-layer finetuning by GD, (c) 1-layer LVA
finetuning, (d) 2-layer finetuning by GD, (e) 2-layer LVA finetuning, (f) the training loss on the
finetuned net over epochs.

5.2   S PEECH ENHANCEMENT

To prove that the proposed method is effective on real data, we conducted experiments on an SE task.
Goal: Train a SE model to enhance (denoise) speech signals in a noisy environment D and adapt to
another noisy environment D.
                          e
Dataset: Speech data pairs were prepared for the source domain D (served as the training set) and
target domain D
              e (served as the adaptation set) as follows:
                    1 ,N2 adapt e
D = {(xijk , yi )}N                xijk , yei )}N
                                                 e1 ,N
                          −→ D = {(e                    (xijk = yi + cj × nk ; x            cj × n
                                                     e2
                  i,k                           i,k                            eijk = yei + e    ek )
where yi denotes a patch2 of a clean speech (as a label), which is then corrupted with noise nk of
type k to form a noisy speech (patch) xijk over an amplification of cj ∝ exp (−SNRj ), determined
by a signal-to-noise ratio (SNRj ) given. N1 (resp. N
                                                    e1 ) denotes the number of patches extracted from
clean utterances in D (resp. D); N2 (resp. N2 ) is the number of noise types contained in D (resp.
                               e              e
D).
 e An SE model f on D performed denoising such that f (xijk ) = yi . In this experiment, 8,000
utterances (corresponding to N1 = 112,000 patches) were randomly excerpted from the Deep Noise
Suppression Challenge (Reddy et al., 2020) dataset; these clean utterances were further contaminated
with domain noise types: nk ∈ {White-noise, Train, Sea, Aircraft-cabin, Airplane-takeoff}, (thus
N2 = 5), at four SNR levels: {−5, 0, 5, 10} (dB) to form the training set. These 112,000 noisy-clean
pairs were used to train the pretrained SE model. We tested performance using different numbers
of adaptation data with N  e1 varying from 20 to 400 patches (Fig. 3). These adaptation data were
contaminated by three target noise types: n ek ∈ {Baby-cry, Bell, Siren} (thus N  e2 = 3) at {−1, 1}
(dB) SNR. Note the speech contents, noise types, and SNRs were all mismatched in the training and
adaptation sets.
Implementation: A Bi-directional LSTM (BLSTM) (Chen et al., 2015) model was used to construct
the SE model f under L2 -loss, consisting of one-layer BLSTM of 300 nodes and one fully-connected
layer for output. The transferred net g adapted from f by finetuning the last layer was performed by
GD to compare with LVA in Eq. (21). For data processing and network, details see Appendix 8.2.
Domain alignment: It was mentioned that the domain alignment ought to be applied prior to LVA.
For real-world data, optimal transport (Villani, 2009) (OT) was selected for implementation to match
domain distributions. To contrast, LVA with and without OT were conducted.
Evaluation metric: SE performances are usually measured by 3 evaluation metrics, L2 -error (MSE),
the perceptual evaluation of speech quality (PESQ) (Rix et al., 2001) and short-time objective
intelligibility (STOI) (Taal et al., 2011). Each metric evaluates different aspects of speech: PESQ
∈ [−0.5, 4.5] evaluates speech quality; STOI ∈ [0, 1] estimates speech intelligibility.
   2
     A patch is defined as a temporal segment extracted from an utterance. We used 128 magnitude spectral
vectors to form a patch in practice.


                                                   7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                                                    e1 of D
      Figure 3: Performance of GD vs. LVA by different patch amount N     e for adaptation.

Result analysis: We excerpted another 100 utterances, contaminated with the target noise types:
ek ∈ {Baby-cry, Bell, Siren} at {−1, 1} (dB) SNR levels, to form the test set. Note that the speech
n
contents were mismatched in the adaptation and test sets. Fig. 3 showed the domain adaptation results
from environment D → D      e to compare GD with LVA. On this test set, the PESQ and STOI of the
original noisy speech (without SE) were 1.704 and 0.808, respectively. The results in Fig. 3 showed
consistent out-performance of LVA over GD under a different number of adaptation data in D    e (N
                                                                                                 e1 as
the horizontal axis). Especially, the L2 -loss of LVA was notably less than that of GD, confirming that
LVA indeed derived the globally optimal weights of a transferred net. Meanwhile, it was observed
that LVA significantly outperformed GD when the amount of target samples in D       e was considerably
less. It was also noticed that the LVA equipped OT alignment (LVA-OT) achieves similar performance
to LVA. An example of the enhanced spectrograms by different SE models: the Pretrained, GD, LVA,
and LVA-OT are shown in Fig. 4 with clean and unprocessed noisy spectrograms for comparison.
Fig. 4 shows LVA recovers the speech components with clear structures than Pretrained and GD (see
green rectangles). More extensive result analyses are provided in Appendix 8.2.


Figure 4: Spectrograms of an utterance (Baby-cry noise at SNR −1 dB; N
                                                                     e1 = 400 for adaptation).

5.3   S UPER RESOLUTION FOR IMAGE DEBLURRING

Goal: Train a Super-Resolution Convolutional Neural Network (SRCNN, Fig. 5) (Dong et al., 2016)
to deblur images of domain D and adapt to another more blurred domain D.
                                                                      e


Figure 5: [SRCNN for image deblurring] Pretrain model: a sequence of CNN layers f = fn ◦ · · · f2 ◦
f1 . Then last CNN layer fn is finetuned to adapt to more blurred images in D.
                                                                            e



                                                  8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Dataset: 2000 high-resolution images were randomly selected as labels from the CUFED
dataset (Wang et al., 2016) to train SRCNN. The source domain (x, y) ∈ D and the target do-
main (e x, ye) ∈ D
                 e were set as follows,
     x ∈ {×3 blurred patches}, x    e ∈ {×4, ×6 blurred patches}, y = ye ∈ {High-Res patches}
Fig. 6 shows image pairs for adaptation. Another image dataset SET14 (Zeyde et al., 2010) was used
to test adapted models. More image preparation details see Appendix 8.3.


                         Figure 6: Sample images (CUFED) of D and D.
                                                                  e

Implementation: This experiment demonstrated that image related tasks can also be implemented
by extending our LVA, Eq. (17), (18), from fully-connected layers to CNNs. Although the analytic
formula Eq. (21) is only valid on a fully-connected layer of regression type, a key observation
admitting such extension is that CNN kernels can locally be regarded as a fully-connected layer, in
that every receptive field is exactly covered by the kernels of a CNN. By proper arrangement, a CNN
kernel C = (Cijγ ) can be folded as a fully-connected layer of 2D matrix weight W = (W`m ). As
such, the LVA can be extended onto CNNs as finetune layers; detailed implementations see Appendix.
In this experiment, an SRCNN model f (Fig. 5) was trained on source domain D to perform deblur
f (x) = y, and subsequently used GD and LVA to adapt f → g on D      e such that g(e
                                                                                   x) = ye.
Result analysis: Fig. 7 showed the results of adapted models by GD and LVA. In Fig. 7, column (b)
were more blurred inputs xe of D;
                               e column (c)(d)(e) were deblurred images to be compared with the
ground truths in column (a). Column (c)(d) compared the two methods adapted with the same number
of target domain samples (N = 256 patches) and LVA reached the highest PSNR scores. While
more target domain samples were exclusively included for GD to N = 16384 in column (e), the
corresponding PSNRs were still not compatible to the LVA adaptation. There were more extensive
experiments conducted to contrast the adaptation outcome of GD and LVA, see Appendix 8.3.


          Figure 7: Image deblurring results of adapted SRCNNs on testing data SET14.
6   C ONCLUSIONS
This study aims to provide a theoretical framework for interpreting the mechanism under domain
adaptation. We derived a firm basis to ensure that a finetuned net can be adapted to a new dataset.
The objective of this study was achieved to address “why transfer learning might work?” and unravel
the underlying process. Based on the LVA, a novel formulation for finetuned nets was introduced
and yielded meaningful interpretations of transfer learning. The formalism was further validated
by domain adaptation applications in Speech Enhancement and Super Resolution. Various tasks
were observed to reach the lowest L2 -loss under LVA, where the LVA is the theoretical limit for the
gradient descent to approach. The LVA interpretations and successful experiments give this study an
inspiring perspective to view transfer learning.


                                                 9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


R EFERENCES
John Blitzer, Ryan McDonald, and Fernando Pereira. Domain adaptation with structural correspon-
  dence learning. In Proceedings of the 2006 conference on empirical methods in natural language
  processing, pp. 120–128, 2006.

Zhangjie Cao, Mingsheng Long, Jianmin Wang, and Michael I Jordan. Partial transfer learning with
  selective adversarial networks. In Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and
  pattern recognition, pp. 2724–2732, 2018.

Zhuo Chen, Shinji Watanabe, Hakan Erdogan, and John R Hershey. Speech enhancement and
  recognition using multi-task learning of long short-term memory recurrent neural networks. In
  Sixteenth Annual Conference of the International Speech Communication Association, 2015.

Jeff Donahue, Yangqing Jia, Oriol Vinyals, Judy Hoffman, Ning Zhang, Eric Tzeng, and Trevor
  Darrell. Decaf: A deep convolutional activation feature for generic visual recognition. In
  International conference on machine learning, pp. 647–655. PMLR, 2014.

Chao Dong, Chen Change Loy, Kaiming He, and Xiaoou Tang. Image super-resolution using deep
  convolutional networks. IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence, 38(2):
  295–307, 2016. doi: 10.1109/TPAMI.2015.2439281.

Yaroslav Ganin, Evgeniya Ustinova, Hana Ajakan, Pascal Germain, Hugo Larochelle, François
  Laviolette, Mario Marchand, and Victor Lempitsky. Domain-adversarial training of neural networks.
  The journal of machine learning research, 17(1):2096–2030, 2016.

Weifeng Ge and Yizhou Yu. Borrowing treasures from the wealthy: Deep transfer learning through
 selective joint fine-tuning. In Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern
 recognition, pp. 1086–1095, 2017.

Izrail Moiseevitch Gelfand, Richard A Silverman, et al. Calculus of variations. Courier Corporation,
   2000.

Ross Girshick, Jeff Donahue, Trevor Darrell, and Jitendra Malik. Rich feature hierarchies for accurate
  object detection and semantic segmentation. In Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer
  vision and pattern recognition, pp. 580–587, 2014.

Nicolas Gonthier, Yann Gousseau, and Saïd Ladjal. An analysis of the transfer learning of convolu-
  tional neural networks for artistic images. arXiv preprint arXiv:2011.02727, 2020.

Yunhui Guo, Honghui Shi, Abhishek Kumar, Kristen Grauman, Tajana Rosing, and Rogerio Feris.
  Spottune: transfer learning through adaptive fine-tuning. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Confer-
  ence on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 4805–4814, 2019.

Xiang Hao, Xiangdong Su, Radu Horaud, and Xiaofei Li. Fullsubnet: A full-band and sub-band
  fusion model for real-time single-channel speech enhancement. In ICASSP 2021-2021 IEEE
  International Conference on Acoustics, Speech and Signal Processing (ICASSP), pp. 6633–6637.
  IEEE, 2021.

Neil Houlsby, Andrei Giurgiu, Stanislaw Jastrzebski, Bruna Morrone, Quentin De Laroussilhe,
  Andrea Gesmundo, Mona Attariyan, and Sylvain Gelly. Parameter-efficient transfer learning for
  nlp. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 2790–2799. PMLR, 2019.

Mahbub Hussain, Jordan J Bird, and Diego R Faria. A study on cnn transfer learning for image
 classification. In UK Workshop on computational Intelligence, pp. 191–202. Springer, 2018.

Simon Kornblith, Jonathon Shlens, and Quoc V Le. Do better imagenet models transfer better?
  In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp.
  2661–2671, 2019.

Wouter M Kouw and Marco Loog. An introduction to domain adaptation and transfer learning. arXiv
 preprint arXiv:1812.11806, 2018.


                                                 10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Xingjian Li, Haoyi Xiong, Hanchao Wang, Yuxuan Rao, Liping Liu, Zeyu Chen, and Jun Huan.
  Delta: Deep learning transfer using feature map with attention for convolutional networks. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:1901.09229, 2019.
Mingsheng Long, Yue Cao, Jianmin Wang, and Michael Jordan. Learning transferable features with
 deep adaptation networks. In International conference on machine learning, pp. 97–105. PMLR,
 2015.
Xugang Lu, Yu Tsao, Shigeki Matsuda, and Chiori Hori. Speech enhancement based on deep
  denoising autoencoder. In Interspeech, volume 2013, pp. 436–440, 2013.
Zelun Luo, Yuliang Zou, Judy Hoffman, and Li Fei-Fei. Label efficient learning of transferable
  representations across domains and tasks. arXiv preprint arXiv:1712.00123, 2017.
Behnam Neyshabur, Hanie Sedghi, and Chiyuan Zhang. What is being transferred in transfer learning?
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2008.11687, 2020.
Sinno Jialin Pan and Qiang Yang. A survey on transfer learning. IEEE Transactions on knowledge
  and data engineering, 22(10):1345–1359, 2009.
Novi Patricia and Barbara Caputo. Learning to learn, from transfer learning to domain adaptation:
 A unifying perspective. In Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
 Recognition, pp. 1442–1449, 2014.
Ariadna Quattoni, Michael Collins, and Trevor Darrell. Transfer learning for image classification
  with sparse prototype representations. In 2008 IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
  Recognition, pp. 1–8. IEEE, 2008.
Colin Raffel, Noam Shazeer, Adam Roberts, Katherine Lee, Sharan Narang, Michael Matena, Yanqi
  Zhou, Wei Li, and Peter J Liu. Exploring the limits of transfer learning with a unified text-to-text
  transformer. arXiv preprint arXiv:1910.10683, 2019.
Chandan KA Reddy, Vishak Gopal, Ross Cutler, Ebrahim Beyrami, Roger Cheng, Harishchandra
  Dubey, Sergiy Matusevych, Robert Aichner, Ashkan Aazami, Sebastian Braun, et al. The in-
  terspeech 2020 deep noise suppression challenge: Datasets, subjective testing framework, and
  challenge results. arXiv preprint arXiv:2005.13981, 2020.
Ievgen Redko, Emilie Morvant, Amaury Habrard, Marc Sebban, and Younès Bennani. A sur-
  vey on domain adaptation theory: learning bounds and theoretical guarantees. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2004.11829, 2020.
A. W. Rix, J. G. Beerends, M. P. Hollier, and A. P. Hekstra. Perceptual evaluation of speech quality
  (pesq)-a new method for speech quality assessment of telephone networks and codecs. In 2001
  IEEE International Conference on Acoustics, Speech, and Signal Processing. Proceedings (Cat.
  No.01CH37221), volume 2, pp. 749–752 vol.2, 2001. doi: 10.1109/ICASSP.2001.941023.
Kate Saenko, Brian Kulis, Mario Fritz, and Trevor Darrell. Adapting visual category models to
  new domains. In Computer Vision–ECCV 2010: 11th European Conference on Computer Vision,
  Heraklion, Crete, Greece, September 5-11, 2010, Proceedings, Part IV 11, pp. 213–226. Springer,
  2010.
Kevin Scaman and Aladin Virmaux. Lipschitz regularity of deep neural networks: analysis and
  efficient estimation. arXiv preprint arXiv:1805.10965, 2018.
Hoo-Chang Shin, Holger R Roth, Mingchen Gao, Le Lu, Ziyue Xu, Isabella Nogues, Jianhua Yao,
  Daniel Mollura, and Ronald M Summers. Deep convolutional neural networks for computer-aided
  detection: Cnn architectures, dataset characteristics and transfer learning. IEEE transactions on
  medical imaging, 35(5):1285–1298, 2016.
C. H. Taal, R. C. Hendriks, R. Heusdens, and J. Jensen. An algorithm for intelligibility prediction
  of time–frequency weighted noisy speech. IEEE Transactions on Audio, Speech, and Language
  Processing, 19(7):2125–2136, 2011. doi: 10.1109/TASL.2011.2114881.


                                                 11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Chuanqi Tan, Fuchun Sun, Tao Kong, Wenchang Zhang, Chao Yang, and Chunfang Liu. A survey
  on deep transfer learning. In International conference on artificial neural networks, pp. 270–279.
  Springer, 2018.
Cédric Villani. Optimal transport: old and new, volume 338. Springer, 2009.
Mei Wang and Weihong Deng. Deep visual domain adaptation: A survey. Neurocomputing, 312:
 135–153, 2018.
Yufei Wang, Zhe Lin, Xiaohui Shen, Radomir Mech, Gavin Miller, and Garrison. W. Cottrell. Event-
  specific image importance. In The IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition
  (CVPR), 2016.
Ying Wei, Yu Zhang, Junzhou Huang, and Qiang Yang. Transfer learning via learning to transfer:
  Supplementary material. In 35th International Conference on Machine Learning, ICML 2018,
  volume 11, pp. 8069, 2018.
Karl Weiss, Taghi M Khoshgoftaar, and DingDing Wang. A survey of transfer learning. Journal of
  Big data, 3(1):1–40, 2016.
LI Xuhong, Yves Grandvalet, and Franck Davoine. Explicit inductive bias for transfer learning
  with convolutional networks. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 2825–2834.
  PMLR, 2018.
Jason Yosinski, Jeff Clune, Yoshua Bengio, and Hod Lipson. How transferable are features in deep
  neural networks? arXiv preprint arXiv:1411.1792, 2014.
Roman Zeyde, Michael Elad, and Matan Protter. On single image scale-up using sparse-
  representations. In International conference on curves and surfaces, pp. 711–730. Springer,
  2010.
Yin Zhu, Yuqiang Chen, Zhongqi Lu, Sinno Jialin Pan, Gui-Rong Xue, Yong Yu, and Qiang Yang.
  Heterogeneous transfer learning for image classification. In Twenty-fifth aaai conference on
  artificial intelligence, 2011.


7     A PPENDIX
7.1   P ROOF OF T HEOREM 3.6

Consider finetuning on the last r layers in Eq. (2) with k + r = n. Denote Fn−r = fn−r ◦ · · · ◦ f1 and
the last r layers F = fn ◦ ... ◦ fn−r+1 of pretrained network and finetuned net G = gn ◦ ... ◦ gn−r+1 .
We also write the difference G − F = δF . With the notations, we rewrite
                    xi ) = G ◦ Fn−r (e
                 g (e                xi ) = (F + δF ) ◦ Fn−r (e
                                                              xi ) = f (xji ) + v1 ,              (A.23)
where v1 = δF ◦ Fn−r (e            xi ) − f (xji ) and ji is the corresponding index such that Eq. (7) is
                         xi ) + f (e
satisfied. Therefore, one computes,
            N                         N
         1 X                       1 X
                  xi ) − yei k2Y =
               kg(e                      kf (xji ) − yei + v1 k2Y
         N i=1                     N i=1
                                         N                                                        (A.24)
                                    3 X
                                              kf (xji ) − yji k2Y + kyji − yei k2Y + kv1 k2Y

                                 ≤
                                   N i=1
                                 ≤ 3 ε2pretrained + ε2data + kv1 k2Y ,


where the last term is further estimated by the triangle inequality to yield

                      kv1 k2Y ≤ 2 kδF ◦ Fn−r (e  xi ))k2Y + kf (exi ) − f (xji )k2Y
                                                                                                  (A.25)
                                     2
                              ≤ 2 CδF   CF2 n−r Cxe2 + CF2 CF2 n−r ε2data .


                                                    12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


with Cxe := maxi ke  xi kX . Note that without any additional assumption, the first term in Eq. (A.25)
is of order 1. To obtain a small error of g, one sufficient condition is to have CδF ≈ εdata . It is
interesting to point out that the analysis relates the Lipschitz constant CδF of the network perturbation
with the data similarity εdata .
Theorem 7.1 (Generalization error bound). Given a test (held-out) set D       e test = {(x(test) , y (test) ) ∈
                                                                                           i        i
         Ntest
X × Y}i=1 with |D   e test | ≤ |D|,
                                e then a well-finetuned net g in Theorem 3.5 has a generalization error
bound,

                                           Ntest
                                      1 X
                       Ltest (g) =                  xtest
                                                 kg(ei )−yeitest k2Y ≤ C1 ε2data + C2 L(g)             (A.26)
                                     Ntest i=1

where εdata is the data deviation between D
                                          e and De test computed by Definition 3.4. C1 , C2 are two
constants with C1 depending on the Lipschitz constant Cg and L(g) the finetune loss in Theorem 3.5.

Proof.
                             Ntest
                        1 X
         Ltest (g) =                  xtest
                                   kg(ei )−yeitest k2Y
                       Ntest i=1
                             Ntest
                        3 X
                                      xtest    xi )k2Y + ke
                                                          yitest − yei k2Y + kg(e
                                                                                xi ) − yei k2Y

                  ≤                kg(ei ) − g(e                                                       (A.27)
                       Ntest i=1
                          Ntest                              N
                     3 X                               3 X
                                Cg2 ε2test + ε2test +              xi ) − yei k2Y

                  ≤                                             kg(e
                    Ntest i=1                         Ntest i=1



7.2   P ERTURBATION APPROXIMATION DERIVATION FOR 2- LAYER CASE

Similarly, let δzi := zei − zi and denote the finetuned nth layer and (n − 1)th layer by
                                 gn = fn + δfn ,         gn−1 = fn−1 + δfn−1                           (A.28)
The perturbation assumption allows the approximation of
                                       zi ) ≈ fn−1 (zi ) + J(fn−1 )(zi ) · δzi ,
                                 fn−1 (e                                                               (A.29)
where J(fn−1 )(zi ) is the Jacobian matrix of fn−1 at zi . The network assumed to deviate from the
pretrained fn−1 by an affine function,
                                         δfn−1 (z̃i ) := Wn−1 · δzi + b,                               (A.30)
for some weight Wn−1 and bias b. With Eq. (A.29) and Eq. (A.30), we obtain

                        zi ) ≈ fn−1 (zi ) + b + J(fn−1 )(zi ) + Wn−1 · δzi .
                  gn−1 (e                                                                              (A.31)

With Eq. (A.31),
     xi ) = (fn + δfn ) ◦ gn−1 (e
   g(e                          zi )
                                                                                                       (A.32)
          ≈ fn ◦ fn−1 (zi ) + fn ◦ J(fn−1 )(zi ) + Wn−1 · δzi + b + δfn ◦ fn−1 (zi ).

Note that the terms involving multiplications δfn and δfn−1 are omitted as we only focus on the first
order terms. Parallel to Eq. (15) for 1-layer case, we approximate
   kg(e
      xi ) − yei kY = k (g(e
                           xi ) − fn ◦ fn−1 (zi )) + (fn ◦ fn−1 (zi ) − yi ) + (yi − yei ) kY          (A.33)
and therefore,

kg(e
   xi ) − yei kY ≈ kδfn ◦ fn−1 (zi ) + fn ◦                                    zi − zi ) + f (xi ) − yi − δyi kY .
                                                     J(fn−1 )(zi ) + Wn−1 + b (e
                                                                                                   (A.34)


                                                         13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


We see that the 2-layer fine-tuning case involves three unknown (parameters), including δfn , b, and
Wn−1 . Although there is no explicit formula to obtain the optimal solution, iterative regression can
be utilized multiple times to obtain a sub-optimal result analytically without using gradient descent.
In fact, one notices that if b is ignored, the optimization of δfn and Wn−1 based on the L2 -loss can be
solved. Once δfn and Wn−1 are solved and fixed, b can be introduced back into the formula and can
be solved again by regression. Similar approximations for general multi-layers cases would still be
reliable as long as the features in the latent space are close to each other. That is to say, the features of
the source and target domain share similarities. These intuition-motivated formulations were shown
to successfully adapt knowledge in experiments for both images and speech signals. The results can
be found in Section 5.


7.3    T RANSMISSION OF L AYER VARIATIONS

We show heuristically the propagation of layer variations in neural nets can be traced via data
deviations. Given two datasets D, D
                                  e with the indexing after sample alignment, we define

                                              ei − xi ,
                                       δxi := x                   δyi := yei − yi                    (A.35)

Let the data deviation be ε from Def. 3.4, and Eq. (A.35) can be decomposed by orders of ε,

                                     (1)       (2)                           (1)       (2)
                       δxi = δxi           + δxi     + ··· ,      δe
                                                                   yi = δyi        + δyi     + ···   (A.36)

          (k)         (k)
with O kδxi kX = O kδyi kY = εk . To obtain a simple picture, first we neglect the high
                (2)    (2)                                (1)          (1)
order terms δxi , δyi , etc. In such case, δxi and δyi can be simply denoted as δxi and δyi ,
respectively, without confusion. By Eq. (14), finetuning the last layer in Theorem 3.5 reveals that

                                 N
                             1 X
                  L(g) =                                              xi ) − yei k2Y
                                   k (fn + δfn ) ◦ fn−1 ◦ · · · ◦ f1 (e
                             N i=1
                                                                                                     (A.37)
                                 N
                          1 X
                        =             zi ) − yei + f (xi ) + J(f )(xi )δxi k2Y + O(ε2 )
                                kδfn (e
                          N i=1

where J(f )(xi ) is the Jacobian of f at xi and O(ε2 ) contains terms like H(f )(xi )δxi δxi , etc with
H(f )(xi ) the Hessian tensor of f at xi . Some effort converts Eq. (A.37) into a familiar form,

                                                         N
                                                     1 X
                                           L(g) =                zi ) − qi k2Y
                                                           kδfn (e                                   (A.38)
                                                     N i=1

with
                                 qi = δyi − J(f )(xi ) · δxi + (yi − f (xi ))                        (A.39)

Regard that Eq. (A.38) recovers Eq. (16) via different routes and starting points, although the two qi ’s
in Eq. (18) and (A.39) slightly differ due to distinct variational conditions. This heuristic derivation
then confirms that data deviations arouse network variations to induce the alternative finetune form.
Consequently, both derivations yield same results.


8      E XPERIMENTAL D ETAILS

All code and data can be found at https://github.com/HHTseng/
Layer-Variational-Analysis.git. The norms k · kX and k · kY in all experi-
ments are set as Euclidean L2 -norms, unless otherwise specified. Some notable details are remarked
here.


                                                             14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


8.1    1D SERIES REGRESSION

Dataset    A 1D series D for the pretrained f and another series D
                                                                 e for transfer learning are given by
(Fig. 8)
                                                      N =2000
                 D = (xi , sin(5πxi )) | xi ∈ [−1, 1] i=1
                                                                         N =2000
                    
                                                                         
                                                                                             (B.40)
                 D = (xi + 0.05 ξi , γ(xi ) yi + 0.03 ηi ) | xi ∈ [−1, 1]
                 e
                    
                    |                  {z              }                 
                                                                          
                                       (e
                                        xi ,e
                                            yi )                            i=1
with
               γ(xi ) = 0.4 xi + 1.3998,
                  ξi ∼ N (1.5, 0.8) (normal distribution mean=1.5, variance=0.8),
                  ηi ∼ U(−1, 1)       (uniform distribution in [−1, 1]).


                Figure 8: The original data D and new data D
                                                           e for transfer learning.


Network Architecture The pretrained model f using D was a 3 fully-connected-layer network
with 64 nodes at each layer and ReLu used as activation functions except the output layer. A finetuned
model gGD using Gradient Descent (GD) retrained the last layer of f by D.  e f and gGD were trained
under L2 -loss with ADAM optimizer at learning rate 10−3 by 8,000 and 12,000 epochs, respectively.
The finetuned model by the LVA method gpesudo using D    e required no training process but directly
replaced the last layer of f by fn 7→ (fn + δfn ) with δfn given in Eq. (21).

Hardware One NVIDIA V100 GPU (32 GB GPU memory) with 4 CPUs (128 GB CPU memory).

Runtime Approximately 3 sec in the LVA method, 4 minutes in GD method.

8.2    S PEECH ENHANCEMENT

Dataset The utterances used in the experiment were excerpted from the Deep Noise Suppression
Challenge (Reddy et al., 2020). We randomly selected 8000 clean utterances for training and 100
utterances for testing. Five noise types {White-noise, Train, Sea, Aircraft-cabin, Airplane-takeoff}
were involved to form the training set (to estimate the pretrained SE model) and three noise types,
{Baby-cry, Bell, Siren} was used to form the transfer learning and testing sets. For the training set,
the 8000 clean utterances were equally divided and contaminated by the five noise types (thus, each
noise type had 1600 noisy utterances) at four signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) levels, {−5, 0, 5, 10} dB.
For the testing set, 100 clean utterances were contaminated by the {Baby-cry, Bell, Siren} noises at
{−1, 1} (dB) SNRs. For the adaptation set, we prepared 20-400 patches contaminated by three noise
types, {Baby-cry, Bell, Siren}, at {−1, 1} dB SNRs.


                                                   15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


            Figure 9: The flowchart of a Deep Denoising Autoencoder (DDAE) for SE.

Implementation All speech utterances were recorded in a 16kHz sampling rate. The speech signals
were first transformed to spectral features (magnitude spectrograms) by a short-time Fourier transform
(STFT). The Hamming window with 512 points and a hop length of 256 points were applied to
transform the speech waveforms into spectral features. To adequately shrink the magnitude range,
a log1p function (log1p(x) := log(1 + x)) was applied to every element in the spectral features.
During training, noisy spectral vectors were treated as input to the SE model to generate enhanced
spectral vectors. The clean spectral vectors were treated as the reference, and the loss was computed
based on the difference of enhanced and reference spectral vectors. Subsequently, the SE model was
trained to minimize the difference. During inference, noisy spectral vectors were inputted to the
trained SE model to generate enhanced ones, which were then converted into time-domain waveform
with the preserved original noisy phase via inverse STFT.

Network Architecture The overall flowchart of the SE task is shown in Fig. 9. In this study, we
implemented SE systems using two neural network models to evaluate the proposed LVA. The first
one is the deep denoising autoencoder (DDAE) model (Lu et al., 2013), which serves as a simpler
neural-network architecture. The other is the Bi-directional LSTM (BLSTM) (Chen et al., 2015),
which is relatively complicated as compared to DDAE. For DDAE, the model is composed of 5
fully-connected layers with 512 units. Activation functions were added to each layer except the last
layer. The LeakyReLU with a negative slope of 0.01 was used as the activation function. For BLSTM,
the model consists of a one-layer BLSTM of 300 nodes and one fully-connected layer. The training
setting is the same for the two SE models. The learning rate of Adam Optimizer was set at 10−3 .
After pretraining, only the last layer parameters were updated in the finetuning stage. According to
Eq. (21), the pseudo inverse of latent features was used to calculate δf .

Hardware One NVIDIA V100 GPU (32 GB GPU memory) with 4 CPUs (128 GB CPU memory).

Runtime Approximately 7 minutes in the LVA method and 25 minutes in GD method with 40
utterances.

8.2.1   A DAPTATION ON M ISMATCHED S PEAKERS

In Sec. 5.2, we have confirmed the effectiveness of the proposed LVA on the noise type and SNR
adaptation of the SE task, where the main speech distortion is from the background noise. In


                                                 16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                   (a) PESQ score of DDAE.


                                   (b) STOI score of DDAE.


                                               17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                      (c) Loss of DDAE.


                                  (d) PESQ score of BLSTM.


                                               18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                   (e) STOI score of BLSTM.


                                      (f) Loss of BLSTM.


                                               19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


this section, we further investigate the achievable performance of LVA on SE where speakers are
mismatched in the source and target domains.
First, we excluded the utterances of the speakers used in the training set and regenerated the adaptation
and the test set by randomly sampling 200 utterances (100 for the adaptation set and 100 for the test
set) from the remaining Deep Noise Suppression Challenge dataset. The experimental setup was
same as Sec. 5.2 with testing speakers not given in the training set. We note that since the speakers
did not match, an OT process was performed to align speakers. In Table 1, we denote LVA-OT as
LVA for shorthand. The comparison of BLSTM model adaptation using GD and LVA is shown in
Table 1. The table demonstrates that both GD and LVA improve the PESQ and STOI score after
adaptation, while LVA consistently yields better performance over different noise types and SNR
levels.

                   Table 1: Performance of finetuned models on mismatched speakers.
                                 noisy           Pretrain       Finetuned      Finetuned
                                (no SE)       (no finetune)       by GD          by LVA
         noise type SNR      PESQ      STOI        PESQ    STOI   PESQ    STOI     PESQ      STOI
         Babycry      −1      1.40     0.74        1.58    0.78   1.58     0.79     1.88      0.81
         Babycry      +1      1.52     0.77        1.69    0.80   1.71     0.82     1.97      0.83
         Bell         −1      1.96     0.84        1.97    0.84   2.18     0.86     2.44      0.89
         Bell         +1      2.07     0.86        2.09    0.86   2.29     0.87     2.55      0.90
         Siren        −1      1.56     0.81        1.74    0.82   1.81     0.84     2.03      0.84
         Siren        +1      1.64     0.83        1.84    0.84   1.97     0.85     2.08      0.85
         Average       -      1.69     0.81        1.82    0.82   1.92     0.84     2.16      0.85


8.2.2      A DAPTATION USING F ULL S UB N ET
In this extended experiment, we utilize a FullSubNet (Hao et al., 2021) pretrained network to perform
SE domain adaptation tasks. The FullSubNet is a state-of-the-art SE model reaching the performance
of PESQ: 2.89 and STOI: 0.96 on the DNS-challenge.
This implementation serves to examine the effect of a pretrained network. To compare with previous
results of the BLSTM model in Sec. 8.2, same source domain data and the target domain set are used
for adaptation. The FullSubNet receives an input of spectrum amplitude and outputs a complex Ideal
Ratio Mask (cIRM) to compare with cIRM labels under L2 -loss. The architecture of the FullSubNet
is composed of a full-band and a sub-band model. Within each model, two stacked LSTM layers and
one fully connected layer are included. The LSTMs contain 512 hidden units and 384 hidden units in
the full-band model and the sub-band model, respectively. The detailed structures can be found in
(Hao et al., 2021).
A pretrained FullSubNet was obtained from the official Github3 , where the last linear layer was
finetuned to adapt to the target set. The finetuned networks were subsequently evaluated on an
adaptation test set to measure PESQ and STOI, where the results are shown in Table 2. The
comparison shows that finetuning from a pretrained FullSubNet achieves enhanced baseline scores
on the target domain (see Table 2 [no finetune]). While adaptation under the gradient descent
significantly improves the pretrained network, the proposed LVA method outperforms the traditional
gradient descent method in terms of PESQ and STOI. The results are consistent with the previous SE
experiments to confirm that the proposed LVA promptly reaches better adaptation.

8.3      S UPER RESOLUTION FOR IMAGE DEBLURRING

CNN extension The LVA formulation Eq. (14) ∼ (19) can be extended to CNN layers with the
following observation shown in Fig. 11, where the left-hand side depicts the usual convolution
operation in CNNs. Given a CNN, denote the kernels by {Cijαβ } with (i, j, α, β) ∈ L1 × L2 × Cin ×
Cout and L1 , L2 the kernel size (e.g., 3 × 3), Cin input channels and Cout output channels. It is noticed
   3
       https://github.com/haoxiangsnr/FullSubNet


                                                      20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


             Table 2: Performance of finetuned models from a pretrained FullSubNet.
                             noisy           Pretrain       Finetuned         Finetuned
                            (no SE)        (no finetune)      by GD            by LVA
      noise type SNR      PESQ      STOI    PESQ         STOI   PESQ    STOI     PESQ     STOI
      Babycry      −1      1.08     0.75     1.88        0.91   2.37     0.89     2.61     0.91
      Babycry      +1      1.09     0.77     2.05        0.92   2.63     0.91     2.75     0.92
      Bell         −1      1.06     0.84     2.10        0.94   2.92     0.93     3.00     0.94
      Bell         +1      1.08     0.86     2.29        0.95   3.05     0.94     3.11     0.95
      Siren        −1      1.17     0.81     2.58        0.94   2.92     0.93     3.02     0.94
      Siren        +1      1.18     0.83     2.80        0.95   3.06     0.94     3.16     0.95
      Average       -      1.11     0.81     2.28        0.94   2.82     0.94     2.94     0.94


Figure 10: SRCNN for image deblurring. A pretrained model was composed by a sequence of CNN
layers f = fn ◦ · · · f2 ◦ f1 , where the last CNN layer fn was finetuned to fit more blurred images D.
                                                                                                     e


that CNN kernels Cijαβ cover a patch of the input image one at a time, denoted by xijα ; then each
covered patch xijα has the same size as Cijαβ for a fixed β. Consequently, each output pixel value at
(k, `, β) is computed by,
                                           X
                                  yk`β =        Cijαβ · xijα (k, `)                           (B.41)
                                            i,j,α

where the underscore remarks indices are to be summed over. If we recall that a fully-connected
layer of weights {Wmn } calculates the output vector v = (v1 , . . . , vm , . . .) from an input vector
u = (u1 , . . . , un , . . .) by,
                                            X
                                     vm =       Wmn · un                                         (B.42)
                                                n
then we noticed mathematically there is NO distinction between Eq. (B.41) and Eq. (B.42) as index
n has the role of ijα and m has the character of k`β. In this view, CNN kernels Cijαβ can be
transformed to a 2D matrix Wmn by an index conversion function η, and image patches xijα (k, `)
can be transformed into a 1-D vector un by another index function ξ, see Fig. 11 (RHS).
Thus, we completed the conversion of a CNN to a fully-connected-layer and naturally Eq. (17) ∼ (18)
follow. There can also be possible extensions to other locally-connected networks in the future scope.

Datasets We used the CUration of Flickr Events Dataset (CUFED) (Wang et al., 2016) to
train SRCNN (Scaman & Virmaux, 2018) for image deblurring, available at https://acsweb.
ucsd.edu/~yuw176/event-curation.html. We randomly selected 2000 images from the
CUFED and randomly crop 20 patches of size 33 × 33 from each image. Three pairs of training &


                                                    21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Figure 11: (LHS) The masked patch xijα is regarded as fully-connected under CNN kernels,
Eq. (B.41). (RHS) By flattening the input and the convolved output into 1D vectors, a CNN is
equivalent to a fully-connected layer Eq. (B.42).


finetune combination D, D     e were considered, see Fig. 12,
                                                                                N =40K
        D1 = (xi , yi ) | yi ∈ {original patches}, xi ∈ {×3 blurred patches} i=1
                                                                                N =40K
                                                                                                 (B.43)
        D
        e1 = (exi , yei ) | yei ∈ {original patches}, x
                                                      ei ∈ {×6 blurred patches} i=1
                                                                             N =40K
      D2 = (xi , yi ) | yi ∈ {original patches}, xi ∈ {×3 blurred patches} i=1
                                                                                 N =40K
                                                                                                 (B.44)
      D     xi , yei ) | yei ∈ {original patches}, x
      e2 = (e                                      ei ∈ {×4, ×6 blurred patches} i=1
and
                                                                                 N =40K
      D3 = (xi , yi ) | yi ∈ {original patches}, xi ∈ {×3, ×4 blurred patches} i=1
                                                                             N =40K
                                                                                                 (B.45)
      D     xi , yei ) | yei ∈ {original patches}, x
      e3 = (e                                      ei ∈ {×6 blurred patches} i=1

Another image dataset SET14 (Zeyde et al., 2010) for testing finetuned models.

Implementation The color images were first transformed to a different color space, YCbCr, to
apply the SRCNN model on a single luminance channel. Our SRCNN, Fig. 10, receives D and D      e of
low resolution image patches to output high resolution ones of the same dimension. A pretrained
model composed by a sequence of CNN layers f = fn ◦ · · · f2 ◦ f1 was pretrained by D under
L2 -loss. Then the last CNN layer fn was finetuned to adapt to more blurred images D.
                                                                                   e Two finetuning
methods by GD and LVA were compared. In particular, the conversion Eq. (B.41) ⇔ Eq. (B.42) was
used to admit LVA solutions.
Multiple pretrained architectures f were implemented, of which were
                      f = f1 ◦ f2 ◦ f3 ,                        (3-layer CNNs)
                      f = f1 ◦ f2 ◦ f3 ◦ f4 ◦ f5 ,              (5-layer CNNs)                   (B.46)
                      f = f1 ◦ f2 ◦ f3 ◦ f4 ◦ f5 ◦ f6 ◦ f7      (7-layer CNNs)

Network Architecture We adopted the fast End-to-End Super Resolution model similar to the
original architecture of SRCNN (Dong et al., 2016) with the insertion of a batch-normalization layer
right after each ReLu activation function. The training batch size for f was set at 128, and the testing
batch size for gradient descent finetuning as 1.
The network architecture of pretrained models corresponding to Eq. (B.46):

      1. 3-layer-CNN of kernel size: (9, 5, 5) with channel size: (1, 32, 32, 1).


                                                  22
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Figure 12: Samples of CUFED for training and finetuning (bicubic{×3, ×4, ×6}) for
Eq. (B.43)∼(B.43).


     2. 5-layer-CNN of kernel size: (9, 5, 5, 5, 5) channel size: (1, 32, 32, 32, 32, 1).
     3. 7-layer-CNN of kernel size: (9, 5, 5, 5, 5, 5, 5), channel size: (1, 32, 32, 32, 32, 32, 32, 1).

where the first and the last number in the channel size is always 1 to indicate the input and output
luminance channel.


                                                  23
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


More extensive results Fig. 13 shows the deblurring results by finetuned models of GD and the
LVA, where our method reached the highest PSNR with the least finetuning samples N = 256. This
outcome indicated the LVA method is beneficial for few-shot learning, especially when adaptation
data is few.
More extensive experiments were conducted to observe performance. The following results com-
pared the finetune loss and PSNR with different combinations of training & finetune data in
Eq. (B.43)∼(B.45) and multiple pretrained architectures of f in Eq. B.46.
In Fig. (a) ∼ (f), the horizontal axis of each subfigure is the patch number and the title of each subfigure
indicated the transition from the old data D to new data D     e by D → D,e e.g., {×3, ×4} → ×6.
Overall, the following facts were observed in Fig. (a)∼(f):

      1. The loss is roughly inverse-proportional to PSNR score. Increasing CNN layers can han-
         dle more difficult tasks, such as {×3} → {×4, ×6} compared to {×3} → {×6} and
         {×4, ×6} → {×3} since {×3} → {×4, ×6} was asked to adapt to more new data than it
         was originally trained.
      2. In all figures, the LVA method had stable performance over GD in both loss and PSNR even
         when sample sizes (x-axis) largely decreased. We can see ups and downs in orange bars, but
         not blue bars.
      3. Obviously in Fig. (a), GD showed difficulty in learning {×3} → {×4, ×6} and {×3} →
         {×6} than {×3, ×4} → {×6}, but the LVA method remained roughly the same (stable) as
         well as retaining its best performance over GD.
      4. Overall, GD method improvement was not consistent with the data number, likely due
         to the local minimum occurring in neural networks. Conversely in the LVA method, the
         performance is (stably) proportional to data samples. Therefore, one could easily derive
         acceptable results with few finetune data.

Fig. (a) ∼ (f) then concludes that the LVA method has better performance and is more efficient than
GD in terms of adaptation data amount considered.

Hardware One NVIDIA V100 GPU (32 GB GPU memory) with 4 CPUs (128 GB CPU memory).

Runtime Approximately 4 minutes in the LVA method and 15 minutes in the GD method with 256
patches (1,000 epochs).

8.4   A DDITIONAL E XPERIMENTS ON D OMAIN A DAPTIVE I MAGE C LASSIFICATIONS

We conduct two additional experiments on images to investigate domain adaptation ability using (1)
Office-31 (Saenko et al., 2010) and (2) MNIST → USPS.

Office-31: Table 3 shows the results of domain transitions within the 3 domains of Office-31:
Amazon (A), DSLR (D) and Webcam (W), resulting in 6 possible transitions to classify 31 items.
On each individual source domain (A, D, W ), the pretrained model was trained for 30 epochs.
Subsequently, it was finetuned onto target domains for another 30 epochs. The proposed LVA
obtained higher adaptation accuracy in most domain transitions, confirming that LVA can promptly
adapt to new tasks.


                   Table 3: Office-31: adaptation accuracy between 3 domains.
                 Domain A→D A→W D→A D→W W→A W→D
                 pretrain 77.4 %       67.1 %     54.2 %     80.7 %     59.4 %    92.9 %
                 GD         78.7 %     71.0 %     58.7 %     86.5 %     60.6 %    94.2 %
                 LVA        84.5 %     79.4 %     71.0 %     87.7 %     70.3 %    93.6 %



                                                    24
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Figure 13: Results of image deblurring by SRCNN. Column (b): testing input images from SET14;
column (c): results of LVA model finetuned with 256 patches; column (d): results of GD model
finetuned with 256 patches; column (e): results of GD model finetuned with 16,384 patches. The
corresponding PSNR shown in the figures indicated our LVA method reached the best PSNR with the
least finetuning samples.


MNIST → USPS: In this experiment, the pretrained model was trained on MNIST (source domain)
with 98.94% accuracy by 20 epochs. While adapting to the target domain USPS, the accuracy of the
pretrained model dropped rapidly to 65.32%. Subsequently, gradient descent (GD) and the proposed
LVA were deployed to enhance the target domain results. Table 4 shows the adaptation accuracy
attained at different finetune epochs. It was observed that LVA consistently outperformed GD and
reached high accuracy in just a few epochs. These two additional experiments on image classifications
again verify that the proposed LVA is capable of real-world DA tasks; the adaptability is general.


                       Table 4: MNIST → USPS (classification accuracy)
              Finetune method 10 epochs 50 epochs 90 epochs 120 epochs
                    pretrain                            65.32%
                     GD            74.64%         80.12%       82.06%        82.46%
                     LVA           86.90%         90.13%       90.83%        90.98%


                                                 25
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                     (a) PSNR of SRCNN.


                                     (b) Loss of SRCNN.


                                               26
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                 (c) Loss: finetuning f3 of f = f3 ◦ f2 ◦ f1 vs. patch number (x-axis)


                             (d) PSNR: finetuning f3 of f = f3 ◦ f2 ◦ f1


                         (e) Loss: finetuning f5 of f = f5 ◦ f4 ◦ f3 ◦ f2 ◦ f1


                        (f) PSNR: finetuning f5 of f = f5 ◦ f4 ◦ f3 ◦ f2 ◦ f1


                                                  27
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                    (g) Loss: finetuning f7 of f = f7 ◦ f6 ◦ f5 ◦ f4 ◦ f3 ◦ f2 ◦ f1


                   (h) PSNR: finetuning f7 of f = f7 ◦ f6 ◦ f5 ◦ f4 ◦ f3 ◦ f2 ◦ f1


                                                  28
