Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


B IT-P RUNING :
A S PARSE M ULTIPLICATION -L ESS D OT-P RODUCT
 Yusuke Sekikawa, Shingo Yashima
 DENSO IT LABORATORY, INC., Tokyo, Japan
 {sekikawa.yusuke, yashima.shingo}@core.d-itlab.co.jp



                                          A BSTRACT

        Dot-product is a central building block in neural networks. However, multipli-
        cation (mult) in dot-product consumes intensive energy and space costs that
        challenge deployment on resource-constrained edge devices. In this study, we
        realize energy-efficient neural networks by exploiting a mult-less, sparse dot-
        product. We first reformulate a dot-product between an integer weight and acti-
        vation into an equivalent operation comprised of additions followed by bit-shifts
        (add-shift-add). In this formulation, the number of add operations equals
        the number of bits of the integer weight in binary format. Leveraging this obser-
        vation, we propose Bit-Pruning, which removes unnecessary bits in each weight
        value during training to reduce the energy consumption of add-shift-add.
        Bit-Pruning can be seen as soft Weight-Pruning as it prunes bits, not the whole
        weight element. In extensive experiments, we demonstrate that sparse mult-
        less networks trained with Bit-Pruning show a better accuracy-energy trade-off
        than sparse mult networks trained with Weight-Pruning. (Code is available at
        https://github.com/DensoITLab/bitprune)


1   I NTRODUCTION

Modern deep neural networks (DNNs) contain numerous dot-products between input features and
weight matrices. However, it is well known that multiplication (mult) in dot-product consumes
intensive energy and space costs, challenging DNNs’ deployment on resource-constrained edge de-
vices. This drives several attempts for efficient DNNs by reducing the energy of mult.
Quantization (Yin et al., 2019; Esser et al., Table 1: Energy [pJ] and area [µm2 ] cost on ASIC
2020; Li & Baillieul, 2004) discretizes the (45nm technology) and FPGA (ZYNQ-7ZC706). Data
weight and/or activation into a low-bit repre- adapted from (You et al., 2020; Gholami et al.;
sentation; low-precision mult requires less en- Horowitz, 2014)
ergy than the high-precision counterpart. Power                            ASIC       FPGA
of two networks (Li et al., 2019b; Miyashita        Operation Format Energy     Area  Energy
et al., 2016; Elhoushi et al., 2021) restricts the  mult      FIX32     3.1     3495   19.6
mult operation to the power of two (PoT); PoT                 FIX8      0.2      282    0.2
mult can be realized by a bit-shift (shift),        add       FIX32     0.1      137    0.1
which consumes orders of magnitude less en-                   FIX8     0.03      36     0.1
ergy than mult. Although these approaches           shift     FIX32    0.13       -     0.1
have successfully reduced energy consumption,                 FIX8    0.024       -    0.025
they define the energy-efficient model structure
before training. That is, they limit model capacity and impose training with a precision that is
difficult to use gradient-based optimization, e.g., approximate gradient with the straight-through
estimator (STE) (Yin et al., 2019), making it challenging to achieve good accuracy in the low-bit
regime (e.g., 4bit, 2bit, or binary).
Aside from low-bit approaches, Weight-Pruning (Frankle & Carbin, 2018; Chen et al., 2022; Yang
et al., 2020; Wortsman et al., 2019) learns efficient model structure during training by removing
unimportant weight from high capacity models. Owing to its data-driven nature, it could remove
the unnecessary mult without sacrificing accuracy (e.g., 95% reduction in unstructured pruning).
Empowered by the recent progress of in/near-memory computing architectures (Gholami et al.),


                                                1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Figure 1: Dot-product realized using sparse mult-add (left) and equivalent representation using
add-shift-add(right). In the mult-add, computation is reduced by pruning the entire weight (mult). In
contrast, in the add-shift-add computation is reduced by pruning the bit (add) in binary format.


several DNN accelerators designed for the unstructured sparsity have emerged (Han et al., 2016;
Bamberg et al., 2023; Dietrich et al., 2021; Zhang et al., 2020), realizing the efficient inference
of these sparse networks. Furthermore, optimized implementation for general-purpose CPUs also
proved to be a good candidate for unstructured sparsity (Kurtz et al., 2020).
Motivated by the significant energy reduction of sparse mult operations by Weight-Pruning and
recent advances in the frameworks supporting unstructured sparsity, we envision new frontiers in
the accuracy/energy trade-off by realizing sparse and mult-less dot-product for hardware support-
ing the unstructured sparsity. Noting that the dot-product between integer weights and activation
can be decomposed into a PoT basis and binary vector, we first reformulate a dot-product between
integer weight and activation (mult-add) into an equivalent operation comprised of additions fol-
lowed by bit-shifts and additions (add-shift-add, Figure 1). In this formulation, the number
of the first add operations equals the bitcount of the weight elements in binary format. From
this observation, we propose Bit-Pruning, which removes unnecessary add (therefore unnecessary
bits in weight) during training in a data-driven manner to reduce the energy consumption in the
add-shift-add operation. Because of the difficulty of optimization in binary format, we opti-
mize parameters on a high-precision differentiable mult-add network with bit-sparsity regulariza-
tion, which promotes weights to be sparse in binary format. After training, the obtained bit-sparse
mult-add network is converted to an equivalent add-shift-add network comprised of sparse
add for efficient inference on DNN accelerators supporting unstructured sparsity.
As depicted in Figure 1, Bit-Pruning can be seen as a soft and fine-grained Weight-Pruning; it does
not necessarily remove the whole weight elements but removes only some unnecessary bits of the
weight values. This interpretation raises the following question:

         Which pruning offers a better accuracy/energy trade-off? mult in mult-add
         network (Weight-Pruning) or add in add-shift-add network (Bit-Pruning)?

We conducted an extensive evaluation to answer the question (Section 4); the results suggest that
pruning the add is several times more energy efficient than pruning the mult.
Remark: We do not argue that the add-shift-add representation itself is efficient. In fact, the
estimated energy consumption of (dense) mult-add and add-shift-add without pruning are
almost the same, as we see in Section 3.3. Our research interest is to investigate whether the fine-
grained pruning by removing bits rather than weights can find a more efficient sparse structure; the
add-shift-add representation permits this investigation.

2     P RELIMINARIES
2.1   D OT- PRODUCT WITH M ULT-A DD

The dot-product is a fundamental building block of neural networks. In this study, we mainly focus
on the dot-product that appears in convolution1 . Let the weights and activation be quantized to M
   1
     The same discussion can be applied for dot-product in another computation block such as multi-layer
perceptron or self/cross attention.


                                                   2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


and N bits, respectively, where M, N are sufficiently fine quantization levels such as M, N = 8, 32.
Convolution with the input I 2 ZCi ⇥W ⇥H and weight W 2 ZCo ⇥Ci ⇥k⇥k is equivalent to matrix
multiplication of unfolded input X 2 ZCi kk⇥W H and the reshaped weight W 2 ZCo ⇥Ci kk :
                                             O = I ⇤ W = W X,                                         (1)
For brevity, we consider a single input pixel u and an output channel j. Then, the convolution which
corresponds to the dot-product of the u-th column vector of the unfolded input X·,u and j-th row
vector of the weight Wj is written as follows:
                                                               K
                                                               X
                                             >
                                     Oj,u = X·,u Wj =                Xk,u · Wj,k ,                    (2)
                                                               k=1
where K = Ci kk. Computing (2) using naive dense mult-add requires K mult followed by
(K 1) add, which consumes a lot of energy as it contains many mult operations (Table 1).

2.2       S PARSE M ULT-A DD BY W EIGHT-P RUNING

When a DNN processor supports unstructured weight and dynamic activation sparsity (Han et al.,
2016; Bamberg et al., 2023), mult can be skipped either when the activation or weight is zero. In
this case, the number of mult operation become mult K where mult is the ratio of the nonzero
element defined as bitcount(Wj 6= 0 | X·,u 6= 0)/K. Therefore, the dot-product using sparse
mult-add consumes less energy than dense mult-add.
The sparse mult-add dot-product is typically realized by Weight-Pruning, which trains a network
with the weight-sparsity regularization Lwgt 2 (Liu et al., 2015; Han et al., 2015):
                                      L(W) = Ltask (W) + ⌘ Lwgt (W),
                                                     L
                                                     X
                                      Lwgt (W) =            X (l)      W (l) ,                        (3)
                                                                             0
                                                     l=1
where Ltask is a loss specific to the given task (e.g., cross-entropy for classification), W =
        l=1 is a set of weight matrices from all L layers, X
{W (l) }L                                                         is an input of l-th layer, and ⌘ is a
                                                              (l)

hyper-parameter to balance the accuracy and computational energy. In practice, l1 -norm or Hoyer(-
Square) loss (Yang et al., 2020) is applied to relax l0 -norm for efficient training. Note that when
the target hardware only supports unstructured weight sparsity (no activation sparsity), the same
argument can be applied by replacing X (l) with numel(X (l) ).

3       B IT-P RUNING
For more efficient DNN inference, we propose a sparse and mult-less dot-product by softening the
Weight-Pruning. Our intuition is that better energy-accuracy tradeoff could be achieved by bit-level
fine-grained pruning instead of the weight-level course pruning. We first reformulate a dot-product
between integer weight and activation into an equivalent operation comprised of add-shift-add,
which does not contain mult (Section 3.1 which consumes lot of energy, Figure 1). In this formu-
lation, we can see that the number of the first add (which directly translates to energy consumption)
equals the bitcount of the weight element in binary format. Then, we propose Bit-Pruning,
which removes unnecessary bits of weight elements during training to achieve efficient inference
(Section 3.2).

3.1       R EFORMULATE D OT- PRODUCT WITH A DD -S HIFT-A DD

An M -bit weight matrix3 W 2 ZCo ⇥K is represented in binary format with a tensor B 2
{0, 1}Co ⇥M ⇥K , where Bj,·,k 2 {0, 1}M is the binary representation of the weight value Wj,k 2 Z:
                                                    M
                                                    X
                                          Wj,k =           2m 1 · Bj,m,k .                            (4)
                                                   m=1
    2
        For x 2 ZI⇥J and y 2 ZJ⇥K , x y 2 ZI⇥J⇥K is defined as (x y)i,j,k = xi,j · yj,k .
    3
        For simplicity, we assume the weight element Wj,k is positive in the following explanation.


                                                           3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


         Figure 2: Matrix view of the mult-add (left) and add-shift-add (right) dot-product.


Then, we rewrite the mult-add dot-product (2) into the following add-shift-add formulation:
                                    K             M
                                                                      !
                                   X             X
                          >                             m 1
                         X·,u Wj =      Xk,u ·        2      · Bj,m,k
                                          k=1            m=1
                                          M
                                          X
                                                        >
                                      =         2m 1 · X·,u Bj,m .                                    (5)
                                          m=1
This is computed first by accumulating the input X·,u along the binary vector Bj,m using add, then
multiplying 2m using shift, and finally aggregating the results of all M bits by add. When the
operation is mapped into the hardware supporting the unstructured sparsity, the first add using the
binary vector Bj,m requires bitcount(Bj,m ) times add. The shift and last add are executed
for M 1 times (Table 2).

3.2   S PARSE A DD -S HIFT-A DD BY B IT-P RUNING

In the add-shift-add formulation of (5), the number of the first add operations equals the
bitcount of the binary tensor B, which directly translates to energy consumption. Therefore, our
goal is to learn the sparse binary tensor of the add-shift-add network that also achieves good
performance by minimizing the following loss:
                               L(B) = Ltask (B) + ⌘ bitcount(B),                                      (6)
where B             l=1 is a set of binary tensors from all L layers.
          = {B (l) }L                                                    However, binary parameters
prohibit gradient computation, making it difficult to train with standard backpropagation.
Instead of directly optimizing the binary tensor B, as done by Yang et al. (2021), we deal with
the original weight matrix W while promoting it to be sparse in the binary format B. Notice that
any dot-product with the integer weight can be precisely expressed as the add-shift-add dot
product, and the number of add counts for B depends on the corresponding integer weight W . For
example, when Wj,k is zero, then Bj,·,k = [0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0]> , and there is no add. When Wj,k is
PoT (e.g., 23 ), then Bj,·,k = [0, 0, 0, 1, 0, 0, 0]> , and there is only one add. In such a way, a number
of add in add-shift-add dot-product depends on the value of the corresponding weight Wj,k
(Figure 3a), and there is favorable value in terms of energy consumption.
We leverage this to propose a framework called Bit-Pruning, which optimizes the network’s energy
consumption in a data-driven manner. The binary tensor B of the add-shift-add network is
trained as the high-precision mult-add network having weight W (Figure 2), and a sparsification
of B is realized by imposing the bit-sparsity regularization Lbit on weight W :
                             L(W) = Ltask (W) + ⌘ Lbit (W),
                                           L
                                           X
                             Lbit (W) =          X (l)   (W (l)   Ŵ (l) ) ,                          (7)
                                                                          0
                                           l=1

where Lbit measures a deviation of the current weight W from bit-sparse proximal weight Ŵ ,
explained as follows. Similar to Weight-Pruning (3), we relax the l0 -norm in (7) with l1 -norm or
Hoyer(-Square) loss in practice.
Proximal weight Given the current weight W , the proximal weight Ŵ is computed (element-wise)
as a minimizer of the sum of weight proximity cost Cmv and add count cost Cadd :
                                        ⇣                             ⌘
                        Ŵj,k = arg min Cmv (w, Wj,k ) + (l) Cadd (w) ,                    (8)
                                      w


                                                     4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                       (a) Number of addition (8bit)


                                      (b) Proximal weight ( = 0.1)


                                      (c) Proximal weight ( = 1.0)
Figure 3: (a) Number of add for each weight (add count cost Cadd ). (b)-(c) Proximal weight Ŵ (arrow),
which is a solution of (8) (number of add for add-shift-add dot-product is encoded as color). Refer to
Appendix C for the visualization of corresponding loss landscape (Cmv (w, ŵ) + Cadd (ŵ)).


where Cadd (w) is the bitcount of w in binary format (Figure 3a) and Cmv (w, w0 ) mea-
sures the proximity of two weight values w and w0 . In this study, we adopted Cmv (w, w0 ) :=
|sgn(w)|w|p sgn(w0 )|w0 |p |. We choose p = 1/2 to discount the change in Cmv for larger value
(assuming accuracy is less affected by the change when it is large). Intuitively, Cadd encourages
Ŵj,k to be sparse in the binary format while Cmv keeps it close to the current weight Wj,k and (l)
controls its balance (larger induce more sparsity). Owing to the discrete structure of the weight
space (e.g., 8 bit), the solution of (8) can be analytically computed for given (Figure 3b-3c).
Efficient sparse inference. Once the training has been completed, the high-precision mult-add
network is converted into a mathematically equivalent add-shift-add network for efficient in-
ference. It is expected to be comprised of sparse add which consumes less energy.

3.3   W HICH IS EFFICIENT ? W EIGHT-P RUNING OR B IT-P RUNING

An important question in this study is whether Table 2: Number of operations for dot-product be-
pruning the add (Bit-Pruning) is more effi- tween K-dimensional M -bit vectors.
cient than pruning the mult (Weight-Pruning).               mult-add         add-shift-add
When considering the dot-product between                 dense sparse         sparse/dense
two K-dimensional, M -bit vectors, the en-       mult      K       mult K            0
ergy consumption of sparse add-shift-add          add    K 1       mult K     M add K+M 1
(Eadd-shift-add ) over that of sparse mult-add  shift      0         0            M 1
(Emult-add ) is calculated from Table 2:
  Eadd-shift-add   (M add K)Eadd + (M 1)Eshift + (M 1)Eadd   M Eadd                          add
                 =                                         ⇡                                       (9)
    Emult-add          ( mult K)Emult + ( mult (K 1))Eadd    Emult                          mult

where mult and add are the ratio of nonzero elements in weight (Wj ) and the ratio of nonzero
bits in its binary format (Bj ), respectively. Emult , Eadd , and Eshift are energy consumption of
corresponding operations and we assume K        M in the last approximation. In the case of ASIC, we


                                                    5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                             Table 3: Experimental setup
                                        CIFAR-10         CIFAR-100                             ImageNet
                Network                 ResNet18          ResNet18                          ConvNeXt-B
                Batch size                            512                                        256
             Training epochs                          200                                        100
                Optimizer                                  AdamW (Loshchilov & Hutter, 2019)
                Scheduler               OneCycle (Smith & Topin, 2019)        Cosine decay (Loshchilov & Hutter, 2017)
         Weight quantization M                                                 8
       Activation quantization N                    4/8/32                                        8
          Weight initialization         Kaiming-uniform (He et al., 2015)                    Pretrained4
    (l) for C
              move (Bit-Pruning only)                           1.0 for all layers (Figure 3c)



roughly get Emult ⇡ M Eadd from Table 1; therefore, the computational efficiency of Bit-Pruning
over Weight-Pruning is almost determined by the ratio of obtained connection density add / mult .
We expect that the add in a Bit-Pruned network is much smaller than the mult in a Weight-
Pruned network when both networks achieve comparable accuracy. This is because Bit-Pruning
removes connections more finely than Weight-Pruning; in other words, given the same nonzero ra-
tio, i.e., add = mult , Bit-Pruned weight can have a more nonzero element (at most M times)
than Weight-Pruned weight when it learns a weight that is sparse in binary format. In the extreme
case where all the nonzero weights in a network are represented as PoT, the computational cost in
add-shift-add representation is M times smaller than that in mult-add representation. The
evaluation on actual DNN training is presented in Section 4.

3.4       B IT-P RUNING AS A UNIFIED LOW- ENERGY MODEL

(Non-uniform) quantization. Bit-Pruning effectively applies different non-uniform mixed-
precision quantization for each weight element. As a result of the Bit-Pruning, we will get a sparse
B; this has a similar effect to the non-uniform quantization of weight. Existing quantization tech-
niques learn (non-uniform) step size for a group of weights; contrary, Bit-Pruning realizes pseudo-
non-uniform quantization by selecting a bit pattern.
PoT dot-product. Bit-Pruning can be interpreted as the soft version of the (additive) PoT quan-
tization. The bit-sparsity regularization prefers sparse binary representation, which corresponds to
the PoT; however, it could learn to choose individual non-PoT values for each weight element when
necessary (i.e., when it achieves less total energy for the same accuracy). The learned weight by
Bit-Pruning is dominated by PoT, while some have multiple nonzero bits (See Figure 6).
Unstructured Weight-Pruning. Bit-Pruning can be seen as a soft, fine-grained version of Weight-
Pruning. Both bit-sparsity and weight-sparsity regularization loss are minimized when W = 0;
this corresponds to zero add in add-shift-add and zero mult in mult-add. However, bit-
sparsity regularization does not necessarily remove the whole weight elements but only some unnec-
essary bits in the weight element.

4       E XPERIMENT
4.1       E VALUATION OF ACCURACY / ENERGY TRADE - OFF

Which is energy efficient; pruning add (Bit-Pruning) or pruning mult (Weight-Pruning)? We eval-
uated the accuracy/energy trade-off of both methods on CIFAR-10 (Krizhevsky et al., a), CIFAR-100
(Krizhevsky et al., b), and ImageNet (Deng et al., 2009). For both bit-sparsity regularization Lbit
(7) and weight-sparsity regularization Lwgt (3) which is used for all the conv layer, we approximate
l0 -norm using Hoyer-Square loss (Yang et al., 2020). We use the same network architecture, quan-
tization method (we use LSQ Esser et al. (2020)), and training strategy except for the loss function
for both frameworks. The primary experimental setup5 is summarized in Table 3. To compare the
trade-off, we train networks across various sparsity coefficients ⌘ of Lwgt and Lbit (fixed across the
entire training sequence).
    4
        Pytorch official model zoo http://pytorch.org/vision/main/models/resnext
    5
        See appendix for more detailed experimental setup (Appendix A) and additional results (Appendix B).


                                                            6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


          (a) CIFAR-10/4-bit                (b) CIFAR-10/8-bit                 (c) CIFAR-10/32-bit


         (d) CIFAR-100/4-bit                (e) CIFAR-100/8-bit               (f) CIFAR-100/32-bit

Figure 4: Accuracy/energy trade-off of ResNet18 trained on CIFAR-10 and CIFAR-100 for difference acti-
vation quantization level. Bit-Pruning (add-shift-add) (BP) and Weight-Pruning (mult-add) (WP) are
compared. Bit-Pruning always uses an 8-bit width binary tensor B, and Weight-Pruning quantizes weight using
the same quantization level for activation. The result of Weight-Pruning in add-shift-add representation
(WP(add)) and Bit-Pruning in mult-add representation (BP(mult)) is provided for reference. The multiply-
accumulate (MAC) of the original dense mult-add network is about 0.55 ⇥ 106 , and the estimated energy
consumption (from Table 1) are 26µJ, 107µJ, and 1721µJ for 4-bit, 8-bit, and 32-bit network, respectively.


CIFAR-10/CIFAR-100. We use ResNet18 (He et al., 2016a) as
one of the most popular architectures and train them from scratch.
Figure 4 summarizes the results on CIFAR-10 (Figure 4a,4b,4c)
and CIFAR-100 (Figure 4d,4e,4f).
ImageNet. We conducted an experiment using pre-trained Con-
vNeXt (Liu et al., 2022) on ImageNet (Deng et al., 2009). The
ConvNeXt is designed to be energy efficient by its network archi-
tecture; c.f., it heavily utilizes depthwise convolutions to reduce
the number of mult. Results are summarized in Figure 5.
Summary. In all ranges of accuracy, add-shift-add net- Figure 5: Result of ConvNeXt-B on
work trained with Bit-Pruning consumes less energy than that of ImageNet. 8bit activation. See Fig-
mult-add network trained with Weight-Pruning. In particular, ure 4 for legend.
huge energy saving is observed in high accuracy regime, demon-
strating the superior data-adaptivity of Bit-Pruning over Weight-Pruning. We see a similar trend for
the large-sized, already efficient networks (ConvNeXt) on a large-scale dataset (ImageNet). The
number of add (in add-shift-add network) and mult (in mult-add network) can be com-
pared by multiplying M (number of bits for weight) to the add count in the plots (Because we have
Emult ⇡ M Eadd from Table 1, Section 3.3). The number of add (from Bit-Pruning) is larger than
mult (from Weight-Pruning), however; their ratio is significantly less than M ; therefore, we’ll get
the better trade-off.
Notice that the Bit-Pruned network does not show efficiency in mult-add representation
(BP(mult)), and the Weight-Pruned network does not show efficiency in add-shift-add rep-
resentation (WP(add)). This is because the Bit-Pruned network prefers sparse weights in binary
format (Figure 6d), which is not necessarily zero, contrary, the Weight-pruned network prefer small
weight, which is not necessarily sparse in binary format (Figure 6c).


                                                    7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


              (a) Initial (Kaming uniform)                                 (b) Naive


                  (c) Weight-Pruning                                 (d) Bit-Pruning (Ours)

Figure 6: Weight histogram (CIFAR-10/ResNet18 13th convolution layer). Naive is a model trained using
only task loss (test accuracy: 93.1%). We choose a model performing around 93.0% test accuracy for Weight-
Pruning and Bit-Pruning. The color indicates the number of addition for add-shift-add.


4.2   A BLATION ON BASE BIT WIDTH

Can we obtain a better accuracy-energy trade-off by pruning bits from a wider bit tensor? We
conducted the accuracy/energy trade-off comparison between Bit-Pruning with different base bit
widths (4-bit/8-bit) (Figure 7). The result shows the network with a wide tensor (8-bit) shows a
better trade-off than one using a narrow tensor (4bit). We consider it is because a network with a
wide bit has more choices for selecting good PoT values, suggesting that a better bit-sparse network
is obtained from the larger design space, just like the case of Weight-Pruning (Frankle & Carbin,
2018).

4.3   L EARNED WEIGHT DISTRIBUTION

Figure 6 visualizes histograms of learned weight. Starting from the initial uniform distribution, both
Bit-Pruning and Weight-Pruning drive most of the weight to zero; this corresponds to removing
mult in the mult-add network and add in the add-shift-add network, respectively. In
Bit-Pruning, most of the remaining nonzero weights are concentrated on sparse values in a binary
format, such as PoT. Whereas, Weight-Pruning did not show such particular preference.


5     R ELATED W ORKS

ShiftAddNet (You et al., 2020) is mult-less DNNs utilizing shift and add for efficient train-
ing and inference. It realizes a better accuracy/energy trade-off than the former study, AdderNet
(Chen et al., 2020), utilizing only add. Ours and ShiftAddNet have similarities in that both utilize
shift and add to realize mult-less DNNs. However, their computational model is fundamen-
tally different from ours; ShiftAddNet computes the interaction between weight and input by first
computing the dot-product with PoT weight followed by the l1 norm with add weight. It does not
have an equivalent mult-add dot-product. Its limited expressiveness and the non-differentiability
of the PoT operation make training harder (requiring specifically designed gradient computation)
and prohibit it from reaching the accuracy of the corresponding mult-add network. Ours can be
learned as an ordinal high-precision differentiable mult-add network; therefore, it is possible to
reach the performance of the original network. Besides, motivation and target hardware is different;
ShiftAddNet aims to realize efficient training and inference on dense vector-type processors, while


                                                    8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


our target is hardware supporting unstructured sparsity solely for inference6 . Instead, using the re-
cent extension, ShiftAddNAS You et al. (2022), ours and ShiftAddNet can be combined, e.g., the
best combination of shift-add and add-shift-add are automatically searched.
Lottery ticket hypothesis states that “dense, randomly-initialized, feed-forward networks contain
sub-networks that have the equivalent accuracy as the original network (winning tickets): unstruc-
tured weight pruning naturally uncovers the winning tickets” (Frankle & Carbin, 2018; Ramanujan
et al., 2020). The comparison of different bit widths in Bit-Pruning (Section 4.2) might indicate the
lottery ticket hypothesis in bits; a network having more connections in terms of add-shift-add
representation (i.e., the large binary tensor B) has more chance of containing the winning ticket.
Bit-level sparsity have been considered in several areas. BSQ Yang et al. (2021) proposed
a novel technique for learning the layer-wise bit-width for mixed-precision networks by induc-
ing grouped bit-label sparsity. The novel notion of bit-slice sparsity (sparsity within a sliced
subdivision of binary weight) is introduced by Zhang et al. (2019) to realize efficient infer-
ence on emerging ReRAM-based DNN accelerators. Because their motivation for considering
the bit-level sparsity differs from ours, their proposed method for inducing it is also totally dif-
ferent. Therefore, it cannot efficiently sparsify the add in the add-shift-add network7 .



6       C ONCLUSION
We propose Bit-Pruning, a novel framework for learning efficient
mult-less sparse DNNs. The intensive evaluation shows prun-
ing add (bit) of the add-shift-add network is more energy
efficient than pruning mult (weight) of the mult-add network.

6.1       L IMITATIONS & F UTURE WORK

Learning weight moving cost. In Bit-Pruning, sparse add for
efficient inference is achieved by guiding the weights closer to the
proximal weight (sparse in binary format and close to the current
weight) defined in (8). The distance to current weight needs to be
defined as weight moving cost Cmv . In this study, we predefined
it (Section 3.2). We consider this to be sub-optimal, and it might
be possible to determine the cost (e.g., by learning p) from data to
achieve a better tradeoff, e.g., some weight can move a lot without
affecting the task loss and vice versa.
Evaluation on quantization susceptible module. In this study,
we evaluate Bit-Pruning on simple classification tasks using sim-
ple network modules such as conv. Some DNN modules are
known to be more susceptible to quantization noise, such as Figure 7: Ablation of bit width.
the object detection head (Li et al., 2019a), transformer module CIFAR-10/100 (top/bottom).
(Bamberg et al., 2023), and recurrent module (He et al., 2016b), making it challenging to quan-
tize them in a lower bit regime. Bit-Pruning might be an ideal choice for realizing energy-efficient
inference on these modules because it could virtually utilize high-precision weight to achieve the
accuracy of the original high-precision network.
Benchmark on real hardware We show the estimate of computational gain by Bit-Pruning using
the basic statistic known in the literature (Table 1); we have not evaluated the actual energy consump-
tion, wall-clock time, or area cost in the actual hardware. The proposed add-shift-add or exist-
ing sparse mult-add models require specialized hardware that supports unstructured/dynamic
sparsity or optimized CPU implementation Kurtz et al. (2020) to exploit the sparsity to the full ex-
tent. The sparsity-aware accelerators often utilize in/near-memory computing architecture (Gholami
et al.). We believe the Bit-Pruning is more suitable than Weight-Pruning for this architecture because
add logic is cheaper in size and energy to place in or near memory than mult logic.
    6
        For this reason, it is difficult to compare with ShiftAddNet in terms of computational efficiency.
    7
        Refer to Appendix-E,H for more discussion and experiments for comparing the ability to induce sparsity.


                                                         9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


R EFERENCES
Lennart Bamberg, Arash Pourtaherian, Luc Waeijen, Anupam Chahar, and Orlando Moreira.
  Synapse compression for event-based convolutional-neural-network accelerators. IEEE Trans-
  actions on Parallel and Distributed Systems, 34(4):1227–1240, 2023.
Hanting Chen, Yunhe Wang, Chunjing Xu, Boxin Shi, Chao Xu, Qi Tian, and Chang Xu. Addernet:
  Do we really need multiplications in deep learning? In IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer
  Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 1468–1477, 2020.
Tianlong Chen, Xuxi Chen, Xiaolong Ma, Yanzhi Wang, and Zhangyang Wang. Coarsening the
  granularity: Towards structurally sparse lottery tickets. In International Conference on Machine
  Learning, pp. 3025–3039, 2022.
Jia Deng, Wei Dong, Richard Socher, Li-Jia Li, Kai Li, and Li Fei-Fei. ImageNet: A large-scale
   hierarchical image database. In IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition,
   pp. 248–255, 2009.
Anastasia Dietrich, Frithjof Gressmann, Douglas Orr, Ivan Chelombiev, Daniel Justus, and
  Carlo Luschi. Towards structured dynamic sparse pre-training of BERT. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2108.06277, 2021.
Mostafa Elhoushi, Zihao Chen, Farhan Shafiq, Ye Henry Tian, and Joey Yiwei Li. DeepShift:
 Towards multiplication-less neural networks. In IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and
 Pattern Recognition, pp. 2359–2368, 2021.
Steven K Esser, Jeffrey L McKinstry, Deepika Bablani, Rathinakumar Appuswamy, and Dharmen-
  dra S Modha. Learned step size quantization. In International Conference on Learning Repre-
  sentations, 2020.
William Falcon and Kyunghyun Cho. A framework for contrastive self-supervised learning and
 designing a new approach. arXiv preprint arXiv:2009.00104, 2020.
Jonathan Frankle and Michael Carbin. The lottery ticket hypothesis: Finding sparse, trainable neural
  networks. arXiv preprint arXiv:1803.03635, 2018.
Amir Gholami, Sehoon Kim, Zhen Dong, Zhewei Yao, Michael W Mahoney, and Kurt Keutzer. A
 survey of quantization methods for efficient neural network inference. In Low-Power Computer
 Vision, pp. 291–326.
Song Han, Jeff Pool, John Tran, and William Dally. Learning both weights and connections for
  efficient neural network. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 28,
  2015.
Song Han, Xingyu Liu, Huizi Mao, Jing Pu, Ardavan Pedram, Mark A Horowitz, and William J
  Dally. Eie: Efficient inference engine on compressed deep neural network. ACM SIGARCH
  Computer Architecture News, 44(3):243–254, 2016.
Kaiming He, Xiangyu Zhang, Shaoqing Ren, and Jian Sun. Delving deep into rectifiers: Surpass-
  ing human-level performance on imagenet classification. In IEEE International Conference on
  Computer Vision, pp. 1026–1034, 2015.
Kaiming He, Xiangyu Zhang, Shaoqing Ren, and Jian Sun. Deep residual learning for image recog-
  nition. In IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 770–778, 2016a.
Qinyao He, He Wen, Shuchang Zhou, Yuxin Wu, Cong Yao, Xinyu Zhou, and Yuheng Zou. Effective
  quantization methods for recurrent neural networks. arXiv preprint arXiv:1611.10176, 2016b.
Dan Hendrycks and Kevin Gimpel.          Gaussian error linear units (GELUs).       arXiv preprint
  arXiv:1606.08415, 2016.
Mark Horowitz. 1.1 computing’s energy problem (and what we can do about it). In IEEE Interna-
 tional Solid-State Circuits Conference Digest of Technical Papers, pp. 10–14, 2014.


                                                10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Andrew Howard, Mark Sandler, Grace Chu, Liang-Chieh Chen, Bo Chen, Mingxing Tan, Weijun
  Wang, Yukun Zhu, Ruoming Pang, Vijay Vasudevan, et al. Searching for MobileNetV3. In
  IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision, pp. 1314–1324, 2019.
Andrew G Howard, Menglong Zhu, Bo Chen, Dmitry Kalenichenko, Weijun Wang, Tobias Weyand,
  Marco Andreetto, and Hartwig Adam. MobileNets: Efficient convolutional neural networks for
  mobile vision applications. arXiv preprint arXiv:1704.04861, 2017.
Yerlan Idelbayev and Miguel A Carreira-Perpinán. Low-rank compression of neural nets: Learning
  the rank of each layer. In IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition,
  pp. 8049–8059, 2020.
Alex Krizhevsky, Vinod Nair, and Geoffrey Hinton. CIFAR-10 (canadian institute for advanced
  research). a. URL http://www.cs.toronto.edu/~kriz/cifar.html.
Alex Krizhevsky, Vinod Nair, and Geoffrey Hinton. CIFAR-100 (canadian institute for advanced
  research). b. URL http://www.cs.toronto.edu/~kriz/cifar.html.
Mark Kurtz, Justin Kopinsky, Rati Gelashvili, Alexander Matveev, John Carr, Michael Goin,
 William Leiserson, Sage Moore, Nir Shavit, and Dan Alistarh. Inducing and exploiting activa-
 tion sparsity for fast inference on deep neural networks. In International Conference on Machine
 Learning, pp. 5533–5543, 2020.
Keyong Li and John Baillieul. Robust quantization for digital finite communication bandwidth
  (dfcb) control. IEEE Transactions on Automatic Control, 49(9):1573–1584, 2004.
Rundong Li, Yan Wang, Feng Liang, Hongwei Qin, Junjie Yan, and Rui Fan. Fully quantized net-
  work for object detection. In IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition,
  pp. 2810–2819, 2019a.
Yuhang Li, Xin Dong, and Wei Wang. Additive Powers-of-Two quantization: An efficient non-
  uniform discretization for neural networks. arXiv preprint arXiv:1909.13144, 2019b.
Baoyuan Liu, Min Wang, Hassan Foroosh, Marshall Tappen, and Marianna Pensky. Sparse convo-
  lutional neural networks. In IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp.
  806–814, 2015.
Zhuang Liu, Hanzi Mao, Chao-Yuan Wu, Christoph Feichtenhofer, Trevor Darrell, and Saining Xie.
  A convnet for the 2020s. In IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition,
  pp. 11976–11986, 2022.
Ilya Loshchilov and Frank Hutter. SGDR: Stochastic gradient descent with warm restarts. In Inter-
   national Conference on Learning Representations, 2017.
Ilya Loshchilov and Frank Hutter. Decoupled weight decay regularization. In International Confer-
   ence on Learning Representations, 2019.
Daisuke Miyashita, Edward H Lee, and Boris Murmann. Convolutional neural networks using
  logarithmic data representation. arXiv preprint arXiv:1603.01025, 2016.
Adam Paszke, Sam Gross, Francisco Massa, Adam Lerer, James Bradbury, Gregory Chanan, Trevor
  Killeen, Zeming Lin, Natalia Gimelshein, Luca Antiga, Alban Desmaison, Andreas Kopf, Edward
  Yang, Zachary DeVito, Martin Raison, Alykhan Tejani, Sasank Chilamkurthy, Benoit Steiner,
  Lu Fang, Junjie Bai, and Soumith Chintala. PyTorch: An imperative style, high-performance
  deep learning library. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 32, pp.
  8024–8035. 2019.
Vivek Ramanujan, Mitchell Wortsman, Aniruddha Kembhavi, Ali Farhadi, and Mohammad Raste-
  gari. What’s hidden in a randomly weighted neural network? In IEEE/CVF Conference on
  Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 11893–11902, 2020.
Leslie N Smith and Nicholay Topin. Super-convergence: Very fast training of neural networks using
  large learning rates. In Artificial Intelligence and Machine Learning for Multi-Domain Operations
  Applications, volume 11006, pp. 369–386, 2019.


                                                11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Ross Wightman.  Pytorch image models.                   https://github.com/rwightman/
  pytorch-image-models, 2019.
Mitchell Wortsman, Ali Farhadi, and Mohammad Rastegari. Discovering neural wirings. In Ad-
 vances in Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 32, 2019.
Huanrui Yang, Wei Wen, and Hai Li. DeepHoyer: Learning sparser neural network with differen-
  tiable scale-invariant sparsity measures. In International Conference on Learning Representa-
  tions, 2020.
Huanrui Yang, Lin Duan, Yiran Chen, and Hai Li. BSQ: Exploring bit-level sparsity for mixed-
  precision neural network quantization. In International Conference on Learning Representations,
  2021.
Penghang Yin, Jiancheng Lyu, Shuai Zhang, Stanley Osher, Yingyong Qi, and Jack Xin. Under-
  standing straight-through estimator in training activation quantized neural nets. In International
  Conference on Learning Representations, 2019.
Haoran You, Xiaohan Chen, Yongan Zhang, Chaojian Li, Sicheng Li, Zihao Liu, Zhangyang Wang,
  and Yingyan Lin. ShiftAddNet: A hardware-inspired deep network. In Advances in Neural
  Information Processing Systems, volume 33, pp. 2771–2783, 2020.
Haoran You, Baopu Li, Shi Huihong, Yonggan Fu, and Yingyan Lin. Shiftaddnas: Hardware-
  inspired search for more accurate and efficient neural networks. In International Conference on
  Machine Learning, pp. 25566–25580, 2022.
Jie-Fang Zhang, Ching-En Lee, Chester Liu, Yakun Sophia Shao, Stephen W Keckler, and Zhengya
   Zhang. SNAP: An efficient sparse neural acceleration processor for unstructured sparse deep
   neural network inference. IEEE Journal of Solid-State Circuits, 56(2):636–647, 2020.
Jingyang Zhang, Huanrui Yang, Fan Chen, Yitu Wang, and Hai Li. Exploring bit-slice sparsity
   in deep neural networks for efficient reram-based deployment. In Workshop on Energy Efficient
   Machine Learning and Cognitive Computing, pp. 1–5, 2019.


                                                12
