Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


C AN W E FAITHFULLY R EPRESENT M ASKED S TATES
TO C OMPUTE S HAPLEY VALUES ON A DNN?

 Jie Ren, Zhanpeng Zhou, Qirui Chen, Quanshi Zhang∗
 Shanghai Jiao Tong University



                                                A BSTRACT

          Masking some input variables of a deep neural network (DNN) and computing
          output changes on the masked input sample represent a typical way to compute at-
          tributions of input variables in the sample. People usually mask an input variable
          using its baseline value. However, there is no theory to examine whether baseline
          value faithfully represents the absence of an input variable, i.e., removing all sig-
          nals from the input variable. Fortunately, recent studies (Ren et al., 2023a; Deng
          et al., 2022a) show that the inference score of a DNN can be strictly disentangled
          into a set of causal patterns (or concepts) encoded by the DNN. Therefore, we pro-
          pose to use causal patterns to examine the faithfulness of baseline values. More
          crucially, it is proven that causal patterns can be explained as the elementary ra-
          tionale of the Shapley value. Furthermore, we propose a method to learn optimal
          baseline values, and experimental results have demonstrated its effectiveness.


1       I NTRODUCTION
Many attribution methods (Zhou et al., 2016; Selvaraju et al., 2017; Lundberg and Lee, 2017; Shriku-
mar et al., 2017) have been proposed to estimate the attribution (importance) of input variables to
the model output, which represents an important direction in explainable AI. In this direction, many
studies (Lundberg and Lee, 2017; Ancona et al., 2019; Fong et al., 2019) masked some input vari-
ables of a deep neural network (DNN), and they used the change of network outputs on the masked
samples to estimate attributions of input variables. As Fig. 1 shows, there are different types of
baseline values to represent the absence of input variables.
Theoretically, the trustworthiness of attributions highly depends on whether the current baseline
value can really remove the signal of the input variable without bringing in new out-of-distribution
(OOD) features. However, there is no criterion to evaluate the signal removal of masking methods.
To this end, we need to first break the blind faith that seemingly reasonable baseline values can
faithfully represent the absence of input variables, and the blind faith that seemingly OOD
baseline values definitely cause abnormal features. In fact, because a DNN may have complex
inference logic, seemingly OOD baseline values do not necessarily generate OOD features.
Concept/causality-emerging phenomenon. The core challenge of theoretically guaranteeing or
examining whether the baseline value removes all or partial signals of an input variable is to explic-
itly define the signal/concept/knowledge encoded by a DNN in a countable manner. To this end,
Ren et al. (2023a) have discovered a counter-intuitive concept-emerging phenomenon in a trained
DNN. Although the DNN does not have a physical unit to encode explicit causality or concepts, Ren
et al. (2023a); Deng et al. (2022a) have surprisingly discovered that when the DNN is sufficiently
trained, the sparse and symbolic concepts emerge. Thus, we use such concepts as a new perspective
to define the optimal baseline value for the absence of input variables.
As Fig. 1 shows, each concept represents an AND relationship between a specific set S of input
variables. The co-appearance of these input variables makes a numerical contribution US to the
network output. Thus, we can consider such a concept as a causal pattern1 of the network output,
    ∗
     Quanshi Zhang is the corresponding author. He is with the Department of Computer Science and Engi-
neering, the John Hopcroft Center, at the Shanghai Jiao Tong University, China. zqs1022@sjtu.edu.cn.
    1
      Note that in this paper, the causal pattern means the extracted causal relationship between input variables
and the output encoded by the DNN, rather than the true intrinsic causal relationship hidden in data.


                                                       1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                                                  ′
        𝑣(𝑥𝑆 )                  𝑣(𝑥𝑆 )           𝐸𝑝 𝑥 ′ 𝑥 𝑣 𝑥𝑆 ⊔ 𝑥𝑁∖𝑆               𝑣(𝑥𝑆 )                                    𝑣(𝑥𝑆 )
                                                        𝑆


                                                                                                                 𝐶𝑆 1        𝐶𝑆 3
                                                                                                                                          …        𝐶𝑆 𝐾
                                                                                                  explained as
                                                        ?           ?
                                                        ?       ?

                                                        ?
                                                        ?   ?


 Mean baseline value:     Blurring the image:    Based on conditional         Zero baseline value:
  introduce additional      cannot remove        distribution w.r.t. the      introduce additional                        remove old           introduce new
information (grey dots) low-frequency features   contexts, i.e., 𝒑(𝒙′ |𝒙𝑺 ) information (black dots)                    causal patterns       causal patterns

Figure 1: (Left) Previous masking methods may either introduce additional signals, or cannot re-
move all the old signals. (Right) The inference of the DNN on images masked by these baseline
values can be well mimicked by causal patterns.


and US is termed the causal effect. For example, the concept of a rooster’s head consists of the
forehead, eyes, beak, and crown, i.e., S = {forehead, eyes, beak, crown} = {f, e, b, c} for short. Only if
input variables f , e, b, and c co-appear, the causal pattern S is triggered and makes an effect US on
the confidence of the head classification. Otherwise, the absence of any input variables in the causal
pattern S will remove the effect.
Ren et al. (2023a) have extracted a set of sparse causal patterns (concepts) encoded by the DNN.
More importantly, the following finding has proven that such causal patterns1 can be considered as
elementary inference logic used by the DNN. Specifically, given an input sample with n variables, we
can generate 2n different masked samples. We can use a relatively small number of causal patterns
to accurately mimic network outputs on all 2n masked samples, which guarantees the faithfulness
of causal patterns.
Defining optimal baseline values based on causal patterns. From the above perspective of causal
patterns, whether baseline values look reasonable and fit human’s intuition is no longer the key
factor to determine the trustworthiness of baseline values. Instead, we evaluate the faithfulness of
baseline values by using causal patterns. Because the baseline value is supposed to represent the
absence of an input variable, we find that setting an optimal baseline value usually generates the
most simplified explanation of the DNN, i.e., we may extract a minimum number of causal patterns
to explain the DNN. Such an explanation is the most reliable according to Occam’s Razor.
• We prove that using incorrect baseline values makes a single causal pattern be explained as an
exponential number of redundant causal patterns. Let us consider the following toy example, where
the DNN contains a causal pattern S={f, e, b, c} with a considerable causal effect E on the output.
If an incorrect baseline value bf of the variable f (forehead) just blurs the image patch, rather than
fully remove its appearance, then masking the variable f cannot remove all score E. The remaining
score E −U{f,e,b,c} will be explained as redundant causal patterns U{e,b} , U{e,c} , U{e,b,c} , etc.
• Furthermore, incorrect baseline values may also generate new patterns. For example, if baseline
values of {f, e, b, c} are set as black regions, then masking all four regions may generate a new
pattern of a black square, which is a new causal pattern that influences the network output.
Therefore, we consider that the optimal baseline value, which faithfully reflects the true inference
logic, usually simplifies the set of causal patterns. I.e., it usually reduces the overall strength of exist-
ing causal effects most without introducing new causal effects. However, we find that most existing
masking methods are not satisfactory from this perspective (see Section 3.2 and Table 1), al-
though the masking method based on conditional distribution of input variables (Covert et al.,
2020b; Frye et al., 2021) performs a bit better.
In particular, we notice that Shapley values can also be derived from causal patterns in theory, i.e.,
the causal patterns are proven to be elementary effects of Shapley values. Therefore, we propose a
new method to learn optimal baseline values for Shapley values, which removes the causal effects
of the masked input variables and avoids introducing new causal effects.
Contributions of this paper can be summarized as follows. (1) We propose a metric to examine
whether the masking approach in attribution methods could faithfully represent the absence state of
input variables. Based on this metric, we find that most previous masking methods are not reliable.


                                                                               2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


(2) We define and develop an approach to estimating optimal baseline values for Shapley values,
which ensures the trustworthiness of the attribution.

2   E XPLAINABLE AI THEORIES BASED ON GAME - THEORETIC INTERACTIONS
This paper is a typical achievement on the theoretical system of game-theoretic interactions. In fact,
our research group has developed and used the game-theoretical interaction as a new perspective
to solve two challenges in explainable AI, i.e., (1) how to define and represent implicit knowledge
encoded by a DNN as explicit and countable concepts, (2) how to use concepts encoded by the
DNN to explain its representation power or performance. More importantly, we find that the game-
theoretic interaction is also a good perspective to analyze the common mechanism shared by previous
empirical findings and explanations of DNNs.
• Explaining the knowledge/concepts encoded by a DNN. Defining interactions between input
variables of a DNN in game theory is a typical research direction (Grabisch and Roubens, 1999;
Sundararajan et al., 2020). To this end, we further defined the multi-variate interaction (Zhang et al.,
2021a;d) and multi-order interaction (Zhang et al., 2021b) to represent interactions of different com-
plexities. Ren et al. (2023a) and Li and Zhang (2023) first discovered that we could consider
game-theoretic interactions as the concepts encoded by a DNN, considering the following three
terms. (1) We found that a trained DNN usually only encoded very sparse and salient interactions,
and each interaction made a certain effect on the network output. (2) We proved that we could just
use the effects of such a small number of salient interactions to well mimic/predict network outputs
on an exponential number of arbitrarily masked input samples. (3) We found that salient interac-
tions usually exhibited strong transferability across different samples, strong transferability across
different DNNs, and strong discrimination power. Thus, the above three perspectives comprised
the solid foundation of considering salient interactions as the concepts encoded by a DNN.
Furthermore, Cheng et al. (2021b) found that such interactions usually represented the most reliable
and prototypical concepts encoded by a DNN. Cheng et al. (2021a) further analyzed the different
signal-processing behaviors of a DNN in encoding shapes and textures.
• The game-theoretic interaction is also a new perspective to investigate the representation
power of a DNN. Deng et al. (2022a) proved a counter-intuitive bottleneck/difficulty of a DNN in
representing interactions of the intermediate complexity. Zhang et al. (2021b) explored the effects
of the dropout operation on interactions to explain the generalization power of a DNN. Wang et al.
(2021a;b); Ren et al. (2021) used interactions between input variables to explain the adversarial
robustness and adversarial transferability of a DNN. Zhou et al. (2023) found that complex (high-
order) interactions were more likely to be over-fitted, and they used the generalization power of
different interaction concepts to explain the generalization power of the entire DNN. Ren et al.
(2023b) proved that a Bayesian neural network (BNN) was less likely to encode complex (high-
order) interactions, which avoided over-fitting.
• Game-theoretic interactions are also used to analyze the common mechanism shared by
many empirical findings. Deng et al. (2022b) discovered that almost all (fourteen) attribution meth-
ods could be re-formulated as a reallocation of interactions in mathematics. This enabled the fair
comparison between different attribution methods. Zhang et al. (2022) proved that twelve previous
empirical methods of boosting adversarial transferability could be explained as reducing interactions
between pixel-wise adversarial perturbations.

3   P ROBLEMS WITH THE REPRESENTATION OF THE MASKED STATES
The Shapley value (Shapley, 1953) was first introduced in game theory to measure the contribution
of each player in a game. People usually use Shapley values to estimate attributions of input variables
of a DNN. Let the input sample x of the DNN contain n input variables, i.e., x = [x1 , . . . , xn ]. The
Shapley value of the i-th X
                          input variable ϕi is defined as follows.

                    ϕi =                [|S|!(n − |S| − 1)!/n!] · v(xS∪{i} ) − v(xS )                (1)
                             S⊆N \{i}
where v(xS ) ∈ R denotes the model output when variables in S are present, and variables in N \S
are masked. Specifically, v(x∅ ) represents the model output when all input variables are masked.
The Shapley value of the variable i is computed as the weighted marginal contribution of i when the
variable i is present w.r.t. the case when the variable i is masked, i.e. v(xS∪{i} ) − v(xS ).


                                                     3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                    𝑣 𝑥𝑆 : the income is less than 50k
                                                                         Table 1: The ratio R of the remaining and newly intro-
      𝑈𝑆 -0.72   +0.58 -1.18      -0.93    +0.58   +0.52   -0.52
          𝐶𝑆1     𝐶𝑆 2  𝐶𝑆 3       𝐶𝑆 4     𝐶𝑆 5    𝐶𝑆 6    𝐶𝑆 7
                                                                         duced causal effects in the masked inputs. A small value
                                                                         of R meant that baseline values removed most original
         relation       marital
                                     age
                                               educati
                                                           sex
                                                                         causal effects and did not introduce many new effects.
           ship         status                   on
                                                                                            R(zero)   R(mean)   R(blur)   R(conditional)   R(ours)
Figure 2: Causal patterns that explain                                        MNIST         1.1736    0.3043    0.4159     0.3780          0.2185
the inference on a sample in the income                                      CIFAR-10       0.6630    0.8042    0.7288     0.4027          0.1211
dataset.
The Shapley value is widely considered a fair attribution method, because it satisfies the linearity,
dummy, symmetry, and efficiency axioms (Weber, 1988) (please refer to Appendix D). However,
when we explain a DNN, a typical challenge is how to faithfully define the absence of an input vari-
able. The most classical way is to use baseline values (or called reference values) b = [b1 , b2 , . . . , bn ]
to mask variables to represent their absence. Specifically, given an input sample x, xS denotes a
masked sample, which is generated by masking variables in the set N \ S .
                                                   If i ∈ S, (xS )i = xi ; otherwise, (xS )i = bi                                                (2)
We aim to learn optimal baseline values b to faithfully represent absent states of input variables.
Decomposing a DNN’s output into sparse interactions. Given a trained DNN v and an input x
with n input variables, Ren et al. (2023a) have proven that the DNN output v(x) can be decomposed
into effects of interactions between input variables. Specifically, let S ⊆ N denote a subset of
input variables. The interaction effect between variables in S is defined as the following Harsanyi
dividend (Harsanyi, 1982).              X                          def                        ′
                                                           US =                   (−1)|S|−|S | · v(xS ′ )                                        (3)
                                                                         S ′ ⊆S
                                                                         P
Based on this definition, we have v(x) =                                  S⊆N US        .
Sparse salient interactions can be considered as causal patterns1 (or concepts) encoded by
the DNN. Theorem 1 and Remark 1 prove that most interactions have ignorable effects US ≈ 0,
and people can use a few salient interactions with non-ignorable effects to well approximate the
inference scores on 2n different masked samples. Thus, we can consider such interactions as causal
patterns1 or concepts encoded by the DNN. Accordingly, we can consider the interaction effect US
as the causal effect. Besides, Remark 1 has been verified on different DNNs learned for various
tasks by experiments in both Appendix G.1 and (Ren et al., 2023a).
Theorem 1 (Faithfulness, proven by Ren et al. (2023a) and Appendix E.1) Let us consider a DNN
v and an input sample x with n input variables. We can generate 2n different masked samples, i.e.,
{xS |S ⊆ N }. The DNN’s outputs on all masked samples can always    P be well mimicked as the sum of
the triggered interaction effects in Eq. (3), i.e., ∀S ⊆ N, v(xS ) = S ′ ⊆S US ′ .
Remark 1 (Sparsity) Interaction effects in most DNNs are usually very sparse. Most interaction
effects are almost zero, i.e., US ≈ 0. A few most salient interaction effects in Ω (less than 100
interaction     effects in most cases) are already enough to approximate the DNN, i.e., ∀S ⊆ N, v(xS ) ≈
P                                    n
   S ′ ∈Ω,S ′ ⊆S US , where |Ω| ≪ 2 .
                    ′


Each causal pattern (concept) S represents an AND relationship between input variables in S . For
example, the head pattern of a rooster consists of {forehead, eyes, beak, crown}. If the forehead, eyes,
beak, and crown of the rooster co-appear, then the head pattern S = {forehead, eyes, beak, crown} is
triggered and makes a causal effect US on the output. Otherwise, if any part is masked, the causal
pattern S will not be triggered, and the DNN’s inference score v(x) will not receive the causal effect
US . In sum, when we mask an input variable i, it is supposed to remove all causal effects of all AND
relationships that contain the variable i. Please see Appendix F for the proof.

3.1      E XAMINING THE FAITHFULNESS OF BASELINE VALUES USING CAUSAL PATTERNS

We use salient causal patterns (or concepts) to evaluate the faithfulness of masking methods. Specifi-
cally, we examine whether baseline values remove most causal effects depending on xi , and whether
baseline values generate new causal effects.
The evaluation of the masking methods based on salient causal effects is theoretically supported
from the following three perspectives. First, Theorem 1 and Remark 1 prove that the inference score
of a DNN can be faithfully disentangled into a relatively small number of causal patterns. Second,
Theorem 2 shows that Shapley values can be explained as a re-allocation of causal effects to input


                                                                                    4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


variables. Therefore, reducing effects of salient patterns means the removal of elementary factors
that determine Shapley values. Besides, in order to verify that the reduction of causal patterns can
really represent the absence of input variables, we have conducted experiments to find that salient
patterns triggered by white noise inputs were much less than those triggered by normal images.
Please see Appendix G.2 for details.

Theorem 2 (proven by Harsanyi (1982) and Appendix E.2) We can directly derive Shapley values
from the effects US of causal patterns. The Shapley value can be Pconsidered1 as uniformly allocating
each causal pattern S’s effect US to all its variables, i.e. ϕi = S⊆N \{i} |S|+1 US∪{i} .

Third, an incorrect baseline value bi will make partial effects of the AND relationship of the variable
i be mistakenly explained as an exponential number of additional redundant causal patterns, which
significantly complicates the explanation. Therefore, the optimal baseline value is supposed to
generate the most sparse causal patterns as the simplest explanation of the DNN. Compared to
dense causal patterns generated by sub-optimal baseline values, the simplest explanation removes
as many as existing causal effects as possible without introducing additional causal effects.
Remark
     Q      2 (proof in Appendix E.3) Let us consider a function with a single causal pattern f (xS ) =
wS     j∈S  (x j−δj ). Accordingly, ground-truth baseline values of variables are obviously {δj }, because
setting any variable ∀j ∈ S, xj = δj will deactivate this pattern. Given the correct baseline values
b∗j = δj , we can use a single causal pattern to regress f (xS ), i.e., US = f (xS ), ∀ S ′ ̸= S, US ′ = 0.

Theorem 3 (proof in Appendix E.3) For the function f (xS ) = wS j∈S (xj −δj ), if we use m′ incor-
                                                                      Q

rect baseline values {b′j |b′j ̸= δj } to replace correct ones to compute causal effects, then the function
                                              ′
will be explained to contain at most 2m causal patterns.
Theorem 4 (proof in Appendix E.3) If we use m′ incorrect baseline values to compute causal effects
                                                           m′
                            Q
in the function f (xS ) = wS j∈S (xj − δj ), a total of k−|S|+m ′   causal patterns of the k-th order
emerge, k ≥ |S|−m′ . A causal pattern of the k-th order means that this causal pattern represents
the AND relationship between k variables.
Specifically, Remark 2, Theorems 3 and 4 provide a new perspective to understand how incorrect
baseline values generate new causal patterns. Remark 2 shows how correct baseline values explain
a toy model that contains a single causal pattern. Theorems 3 and 4 show that incorrect baseline
values will use an exponential number of redundant low-order patterns to explain a single
high-order causal pattern. For example, we are given the function f (x) = w(xp −δp )(xq −δq ) s.t.
xp = 3, xq = 4, δp = 2, δq = 3. If we use ground-truth baseline values {δp , δq }, then the function
is explained as simple as a single causal pattern Ω ={{p, q}}, which yields correct Shapley values
ϕp = ϕq = 0.5 · w, according to Theorem 2. Otherwise, if we use incorrect baseline values {b′p =
1, b′q = 1}, then this function will be explained as four causal patterns Ω = {∅, {p}, {q}, {p, q}}, i.e.,
f (x) = U∅ C∅ + U{p} C{p} + U{q} C{q} + U{p,q} C{p,q} , where U∅ = 2w, U{p} = −4w, U{q} = −3w,
and U{p,q} = 6w are computed using incorrect baseline values. Incorrect baseline values increase
complicated causal patterns and lead to incorrect Shapley values ϕp = −w, ϕq = 0. In fact, the
existence of most newly introduced causal patterns is due to that the effects of a high-order causal
pattern are not fully removed, and that OOD causal patterns (new OOD edges or shapes) may be
caused by incorrect baseline values.

3.2   P ROBLEMS WITH PREVIOUS MASKING METHODS
In this subsection, we compare causal patterns in the masked sample with causal patterns in the
original sample to evaluate the following baseline values.
(1) Mean baseline values. As Fig. 1 shows, the baseline value of each input variable is set to the
mean value of this variable over all samples (Dabkowski and Gal, 2017), i.e. bi = Ex [xi ]. However,
empirically, this method actually introduces additional signals to the input. For example, mean
values introduce massive grey dots to images and may form new edges as abnormal causal patterns.
This has been verified by experiments in Table 1. Experimental details will be introduced later.
(2) Zero baseline values. Baseline values of all input variables are set to zero (Ancona et al., 2019;
Sundararajan et al., 2017), i.e. ∀i ∈ N, bi = 0. As Fig. 1 shows, just like mean baseline values, zero
baseline values also introduce additional signals (black dots) to the input (verified in Table 1).


                                                    5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023



                                Table 2: Analysis about previous masking methods.
                               Baseline values      Different samples share the
 Setting of baseline values                                                                           Shortcomings
                              are constant or not   same baseline values or not
   Mean baseline value                ✓                         ✓                                introduce additional signals
   Zero baseline value                ✓                         ✓                                introduce additional signals
  Blurring baseline value             ✓                          ✗                         not remove low-frequency components
   Marginal distribution              ✗                         ✓                               assume feature independence
  Conditional distribution            ✗                          ✗                balance between the computational cost and the accuracy
           Ours                       ✓                     both are ok                            high computational cost

(3) Blurring input samples. Fong and Vedaldi (2017) and Fong et al. (2019) blur image pixels xi
using a Gaussian kernel as its masked state. Covert et al. (2020a); Sturmfels et al. (2020) mentioned
that this approach only removed high-frequency signals, but failed to remove low-frequency signals.
(4) For each input variable, determining a different baseline value for each specific context S . In-
stead of fixing baseline values as constants, some studies use varying baseline values to compute
v(xS ) given x, which are determined temporarily by the context S in x. Some methods (Frye et al.,
2021; Covert et al., 2020b) define v(xS ) by modeling the conditional distribution of variable values
in N \S given the context S , i.e. v(xS ) = Ep(x′ |xS ) [model(xS ⊔ x′N \S )]. The operation ⊔ means the
concatenation of x’s dimensions in S and x′ ’s dimensions in N \ S . By assuming the independence
between input variables, the above conditional baseline values can be simplified to marginal baseline
values (Lundberg and Lee, 2017), i.e. v(xS ) = Ep(x′ ) [model(xS ⊔ x′N \S )].
We conducted experiments to examine whether the above baseline values remove all causal patterns
in the original
        h P input and      whether baseline values introduce
                                                          i     new causal patterns. We used the metric
                                   (noise)
R = Ex ( S⊆N |US′ |− S⊆N |US
                        P                      P
                                           |)/( S⊆N |US |) to evaluate the quality of masking. We gen-
erated a set of samples based on x, where a set of input variables were masked, and US′ denote the
causal effect in such masked samples. US denote the causal effect in the original sample x, which
was used for normalization. US(noise) denotes the causal effect in a white noise input, and it represents
the unavoidable effect of huge amounts of noise patterns. Thus, we considered the US(noise) term as
an inevitable anchor value and removed it from R for a more convincing evaluation. The masking
method would have two kinds of effects on causal patterns. (1) We hoped to remove all existing
salient patterns in the original sample. (2) We did not expect the masking method to introduce new
salient patterns. Interestingly, the removal of existing salient patterns decreased the R value, while
the triggering of new patterns increased the R value. Thus, the R metric reflected both effects. A
small value of R indicated a good setting of baseline values.
We used 20 images in the MNIST dataset (LeCun et al., 1998) and 20 images in the CIFAR-10
dataset (Krizhevsky et al., 2009) to compute R, respectively. We split each MNIST image into 7 × 7
grids and split each CIFAR-10 image into 8 × 8 grids. For each image, we masked the central 4 × 3
grids using the zero baseline, mean baseline, blur baseline, and the baseline based on the conditional
distribution, and computed the metric of R(zero) , R(mean) , R(blur) , and R(conditional) , respectively. Table 1
shows that the ratio R by using previous baseline values were all large. Although the masking
method based on conditional distribution performed better than some other baseline values, our
method exhibited the best performance. It indicates that previous masking methods did not
remove most existing patterns and/or trigger new patterns.

3.3    A BSENCE STATES AND OPTIMAL BASELINE VALUES
In the original scenario of game theory, the Shapley value was proposed without the need to define
the absence of players. When people explain a DNN, we consider that the true absence state of
variables should generate the most simplified causal explanation. Remark 2 and Theorem 3 show
that correct baseline values usually generate the simplest causal explanation, i.e., using the least
number of causal patterns to explain the DNN. In comparison, if an incorrect baseline value bi does
not fully remove all effects of AND relationships of the variable i, then the remained effects will be
mistakenly explained as a large number of other redundant patterns.
The above proof well fits Occam’s Razor, i.e., the simplest causality with the minimum causal
patterns is more likely to represent the essence of the DNN’s inference logic. This also lets us
consider the baseline values that minimize the number of salient causal patterns (i.e., achieving the
simplest causality) as the optimal baseline values.
Therefore, the learning of the baseline value b∗i of the i-th variable can be formulated to sparsify
causal patterns in the deep model. Particularly, such baseline values are supposed to remove existing


                                                                     6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


            Table 3: Examples of generated functions and their ground-truth baseline values.
                  Functions (∀i ∈ N, xi ∈ {0, 1})                               The ground truth of baseline values
               −0.185x1 (x2 + x3 )2.432 − x4 x5 x6 x7                            b∗i = 0 for i ∈ {1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7}
         −x1 x2 x3 + sigmoid(−5x4 x5 x6 x7 + 2.50) − x8 x9           b∗i = 1 for i ∈ {4, 5, 6, 7}, b∗i = 0 for i ∈ {1, 2, 3, 8, 9}
    −sigmoid(+4x1 − 4x2 + 4x3 − 6.00) − x4 x5 x6 x7 − x8 x9 x10     b∗i = 1 for i = 2, b∗i = 0 for i ∈ {1, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10}


causal effects without introducing many new effects.
                                      X
                      b∗ = arg minb            |Ω(x)|, subject to Ω(x) = {S ⊆ N ||US (x|b)| > τ }                                (4)
                                          x

where US (x|b) denotes the causal effect computed on the sample x by setting baseline values to b.

4      E STIMATING BASELINE VALUES
Based on Theorem 3, we derive Eq. (4) to learn optimal baseline values, but the computational
cost of enumerating all causal patterns is exponential. Thus, we explore an approximate solution
to learning baseline values. According to Theorem 4, incorrect baseline values usually mistakenly
explain high-order causal patterns as an unnecessarily large number of low-order causal patterns,
where the order m of the causal effect US is defined as the cardinality of S , m = |S|.
Thus, the objective of learning baseline values is roughly equivalent to penalizing effects of low-
order causal patterns, in order to prevent learning incorrect baseline values that mistakenly represent
the high-order pattern as an exponential number of low-order patterns.
                                                                   X X
                            min L(b), subject to L(b) =                                  |US (x|b)|                              (5)
                             b                                       x       S⊆N,|S|≤k

An approximate-yet-efficient solution. When each input sample contains a huge number of vari-
ables, e.g., an image sample, directly optimizing Eq. (5) is NP-hard. Fortunately, we find the multi-
order Shapley value and the multi-order marginal benefit in the following equation have strong
connections with multi-order causal patterns (proven in Appendix H), as follows.
                                                                            X
               (m)         def
             ϕi      (x|b) = ES⊆N \{i} v(xS∪{i} , b)−v(xS , b) = ES⊆N \{i}                           UL∪{i} (x|b)
                                 |S|=m                                         |S|=m           L⊆S
                                                                                                                                 (6)
                           def
                                                               X
             ∆vi (S|x, b) = v(xS∪{i} , b)−v(xS , b) =                    UL∪{i} (x|b)
                                                                   L⊆S
          (m)
where          and ∆vi (S|x, b) denote the m-order Shapley value and the m-order marginal benefit
         ϕi (x|b)
computed using baseline values b, respectively, where the order m is given as m = |S|.
According to the above equation, high-order casual patterns US are only contained by high-order
Shapley values ϕ(m)
                i   and high-order marginal benefits ∆vi . Therefore, in order to penalize the effects
of low-order causal patterns, we penalize the strength of low-order Shapley values and low-order
marginal benefits, respectively, as an engineering solution to boost computational efficiency. In
experiments, these loss functions were optimized via SGD.
                      X      XX            (m)
                                                                             X         XX
    LShapley (b) =                       |ϕi     (x|b)|,   Lmarginal (b) =                        E S⊆N |∆vi (S|x, b)| (7)
                                                                                                   |S|=m
                  m∼Unif(0,λ) x∈X i∈N                                    m∼Unif(0,λ) x∈X i∈N

where λ ≥ m denotes the maximum order to be penalized. We have conducted experiments to verify
that baseline values b learned by loss functions in Eq. (7) could effectively sparsify causal effects of
low-order causal patterns in Eq. (5). Please see Appendix G.3 for results.
Most importantly, we still used the metric R in Section 3.2 to check whether the learned baseline
values removed original causal patterns in the input while not introducing new patterns. The low
value of R(ours) in Table 1 shows that baseline values learned by our method successfully removed
existing salient causal patterns without introducing many new salient patterns.

5      E XPERIMENTS
5.1      V ERIFICATION OF CORRECTNESS OF BASELINE VALUES AND S HAPLEY VALUES

Correctness of baseline values on synthetic functions. People usually cannot determine the
ground truth of baseline values for real images, such as the MNIST dataset. Therefore, we con-
ducted experiments on synthetic functions with ground-truth baseline values, in order to verify the


                                                               7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                 Table 4: Accuracy of the learned baseline values.
                                                            LShapley                                                Lmarginal
                                     initialize as 0   initialize as 0.5   initialize as 1   initialize as 0    initialize as 0.5   initialize as 1
       Synthetic functions              98.06%              98.70%            98.70%            98.06%               98.14%            98.14%
 Functions in (Tsang et al., 2018)      88.52%              91.80%            90.16%            86.89%               91.80%            90.16%

Table 5: Accuracy of Shapley values on the extended Addition-Multiplication dataset using different
settings of baseline values.
                  Zero          Mean          Baseline values in SHAP                Kernel SHAP               Frye et al. (2021)         Ours
  Accuracy       82.88%        72.63%                 81.25%                           33.88%                      66.00%                 100%

Table 6: An example of Shapley values                         Baseline values              The computed Shapley values {ϕi }
computed on different baseline values.                          Truth/Ours                {0, 0, −5, −0.06, 0.10, −0.06, −4.23}
The function is model(x) = −2.62x1−5x3−                        Zero baseline               {0, 0, −5, −0.99, 1.15, 0.87, −4.23}
1.98x6 (x4−0.94)+1.15(x5−0.91)−4.23x7 ,                       Mean baseline             {1.31, 0, −2.50, −0.74, 0.58, 0.19, −2.11}
                                                             Setting in SHAP         {0.014, 0, −0.011, −0.003, 0.003, 0.001, −0.010}
and the input is x = [0, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1].

correctness of the learned baseline values. We randomly generated 100 functions, whose causal pat-
terns and ground truth of baseline values could be easily determined. This dataset has been released
at https://github.com/zzp1012/faithful-baseline-value. The generated func-
tions were composed of addition, subtraction, multiplication, exponentiation, and the sigmoid opera-
tions (see Table 3). For example, for the function y = sigmoid(3x1 x2 −3x3 −1.5)−x4 x5 +0.25(x6 +x7 )2 ,
xi ∈ {0, 1}, there were three causal patterns (i.e. {x1 , x2 , x3 }, {x4 , x5 }, {x6 , x7 }), which were activated
only if xi = 1 for i ∈ {1, 2, 4, 5, 6, 7} and x3 = 0. In this case, the ground truth of baseline values was
b∗i = 0 for i ∈ {1, 2, 4, 5, 6, 7} and b∗3 = 1. Please see Appendix G.4 for more discussions about the
setting of ground-truth baseline values.
We used our method to learn baseline values on these functions and tested the accuracy. Note that
|bi −b∗i | ∈ [0, 1] and b∗i ∈ {0, 1}. If |bi −b∗i | < 0.5, we considered the learned baseline value correct. We
set λ = 0.5n in both LShapley and Lmarginal . The results are reported in Table 4 and are discussed later.
Correctness of baseline values on functions in (Tsang et al., 2018). Besides, we also evaluated
the correctness of the learned baseline values using functions in Tsang et al. (2018). Among all
the 92 input variables in these functions, the ground truth of 61 variables could be determined (see
Appendix G.4). Thus, we used these annotated baseline values to test the accuracy. Table 4 reports
the accuracy of the learned baseline values on the above functions. In most cases, the accuracy was
above 90%, showing that our method could effectively learn correct baseline values. A few functions
in (Tsang et al., 2018) did not have salient causal patterns, which caused errors in the learning.
Besides, in experiments, we tested our method under three different initializations of baseline values
(i.e., 0, 0.5, and 1). Table 4 shows that baseline values learned with different initialization settings
all converged to similar and high accuracy.
Correctness of the computed Shapley values. Incorrect baseline values lead to incorrect Shap-
ley values. We verified the correctness of the computed Shapley values on the extended Addition-
Multiplication dataset (Zhang et al., 2021c). We added the subtraction operation to avoid all base-
line values being zero. Theorem 2 considers the Shapley value as a uniform assignment of effects
of each causal pattern to its compositional variables. This enabled us to determine the ground-truth
Shapley value of variables without baseline values based on causal patterns. For example, the func-
tion f (x) = 3x1 x2 + 5x3 x4 + x5 s.t. x = [1, 1, 1, 1, 1] contained three causal patterns, according to
the principle of the most simplified causality. Accordingly, the ground-truth Shapley values were
ϕ̂1 = ϕ̂2 = 3/2, ϕ̂3 = ϕ̂4 = 5/2, and ϕ̂5 = 1. See Appendix G.5 for more details. The estimated Shapley
value ϕi was considered correct if |ϕi − ϕ̂i | ≤ 0.01; otherwise, incorrect. Then, we computed the
accuracy of the estimated Shapley values as the ratio of input variables with correct Shapley values.
Discussion on why the learned baseline values generated correct Shapley values. We computed
Shapley values of variables in the extended Addition-Multiplication dataset using different baseline
values, and compared their accuracy in Table 5. The result shows that our method exhibited the
highest accuracy. Table 6 shows an example of incorrect Shapley values computed by using other
baseline values. Our method generated correct Shapley values in this example. For the variable x6 ,
due to its negative coefficient −1.98, its contribution should be negative. However, all other baseline
values generated positive Shapley values for x6 . The term −4.23x7 showed the significant effect of
the variable x7 on the output, but its Shapley value computed using baseline values in SHAP was
just −0.010, which was obviously incorrect.

                                                                       8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                                                                              Values of      Zero                           Mean        Baseline       Baseline       Ours            Ours
                                                                                          the input sample baseline                        baseline     in SHAP        in SAGE    𝐿Shapley    𝐿marginal      163

 Native-country native-
               country
                                                                        Native-country
                                                                                native-country
                                                                                                            values                          values                                zero-init   zero-init
                                                                       Hours-per-week
                                                                               hours-per-week
            hours-per-
Hours-per-week week
                                                                          Capital-loss
                                                                                   capital-loss

                                                                          Capital-gain
                                                                                   capital-gain
               capital-
   Capital-loss   loss
                                                                                       Sex
                                                                                    Race
                                                                                            sex

                                                                                           race

               capital-                                                   Relationship
   Capital-gain  gain
                                                                                  relationship

                                                                           Occupation
                                                                                   occupation

                                                                         Marital-status
                                                                                 marital-status
             Sex     sex
                                                                            Educationeducation
                                                  Using                     Workclassworkclass
           Race     race
                                                  (zero-init)                          Age  age

            relationshi
                                                                                              Values of
                                                                                                  00   20
                                                                                                       20
                                                                                                            Zero0
                                                                                                             40
                                                                                                             40
                                                                                                                        60
                                                                                                                        60   80
                                                                                                                                            Mean0       Baseline
                                                                                                                                                             0
                                                                                                                                                                       Baseline
                                                                                                                                                                           0
                                                                                                                                                                                      Ours
                                                                                                                                                                                      0
                                                                                                                                                                                                      Ours
                                                                                                                                                                                                      0
   Relationship  p                                Using                                   the input sample baseline                        baseline   Shapley
                                                                                                                                                        in SHAPvalue   in SAGE    𝐿           𝐿              330
             occupatio
    Occupation    n                               (mean-init)           Native-country
                                                                                native-country

                                                                       Hours-per-week
                                                                               hours-per-week
               marital-
  Marital-statusstatus                            Using                   Capital-loss
                                                                                   capital-loss

                                                                          Capital-gain
                                                                                   capital-gain


     Education
             education                            (zero-init)                          Sex  sex

                                                                                    Race   race


     Workclass
             workclass                            Using                   Relationship
                                                                                  relationship

                                                                           Occupation
                                                                                   occupation


             Age     age
                                                  (mean-init)            Marital-status
                                                                                 marital-status

                                                                            Educationeducation

                  -20      00    20
                                20     40
                                      40     60
                                            60      80
                                                   80     100
                                                         100     120
                                                                1200        Workclassworkclass

                                                                                       Age  age

                                    Baseline values                                               00    20
                                                                                                        20
                                                                                                                  40
                                                                                                                   40
                                                                                                                             60
                                                                                                                              60   0       0              0            0              0           0
                                learned by our methods                                                                                                Shapley value

Figure 3: The learned baseline values (left) and Shapley values computed with different baseline val-
ues (right) on the income dataset. Results on the MNIST, the CIFAR-10, and the credit datasets
are shown in Appendix G.6 and G.7.

5.2           R ESULTS AND EVALUATION ON REALISTIC DATASETS AND MODELS
Learning baseline values. We used our method to learn baseline values for MLPs, LeNet (Le-
Cun et al., 1998), and ResNet-20 (He et al., 2016) trained on the UCI South German Credit
dataset (namely credit dataset) (Dua and Graff, 2017), the UCI Census Income dataset (namely
income dataset) (Dua and Graff, 2017), the MNIST dataset (LeCun et al., 1998), and the CIFAR-10
dataset (Krizhevsky et al., 2009), respectively. We learned baseline values by using either LShapley or
                                                                                        p(y truth |xS )
Lmarginal as the loss function. In the computation of LShapley , we set v(xS ) = log 1−p(y     truth |x ) . In the
                                                                                                       S
computation of Lmarginal , |∆vi (S)| was set to |∆vi (S)| = ∥h(xS∪{i} )−h(xS )∥1 , where h(xS ) denotes the
output feature of the penultimate layer given the masked input xS , in order to boost the efficiency of
learning. We set λ = 0.2n for the MNIST and the CIFAR-10 datasets, and set λ = 0.5n for the simpler
data in two UCI datasets. Given baseline values, we used the sampling-based approximation (Castro
et al., 2009) to estimate Shapley values.
We used two ways to initialize baseline values before learning, i.e. setting baseline values to zero
or mean values over different samples, namely zero-init and mean-init, respectively. Fig. 3 (left)
shows that baseline values learned with different initialization settings all converged to similar base-
line values, except for very few dimensions having multiple local-minimum solutions (discussed in
Appendix G.7), which proved the stability of our method.
Comparison of attributions computed using different baseline values. Fig. 3 shows the learned
baseline values and the computed Shapley values on the income dataset. We found that attributions
generated by zero/mean baseline values conflicted with the results of all other methods. Our method
obtained that the occupation had more influence than the marital status on the income, which was
somewhat consistent with our life experience. However, baseline values in SHAP and SAGE some-
times generated abnormal explanations. In this top-right example, the attribute capital gain was
zero, which was not supposed to support the prediction of “the person made over 50K a year.” How-
ever, the SAGE’s baseline values generated a large positive Shapley value for capital gain. In the
bottom-right example, both SHAP and SAGE considered the marital status important for the pre-
diction. SHAP did not consider the occupation as an important variable. Therefore, we considered
these explanations not reliable. Attribution maps and baseline values generated on the CIFAR-10
and the MNIST datasets are provided in Appendix G.6. Compared to zero/mean/blurring baseline
values, our baseline values were more likely to ignore noisy variables in the background, which
were far from the foreground in images. Compared to SHAP, our method yielded more informative
attributions. Besides, our method generated smoother attributions than SAGE.


6          C ONCLUSIONS

In this paper, we have defined the absence state of input variables in terms of causality. Then, we
have found that most existing masking methods cannot faithfully remove existing causal patterns
without triggering new patterns. In this way, we have formulated optimal baseline values for the
computation of Shapley values as those that remove most causal patterns. Then, we have proposed an
approximate-yet-efficient method to learn optimal baseline values that represent the absence states
of input variables. Experimental results have demonstrated the effectiveness of our method.


                                                                                                                                       9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


E THIC S TATEMENT

This paper aims to examine the masking approach in previous explaining methods. We find that
previous settings of the masking approach cannot faithfully represent the absence of input variables,
thereby hurting the trustworthiness of the obtained explanations. Therefore, we propose a new
method to learn optimal baseline values to represent the absence of input variables. In this way, the
trustworthiness of explanations of the DNN is further boosted. There are no ethical issues with this
paper.


R EPRODUCIBILITY S TATEMENT

We have provided proofs for all theoretical results in Appendix E and Appendix H. We have also
provided experimental details in Section 5 and Appendix G. Furthermore, we will release the code
when the paper is accepted.


ACKNOWLEDGEMENT

This work is partially supported by the National Nature Science Foundation of China (62276165),
National Key R&D Program of China (2021ZD0111602), Shanghai Natural Science Foundation
(21JC1403800,21ZR1434600), National Nature Science Foundation of China (U19B2043). This
work is also partially supported by Huawei Technologies Inc.

R EFERENCES
Kjersti Aas, Martin Jullum, and Anders Løland. Explaining individual predictions when features are dependent:
  More accurate approximations to shapley values. Artif. Intell., 298(C), sep 2021. ISSN 0004-3702. doi:
  10.1016/j.artint.2021.103502.

Chirag Agarwal and Anh Nguyen. Explaining image classifiers by removing input features using generative
  models. In Hiroshi Ishikawa, Cheng-Lin Liu, Tomas Pajdla, and Jianbo Shi, editors, Computer Vision –
  ACCV 2020, pages 101–118, Cham, 2021. Springer International Publishing. ISBN 978-3-030-69544-6.

Marco Ancona, Cengiz Oztireli, and Markus Gross. Explaining deep neural networks with a polynomial time
  algorithm for shapley value approximation. In Kamalika Chaudhuri and Ruslan Salakhutdinov, editors, Pro-
  ceedings of the 36th International Conference on Machine Learning, volume 97 of Proceedings of Machine
  Learning Research, pages 272–281. PMLR, 09–15 Jun 2019.

Robert J. Aumann and Lloyd S. Shapley. Values of Non-Atomic Games. Princeton University Press, Princeton,
  2015. ISBN 9781400867080. doi: doi:10.1515/9781400867080.

Peer Bork, Lars J Jensen, Christian von Mering, Arun K Ramani, Insuk Lee, and Edward M Marcotte. Protein
  interaction networks from yeast to human. Current Opinion in Structural Biology, 14(3):292–299, 2004.
  ISSN 0959-440X. doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.sbi.2004.05.003.

Javier Castro, Daniel Gómez, and Juan Tejada. Polynomial calculation of the shapley value based on sampling.
   Computers & Operations Research, 36(5):1726–1730, 2009. ISSN 0305-0548. doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/
   j.cor.2008.04.004. Selected papers presented at the Tenth International Symposium on Locational Decisions
   (ISOLDE X).

Xu Cheng, Chuntung Chu, Yi Zheng, Jie Ren, and Quanshi Zhang. A game-theoretic taxonomy of visual
  concepts in dnns. arXiv preprint arXiv:2106.10938, 2021a.

Xu Cheng, Xin Wang, Haotian Xue, Zhengyang Liang, and Quanshi Zhang. A hypothesis for the aesthetic
  appreciation in neural networks. arXiv preprint arXiv::2108.02646, 2021b.

Ian Covert, Scott Lundberg, and Su-In Lee. Feature removal is a unifying principle for model explanation
   methods. arXiv preprint arXiv:2011.03623, 2020a.

Ian C. Covert, Scott Lundberg, and Su-In Lee. Understanding global feature contributions with additive impor-
   tance measures. In NeurIPS 2020. ACM, December 2020b.


                                                     10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Piotr Dabkowski and Yarin Gal. Real time image saliency for black box classifiers. In Isabelle Guyon, Ulrike
   von Luxburg, Samy Bengio, Hanna M. Wallach, Rob Fergus, S. V. N. Vishwanathan, and Roman Garnett,
   editors, Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 30: Annual Conference on Neural Information
   Processing Systems 2017, December 4-9, 2017, Long Beach, CA, USA, pages 6967–6976, 2017.

Huiqi Deng, Qihan Ren, Hao Zhang, and Quanshi Zhang. Discovering and explaining the representation
  bottleneck of DNNS. In The Tenth International Conference on Learning Representations, ICLR 2022,
  Virtual Event, April 25-29, 2022. OpenReview.net, 2022a.

Huiqi Deng, Na Zou, Mengnan Du, Weifu Chen, Guocan Feng, Ziwei Yang, Zheyang Li, and Quanshi Zhang.
  Understanding and unifying fourteen attribution methods with taylor interactions. arXiv preprint, 2022b.

Alexey Dosovitskiy and Thomas Brox. Inverting visual representations with convolutional networks. In 2016
  IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, CVPR 2016, Las Vegas, NV, USA, June
  27-30, 2016, pages 4829–4837. IEEE Computer Society, 2016.

Dheeru Dua and Casey Graff. UCI machine learning repository, 2017.

Ruth Fong, Mandela Patrick, and Andrea Vedaldi. Understanding deep networks via extremal perturbations and
  smooth masks. In 2019 IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision, ICCV 2019, Seoul, Korea
  (South), October 27 - November 2, 2019, pages 2950–2958. IEEE, 2019. doi: 10.1109/ICCV.2019.00304.

Ruth C. Fong and Andrea Vedaldi. Interpretable explanations of black boxes by meaningful perturbation. In
  IEEE International Conference on Computer Vision, ICCV 2017, Venice, Italy, October 22-29, 2017, pages
  3449–3457. IEEE Computer Society, 2017. doi: 10.1109/ICCV.2017.371.

Christopher Frye, Damien de Mijolla, Tom Begley, Laurence Cowton, Megan Stanley, and Ilya Feige. Shapley
  explainability on the data manifold. In 9th International Conference on Learning Representations, ICLR
  2021, Virtual Event, Austria, May 3-7, 2021. OpenReview.net, 2021.

Michel Grabisch and Marc Roubens. An axiomatic approach to the concept of interaction among players in co-
  operative games. International Journal of game theory, 28(4):547–565, 1999. doi: 10.1007/s001820050125.

Ulrike Grömping. Estimators of relative importance in linear regression based on variance decomposition. The
  American Statistician, 61(2):139–147, 2007.

Riccardo Guidotti, Anna Monreale, Salvatore Ruggieri, Dino Pedreschi, Franco Turini, and Fosca Giannotti.
  Local rule-based explanations of black box decision systems. arXiv preprint arXiv:1805.10820, 2018.

Michael Harradon, Jeff Druce, and Brian Ruttenberg. Causal learning and explanation of deep neural networks
  via autoencoded activations. arXiv preprint arXiv:1802.00541, 2018.

John C. Harsanyi. A Simplified Bargaining Model for the n-Person Cooperative Game, pages 44–70. Springer
  Netherlands, Dordrecht, 1982. ISBN 978-94-017-2527-9. doi: 10.1007/978-94-017-2527-9 3.

Kaiming He, Xiangyu Zhang, Shaoqing Ren, and Jian Sun. Deep residual learning for image recognition. In
  2016 IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), pages 770–778, 2016.

Alon Keinan, Ben Sandbank, Claus C. Hilgetag, Isaac Meilijson, and Eytan Ruppin. Fair attribution of func-
  tional contribution in artificial and biological networks. Neural Comput., 16(9):1887–1915, 2004. doi:
  10.1162/0899766041336387.

Alex Krizhevsky, Geoffrey Hinton, et al. Learning multiple layers of features from tiny images. 2009.

Alex Krizhevsky, Ilya Sutskever, and Geoffrey E. Hinton. Imagenet classification with deep convolutional
  neural networks. In Peter L. Bartlett, Fernando C. N. Pereira, Christopher J. C. Burges, Léon Bottou,
  and Kilian Q. Weinberger, editors, Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 25: 26th Annual
  Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems 2012. Proceedings of a meeting held December 3-6,
  2012, Lake Tahoe, Nevada, United States, pages 1106–1114, 2012.

I. Elizabeth Kumar, Suresh Venkatasubramanian, Carlos Scheidegger, and Sorelle A. Friedler. Problems with
   shapley-value-based explanations as feature importance measures. In Proceedings of the 37th International
   Conference on Machine Learning, ICML 2020, 13-18 July 2020, Virtual Event, volume 119 of Proceedings
   of Machine Learning Research, pages 5491–5500. PMLR, 2020.

Yann LeCun, Léon Bottou, Yoshua Bengio, and Patrick Haffner. Gradient-based learning applied to document
  recognition. Proc. IEEE, 86(11):2278–2324, 1998. doi: 10.1109/5.726791.


                                                     11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Mingjie Li and Quanshi Zhang. Does a neural network really encode symbolic concept?           arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2302.13080, 2023.

Scott M. Lundberg and Su-In Lee. A unified approach to interpreting model predictions. In Isabelle Guyon,
  Ulrike von Luxburg, Samy Bengio, Hanna M. Wallach, Rob Fergus, S. V. N. Vishwanathan, and Roman
  Garnett, editors, Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 30: Annual Conference on Neural
  Information Processing Systems 2017, December 4-9, 2017, Long Beach, CA, USA, pages 4765–4774, 2017.

Scott M Lundberg, Gabriel G Erion, and Su-In Lee. Consistent individualized feature attribution for tree
  ensembles. arXiv preprint arXiv:1802.03888, 2018.

Aleksander Madry, Aleksandar Makelov, Ludwig Schmidt, Dimitris Tsipras, and Adrian Vladu. Towards
  deep learning models resistant to adversarial attacks. In 6th International Conference on Learning Repre-
  sentations, ICLR 2018, Vancouver, BC, Canada, April 30 - May 3, 2018, Conference Track Proceedings.
  OpenReview.net, 2018.

Luke Merrick and Ankur Taly. The explanation game: Explaining machine learning models using shapley
  values. In Andreas Holzinger, Peter Kieseberg, A Min Tjoa, and Edgar R. Weippl, editors, Machine Learning
  and Knowledge Extraction - 4th IFIP TC 5, TC 12, WG 8.4, WG 8.9, WG 12.9 International Cross-Domain
  Conference, CD-MAKE 2020, Dublin, Ireland, August 25-28, 2020, Proceedings, volume 12279 of Lecture
  Notes in Computer Science, pages 17–38. Springer, 2020. doi: 10.1007/978-3-030-57321-8\ 2.

Alexander Mordvintsev, Christopher Olah, and Mike Tyka. Inceptionism: Going deeper into neural networks.
  In Google Research Blog, 2015.

Jie Ren, Die Zhang, Yisen Wang, Lu Chen, Zhanpeng Zhou, Yiting Chen, Xu Cheng, Xin Wang, Meng Zhou,
   Jie Shi, and Quanshi Zhang. Towards a unified game-theoretic view of adversarial perturbations and robust-
   ness. In M. Ranzato, A. Beygelzimer, Y. Dauphin, P.S. Liang, and J. Wortman Vaughan, editors, Advances
   in Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 34, pages 3797–3810. Curran Associates, Inc., 2021.

Jie Ren, Mingjie Li, Qirui Chen, Huiqi Deng, and Quanshi Zhang. Towards axiomatic, hierarchical, and
   symbolic explanation for deep models. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision
   and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), June 2023a.

Qihan Ren, Huiqi Deng, Yunuo Chen, Siyu Lou, and Quanshi Zhang. Bayesian neural networks tend to ignore
  complex and sensitive concepts. arXiv preprint arXiv:2302.13095, 2023b.

Ramprasaath R. Selvaraju, Michael Cogswell, Abhishek Das, Ramakrishna Vedantam, Devi Parikh, and Dhruv
  Batra. Grad-cam: Visual explanations from deep networks via gradient-based localization. In IEEE Inter-
  national Conference on Computer Vision, ICCV 2017, Venice, Italy, October 22-29, 2017, pages 618–626.
  IEEE Computer Society, 2017. doi: 10.1109/ICCV.2017.74.

Pranab Kumar Sen, Richard H. Lindeman, Peter F. Merenda, and Ruth Z. Gold. Introduction to bivariate and
   multivariate analysis. Journal of the American Statistical Association, 76:752, 1981.

Lloyd S Shapley. A value for n-person games. Contributions to the Theory of Games, 2(28):307–317, 1953.

Avanti Shrikumar, Peyton Greenside, and Anshul Kundaje. Learning important features through propagating
  activation differences. In Doina Precup and Yee Whye Teh, editors, Proceedings of the 34th International
  Conference on Machine Learning, ICML 2017, Sydney, NSW, Australia, 6-11 August 2017, volume 70 of
  Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pages 3145–3153. PMLR, 2017.

Karen Simonyan, Andrea Vedaldi, and Andrew Zisserman. Deep inside convolutional networks: Visualis-
  ing image classification models and saliency maps. In Yoshua Bengio and Yann LeCun, editors, 2nd In-
  ternational Conference on Learning Representations, ICLR 2014, Banff, AB, Canada, April 14-16, 2014,
  Workshop Track Proceedings, 2014.

Xi Song, Tianfu Wu, Yunde Jia, and Song-Chun Zhu. Discriminatively trained and-or tree models for object
  detection. In 2013 IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, Portland, OR, USA, June
  23-28, 2013, pages 3278–3285. IEEE Computer Society, 2013.

Erik Štrumbelj and Igo Kononenko. Explaining prediction models and individual predictions with feature con-
   tributions. Knowledge and information systems, 41(3):647–665, 2014. doi: 10.1007/s10115-013-0679-x.

Erik Štrumbelj, Igor Kononenko, and M Robnik Šikonja. Explaining instance classifications with interactions
   of subsets of feature values. Data & Knowledge Engineering, 68(10):886–904, 2009. doi: 10.1016/j.datak.
   2009.01.004.


                                                     12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Pascal Sturmfels, Scott Lundberg, and Su-In Lee. Visualizing the impact of feature attribution baselines. Distill,
  5(1):e22, 2020.
Mukund Sundararajan and Amir Najmi. The many shapley values for model explanation. In Proceedings of the
 37th International Conference on Machine Learning, ICML 2020, 13-18 July 2020, Virtual Event, volume
 119 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pages 9269–9278. PMLR, 2020.
Mukund Sundararajan, Ankur Taly, and Qiqi Yan. Axiomatic attribution for deep networks. In Doina Precup
 and Yee Whye Teh, editors, Proceedings of the 34th International Conference on Machine Learning, ICML
 2017, Sydney, NSW, Australia, 6-11 August 2017, volume 70 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research,
 pages 3319–3328. PMLR, 2017.
Mukund Sundararajan, Kedar Dhamdhere, and Ashish Agarwal. The shapley taylor interaction index. In
 Proceedings of the 37th International Conference on Machine Learning, ICML 2020, 13-18 July 2020,
 Virtual Event, volume 119 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pages 9259–9268. PMLR, 2020.
Michael Tsang, Dehua Cheng, and Yan Liu. Detecting statistical interactions from neural network weights. In
  6th International Conference on Learning Representations, ICLR 2018, Vancouver, BC, Canada, April 30 -
  May 3, 2018, Conference Track Proceedings. OpenReview.net, 2018.
Xin Wang, Shuyun Lin, Hao Zhang, Yufei Zhu, and Quanshi Zhang. Interpreting attributions and interactions of
  adversarial attacks. In 2021 IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision, ICCV 2021, Montreal,
  QC, Canada, October 10-17, 2021, pages 1075–1084. IEEE, 2021a.
Xin Wang, Jie Ren, Shuyun Lin, Xiangming Zhu, Yisen Wang, and Quanshi Zhang. A unified approach to
  interpreting and boosting adversarial transferability. In 9th International Conference on Learning Represen-
  tations, ICLR 2021, Virtual Event, Austria, May 3-7, 2021. OpenReview.net, 2021b.
Robert James Weber. Probabilistic values for games, page 101–120. Cambridge University Press, 1988. doi:
  10.1017/CBO9780511528446.008.
Jason Yosinski, Jeff Clune, Anh Nguyen, Thomas Fuchs, and Hod Lipson. Understanding neural networks
   through deep visualization. arXiv preprint arXiv:1506.06579, 2015.
Die Zhang, Hao Zhang, Huilin Zhou, Xiaoyi Bao, Da Huo, Ruizhao Chen, Xu Cheng, Mengyue Wu, and
  Quanshi Zhang. Building interpretable interaction trees for deep NLP models. In Thirty-Fifth AAAI Confer-
  ence on Artificial Intelligence, AAAI 2021, Thirty-Third Conference on Innovative Applications of Artificial
  Intelligence, IAAI 2021, The Eleventh Symposium on Educational Advances in Artificial Intelligence, EAAI
  2021, Virtual Event, February 2-9, 2021, pages 14328–14337. AAAI Press, 2021a.
Hao Zhang, Sen Li, Yinchao Ma, Mingjie Li, Yichen Xie, and Quanshi Zhang. Interpreting and boosting
  dropout from a game-theoretic view. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2021b.
Hao Zhang, Yichen Xie, Longjie Zheng, Die Zhang, and Quanshi Zhang. Interpreting multivariate shapley
  interactions in dnns. In Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, AAAI 2021, Thirty-Third
  Conference on Innovative Applications of Artificial Intelligence, IAAI 2021, The Eleventh Symposium on
  Educational Advances in Artificial Intelligence, EAAI 2021, Virtual Event, February 2-9, 2021, pages 10877–
  10886. AAAI Press, 2021c.
Hao Zhang, Yichen Xie, Longjie Zheng, Die Zhang, and Quanshi Zhang. Interpreting multivariate shapley
  interactions in dnns. In Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, AAAI 2021, Thirty-Third
  Conference on Innovative Applications of Artificial Intelligence, IAAI 2021, The Eleventh Symposium on
  Educational Advances in Artificial Intelligence, EAAI 2021, Virtual Event, February 2-9, 2021, pages 10877–
  10886. AAAI Press, 2021d.
Quanshi Zhang, Xin Wang, Jie Ren, Xu Cheng, Shuyun Lin, Yisen Wang, and Xiangming Zhu. Proving
  common mechanisms shared by twelve methods of boosting adversarial transferability. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2207.11694, 2022.
Bolei Zhou, Aditya Khosla, Àgata Lapedriza, Aude Oliva, and Antonio Torralba. Object detectors emerge in
  deep scene cnns. In Yoshua Bengio and Yann LeCun, editors, 3rd International Conference on Learning
  Representations, ICLR 2015, San Diego, CA, USA, May 7-9, 2015, Conference Track Proceedings, 2015.
Bolei Zhou, Aditya Khosla, Àgata Lapedriza, Aude Oliva, and Antonio Torralba. Learning deep features for
  discriminative localization. In 2016 IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, CVPR
  2016, Las Vegas, NV, USA, June 27-30, 2016, pages 2921–2929. IEEE Computer Society, 2016.
Huilin Zhou, Hao Zhang, Huiqi Deng, Dongrui Liu, Wen Shen, Shih-Han Chan, and Quanshi Zhang. Concept-
  level explanation for the generalization of a dnn. arXiv preprint arXiv:2302.13091, 2023.


                                                       13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Table 7: Accuracy of Shapley values computed Table 8: The learned baseline values could re-
on the pre-defined decision tree, which was cover original samples from adversarial examples.
based on the MNIST dataset.                                           ∥xadv − x∥2 ∥b − x∥2
 Baseline                      baseline                    MNIST on LeNet         2.33        0.43
             zero     mean                 ours
  value                       in SHAP                     MNIST on AlexNet        2.53        1.15
 Accuracy   92.99%   92.93%    93.37%     96.84%        CIFAR-10 on ResNet-20     1.19        1.11


A    R ELATED WORKS

No previous methods directly examined the faithfulness of the masking methods. Instead, we made
a survey in a larger scope of attribution methods and other explainable AI studies, and put them in
the appendix. Nevertheless, we will put this section back to the main paper if the paper is accepted.
In the scope of explainable AI, many methods (Simonyan et al., 2014; Yosinski et al., 2015; Mord-
vintsev et al., 2015; Dosovitskiy and Brox, 2016; Zhou et al., 2015) have been proposed to explain
the DNN. Among all methods, the estimation of attributions for each input variable represents a
classical direction (Zhou et al., 2016; Selvaraju et al., 2017; Lundberg and Lee, 2017; Shrikumar
et al., 2017). In this paper, we mainly focus on attributions based on Shapley values.
Shapley values. The Shapley value (Shapley, 1953) in game theory was widely considered as a
fair distribution of the overall reward in a game to each player (Weber, 1988). (Sen et al., 1981)
and (Grömping, 2007) used the Shapley value to attribute the correlation coefficient of a linear
regression to input features. (Štrumbelj et al., 2009; Štrumbelj and Kononenko, 2014) used the
Shapley value to attribute the prediction of a model to input features. (Bork et al., 2004) used the
Shapley value to measure importances of protein interactions in large, complex biological interaction
networks. (Keinan et al., 2004) employed the Shapley value to measure causal effects in neurophys-
ical models. (Sundararajan et al., 2017) proposed Integrated Gradients based on the AumannShap-
ley(Aumann and Shapley, 2015) cost-sharing technique. Besides above local explanations, (Covert
et al., 2020b) focused on the global interpretability.
In order to compute the Shapley value in deep models efficiently, (Lundberg and Lee, 2017) pro-
posed various approximations for Shapley valus in DNNs. (Lundberg et al., 2018) further computed
the Shapley value on tree emsembles. (Aas et al., 2021) generalized the approximation method in
(Lundberg and Lee, 2017) to the case when features were related to each other. (Ancona et al., 2019)
further formulated a polynomial-time approximation of Shapley values for DNNs.
Baseline values. In terms of baseline values of Shapley values, most studies (Covert et al., 2020a;
Merrick and Taly, 2020; Sundararajan and Najmi, 2020; Kumar et al., 2020) compared influences
of baseline values on explanations, without providing any principles for setting baseline values.
Shrikumar et al. (2017) proposed DeepLIFT to estimate attributions of input variables, and also
mentioned the choice of baseline values. Besides, Agarwal and Nguyen (2021) and Frye et al.
(2021) used generative models to alleviate the out-of-distribution problem caused by baseline values.
Unlike previous studies, we rethink and formulate baseline values from the perspective of game-
theoretic causality. We define the absent state of input variables, and propose a method to learn
optimal baseline values based on the number of causal patterns.

B    Q UANTITATIVE EVALUATION OF ATTRIBUTIONS FOR IMAGE
     CLASSIFICATION

In order to quantitatively evaluate Shapley values computed by different baseline values on the
MNIST dataset, we constructed an And-Or decision tree following (Harradon et al., 2018), whose
structure directly provided the ground-truth Shapley value for each input variable. Then, we used
different attribution methods to explain the decision tree. Table 7 shows that our method generated
more accurate Shapley values than other baseline values.
We constructed a decision tree (Song et al., 2013) for each category in the MNIST dataset. Specifi-
cally, for each category (digit), we first computed the average image over all training samples in this
category. Let x̄(c) ∈ Rn denote the average image of the c-th category. Then, we built a decision
tree by considering each pixel as an internal node. The splitting rule for the decision tree was de-
signed as follows. Given an input x in the category c, the splitting criterion at the pixel (node) xi was


                                                   14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                  (c)                             (c)
designed as (x̄i > 0.5)&(xi > 0.5) 2 . If (x̄i > 0.5)&(xi > 0.5) = True, then the pixel value
xi was added to the output; otherwise, xi was ignored. In this way, the output of the decision tree
              P                                  (c)
was f (x) = i∈V xi , where V = {i ∈ N |(x̄i > 0.5)&(xi > 0.5) = True} denote the set of all
pixels that satisfied the above equation. For inference, the probability of x belonging
                                                                                   P to the category
c was p(c|x) = sigmoid(γ(f (x) − β)), where γ = 40 was a constant and β ∝ i∈N 1x̄(c) >0.5 . In
                                                                                              i
                                      p(c|x)
this case, we defined v(xN ) = log 1−p(c|x)  . Thus, the co-appearing of pixels in V formed a causal
pattern to contribute for v(xN ). In other words, because ∀i ∈ N, xi ≥ 0, the absence of any pixel
in V might deactivate this pattern by leading to a small probability p(c|x) < 0.5 and a small v. This
pattern can also be understood as an AND node in the And-Or decision tree (Song et al., 2013).
In the above decision tree, the ground-truth Shapley values of input variables (pixels) were easy to
determine. The above decision tree ensured that the absence of any variable in V would deactivate
the causal pattern. Therefore, according to Theorem 2 in the paper, the output probability should
be fairly assigned to pixels in V , i.e., they shared the same Shapley values ϕ̂i = v(x N)
                                                                                     |V | . For other
pixels that were not contained in the output, their ground-truth Shapley values were zero.
We estimated Shapley values of input variables in the above decision tree by using zero baseline val-
ues, mean baseline values, baseline values in SHAP, and the learned baseline values by our method,
respectively. Let ϕi denote the estimated Shapley value of the variable i. If |ϕi − ϕ̂i | ≤ 0.01, we con-
sidered the estimated Shapley value ϕi correct; otherwise, incorrect. In this way, we computed the
accuracy of the estimated Shapley values, and Table 7 shows that our method achieved the highest
accuracy.

C       R EMOVING ADVERSARIAL PERTURBATIONS FROM THE INPUT
Let x denote the normal sample, and let xadv = x + δ denote the adversarial example generated by
(Madry et al., 2018). According to (Ren et al., 2021), the adversarial example xadv mainly created
out-of-distribution bivariate interactions with high-order contexts, which were actually related to
the high-order interactions (causal patterns) in this paper. Thus, in the scenario of this study, the
adversarial utility was owing to out-of-distribution high-order interactions (causal patterns). The
removal of input variables was supposed to remove most high-order causal patterns.
Therefore, the baseline value can be considered as the recovery of the original sample. In this way,
we used the adversarial example xadv to initialize baseline values before learning, and used Lmarginal to
learn baseline values. If the learned baseline values b satisfy ∥b−x∥1 ≤ ∥xadv−x∥1 , we considered that
our method successfully recovered the original sample to some extent. We conducted experiments
using LeNet, AlexNet (Krizhevsky et al., 2012), and ResNet-20 on the MNIST dataset (∥δ∥∞ ≤
32/255) and the CIFAR-10 dataset (∥δ∥∞ ≤ 8/255). Table 8 shows that our method recovered original
samples from adversarial examples, which demonstrated the effectiveness of our method.

D        A XIOMS OF THE S HAPLEY VALUE
The Shapley value (Shapley, 1953) was first introduced in game theory, which measures the con-
tribution of each player in a game. Actually, given an input x with n input variables, i.e.,
x = [x1 , . . . , xn ], we can consider a deep model as a game with n players N = {1, 2, · · · , n}. Each
player i is an input variable xi (e.g. an input dimension, a pixel, or a word). In this way, the problem
of fairly estimating attributions of input variables in the DNN is equivalent to the problem of fairly
assigning the total reward in the game to each player. The Shapley value is widely considered a fair
attribution method, because it satisfies the following four axioms (Weber, 1988).
(1) Linearity axiom: If two games can be merged into a new game u(xS ) = v(xS ) + w(xS ), then
Shapley values in the two old games also can be merged, i.e. ∀i ∈ N , ϕi,u = ϕi,v + ϕi,w .
(2) Dummy axiom and nullity axiom: The dummy player i is defined as a player without any inter-
actions with other players, i.e. satisfying ∀S ⊆ N \ {i}, v(xS∪{i} ) = v(xS ) + v(x{i} ). Then, the
dummy player’s Shapley value is computed as ϕi = v(x{i} ). The null player i is defined as a player
that satisfies ∀S ⊆ N \ {i}, v(xS∪{i} ) = v(xS ). Then, the null player’s Shapley value is ϕi = 0.
    2                                                           (c)
        For Table 7, the splitting criterion was designed as (x̄i     > 0.5).


                                                           15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


(3) Symmetry axiom: If ∀S ⊆ N \ {i, j}, v(xS∪{i} ) = v(xS∪{j} ), then ϕi = ϕj .
(4) Efficiency axiom: The overall
                               P reward of the game is equal to the sum of Shapley values of all
players, i.e. v(xN ) − v(x∅ ) = i∈N ϕi .

E     P ROOFS OF THEOREMS

This section provides proofs of theorems in the main paper.

E.1   P ROOF OF T HEOREM 1

Theorem 1 (Faithfulness, proven by Ren et al. (2023a)) Let us consider a DNN v and an input
sample x with n input variables. We can generate 2n different masked samples, i.e., {xS |S ⊆ N }.
The DNN’s outputs on all masked samples can always    P be well mimicked as the sum of the triggered
interaction effects in Eq. (3), i.e., ∀S ⊆ N, v(xS ) = S ′ ⊆S US ′ .

Proof: According to the definition of the Harsanyi dividend, we have ∀S ⊆ N ,
                          X                  X X                     ′
                                   US ′ =                   (−1)|S |−|L| v(xL )
                          S ′ ⊆S             S ′ ⊆S L⊆S ′
                                             X        X                     ′
                                         =                        (−1)|S |−|L| v(xL )
                                             L⊆S S ′ ⊆S:S ′ ⊇L
                                               |S|
                                             X X               X                ′
                                         =                                (−1)s −|L| v(xL )
                                             L⊆S s′ =|L| S ′ ⊆S:S⊇L
                                                              |S ′ |=s′

                                                             |S|−|L|
                                                                                   !
                                             X                 X          |S| − |L|
                                         =         v(xL )                            (−1)m = v(xS )
                                                              m=0
                                                                              m
                                             L⊆S



E.2   P ROOF OF T HEOREM 2

Theorem 2 Harsanyi dividends can be considered as causal patterns of the Shapley value.
                                         X               1
                                   ϕi =                       US∪{i}                                (8)
                                             S⊆N \{i} |S| + 1
In this way, the effect of an causal pattern consisting of m variables can be fairly assigned to the m
variables. This connection has been proved in (Harsanyi, 1982).

• Proof:
             X      1
 right =                 US∪{i}
                 |S| + 1
        S⊆N \{i}
                                                                           
          X         1      X      |S|+1−|L|
                                                   X      |S|−|L|
      =                      (−1)          v(L) +   (−1)         v(L ∪ {i})
                 |S| + 1
           S⊆N \{i}                L⊆S                                    L⊆S
             X           1    X
      =                         (−1)|S|−|L| [v(L ∪ {i}) − v(L)]
                      |S| + 1
           S⊆N \{i}            L⊆S

             X           X    (−1)|K|
      =                                   [v(L ∪ {i}) − v(L)]     % Let K = S \ L
                            |K| + |L| + 1
        L⊆N \{i} K⊆N \L\{i}
                                                    !
                  n−1−|L|          k
          X         X        (−1)       n −  1 − |L|   [v(L ∪ {i}) − v(L)]
      =                                                                      % Let k = |K|
                           k + |L| + 1        k
           L⊆N \{i}      k=0
             X        |L|!(n − 1 − |L|)!
      =                                  [v(L ∪ {i}) − v(L)]                        % by the property of combinitorial number
                              n!
           L⊆N \{i}

      = ϕi = left


                                                                    16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Table 9: Comparison between ground-truth baseline values and incorrect
                                                              P        baseline values. The last
                                                                                                                                                           |US |
column shows ratios of causal patterns of different orders rm = PS⊆N,|S|=m|US | . We consider in-
                                                                        S⊆N,S̸=∅
teractions of input samples that activate causal patterns. We find that when models/functions contain
a single complex collaborations between multiple variables (i.e. high-order causal patterns), incor-                                                                       1

rect baseline values usually generate a mixture of many low-order causal patterns. In comparison,                               Learned baseline values by
                                                                                                                                Learned baseline values by                0.5

ground-truth baseline values lead to sparse and high-order causal patterns.                                                     Zero baseline values


                                                                                                                               ∑ |
                                                                                                                                     ( )
                                                                                                                                           |
                                                                                                                                                                           0
                                                                                                                                                                                     ∗       ( )   ( )       ( )
                                                                                                                                      ( )
                                                                                                                              ∑ ∑ |            |                                               c


 Functions (∀i ∈ N, i ∈ {0, 1})                                        1Baseline values b                                                      Ratios r
                      Learned baseline values by
                      Learned baseline values by                      0.5                                                                                                                1               5
                      Zero baseline values                     ground truth: b∗ = [0, 0, 0, 0, 0]                1                                                                                             ∗      1


  f (x) = x1 x2 x3∑x| 4 x| 5
                          ( )

                             ( )
                                                           incorrect: b0 (1) ∗= [0.5,
                                                                                  ( ) 0.5,
                                                                                         ( )0.5,(0.5,
                                                                                                  )   0.5]                                                                                                     ( )   0.5


  x = [1, 1, 1, 1, ∑1]∑ | |                                incorrect: b(2) = [0.1, 0.2, 0.6, 0.0, 0.1]
                                                                                            c
                                                                                                                0.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                               ( )    0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ∗   ( )   ( )   ( )

                                                           incorrect: b(3) = [0.7, 0.1, 0.3, 0.5, 0.1]           0
                                                                                                                                 ∗                 ( )         ( )        ( )
                                                                                                                                                                                                               ( )



                                                                                    1            5                                                   c


              1                                                                               ∗
                                                                ground truth: b∗ = [0, 0, 0, 0]                       1
  f (x) = sigmoid(5x1 x2 x3 +                                incorrect: b(1) = [0.5, 0.5, 0.5,(0.5]
                                                                                                )               0.5
  5x4 − 7.5)
           0.5                                               incorrect: b(2) = [0.6, 0.4, 0.7, 0.3]
  x = [1, 1, 1, 1]                                                                            ( )                     0
                                                             incorrect: b(3) = [0.3, 0.6, 0.5, 0.8]                             ∗                  ( )         ( )        ( )
                                                                                                         ( )
              0
                      ∗                       ( )           ( )       ( )
                          Learned baseline values by            ground truth: b∗ = [0, 0, 0, 1]                       1
                                   3
  f (x) = x1 (x2 + x    − xvalues
                          Learned baselinecvalues by
                     3 baseline
                   Zero         4)                           incorrect: b(1) = [0.5, 0.5, 0.5, 0.5]             0.5
  x = [1, 1, 1, 0]              ( )                          incorrect: b(2) = [0.2, 0.3, 0.6, 0.1]
                       ∑ |            |                                                                               0
                      ∑ ∑ |
                                   ( )
                                          |                  incorrect: b(3) = [1.0, 0.3, 1.0, 0.1]                             ∗                  ( )         ( )       ( )
                                                                                                                                                       c


                                                                                        1            5
                  1                                                                                       ∗
                                                                                                                          1
                                                                                                          ( )         0.5
            0.5
E.3    P ROOF   OF R EMARK 2, T HEOREM 3, AND T HEOREM
                                                     ( )4                                                                 0
                                                                                                                                      ∗                  ( )       ( )         ( )
                                                                                                          ( )
                  0
                          ∗
                          ( )     ( )     ( )                                                                                                                  Q
Remark 2 Let us consider      a function  with  a single causal pattern f (xS ) = wS j∈S (xj −δj ). Ac-
cordingly, ground-truth baseline values of variables are obviously {δj }, because setting any variable
                                                    c

∀j ∈ S, xj = δj will deactivate this pattern. Given the correct baseline values b∗j = δj , we can use a
single causal pattern to regress f (xS ), i.e., US = f (xS ), ∀ S ′ ̸= S, US ′ = 0.


Theorem 3 For the function f (xS ) = wS j∈S (xj − δj ), if we use m′ incorrect baseline values
                                                                                Q

{b′j |b′j ̸= δj } to replace correct ones to compute causal effects, then the function will be explained to
                         ′
contain at most 2m causal patterns.


Theorem 4 If we use m′ incorrect baseline values to compute causal effects in the function f (xS ) =
                                 m′
                                          causal patterns of the k-th order emerge, k ≥ |S| − m′ . A
   Q
wS j∈S (xj − δj ), a total of k−|S|+m ′

causal pattern of the k-th order means that this causal pattern represents the AND relationship
between k variables.


• Theoretical proof: Without loss of generality, let us consider an input sample x, with ∀j ∈ S, xj ̸=
δj . Based on the ground-truth baseline value {δj }, we have
                                                Q
(1) v(xS ) = f (xS ) = wS                               j∈S (xj − δj ) ̸= 0     ,
       ′                                        Q                           Q
(2) ∀S ⊊ S, v(xS ′ ) = wS j∈S ′ (xj − δj ) k∈S\S ′ (δk − δk ) = 0,
                                              ′
Accordingly, we have US = S ′ ⊆S (−1)|S|−|S | v(xS ′ ) = v(xS ) ̸= 0. For S ′ ⊊ S , we have US ′ =
                                P
P           |S ′ |−|L|         P
  L⊆S ′ (−1)           v(xL ) = L⊆S ′ 0 = 0.

(3) ∀S ′ ̸= S , let S ′ = L ∪ M , where L ⊆ S and M ∩ S = ∅. Then, we have


                                                                                            17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                 X                   ′
        US ′ =            (−1)|S |−|T | v(xT )
                 T ⊆S ′
                 X                   ′     ′                   X                    ′       ′
             =            (−1)|S |−|L | v(xL′ ) +                       (−1)|S |−|M | v(xM ′ )
                 L′ ⊆L                                        M ′ ⊆M
                                                                                      | {z }
                                                                                                =v(x∅ )=0
                 L′ ̸=∅                                       M ′ ̸=∅
                                                |S|−|L′ |−|M ′ |                                      ′
                           X
                 +                       (−1)                       v(xL′ ∪M ′ ) +(−1)|S | v(x∅ )
                     L′ ⊆L,M ′ ⊆M
                                                                    | {z }                 | {z }
                                                                            =v(L′ )                        =0
                      L′ ̸=∅,M ′ ̸=∅
                 X                   ′     ′                       X                              ′        ′
             =            (−1)|S |−|L | v(xL′ ) +                                  (−1)|S|−|L |−|M | v(xL′ )
                 L′ ⊆L                                        L ⊆L,M ′ ⊆M
                                                               ′
                  ′                                             ′     ′
                 L ̸=∅                                         L ̸=∅,M ̸=∅
                        |S ′ |−|S|                                      ′               ′
                                                      X
             =(−1)                   v(xS ) +                 (−1)|S |−|S|−|M | v(xS )                    % v(xL′ ) ̸= 0 only if L′ = S
                                                  M ′ ⊆M
                                                     ′
                                                     M ̸=∅
                                   |S ′ |−|S|−|M ′ |
                  X
             =             (−1)                        v(xS ) = 0
                 M ′ ⊆M


Therefore, there is only one causal pattern with non-zero effect US .
In comparison, if we use m′ incorrect baseline values {δj′ }, where                                                    1δj′ ̸=δj = m′ , then the
                                                                                                                P
                                                                                                                 j∈S
                                                                             ′
function will be explained to contain at most 2m causal patterns. For the simplicity of notations, let
S = {1, 2, ..., m}, and δ1′ = δ1 + ϵ1 , ..., δm
                                              ′                                                                   ′
                                                ′ = δm′ + ϵm′ , where ϵ1 , ..., ϵm′ ̸= 0. Let T = {1, 2, . . . , m }.
In this case, we have
(1) v(xS ) = f (xS ) ̸= 0
(2) ∀S ′ ⊊ S, |S ′ | < m − m′ , v(xS ′ ) = wS j∈S ′ (xj − δj ) l∈S\S ′ (δl′ − δl ). Because |S| − |S ′ | > m′ ,
                                                 Q               Q

there is at least one variable with ground-truth baseline value in S \ S ′ . Therefore, v(xS ′ ) = 0.
                                        ′
Furthermore, US ′ = L⊆S ′ (−1)|S |−|L| v(xL ) = 0
                        P

(3) ∀S ⊊ S, |S | = k ≥ m − m , v(xS ′ ) = wS j∈S ′ (xj − δj ) l∈S\S ′ (δl′ − δl ). If S \ T ⊆ S ′ , then
        ′        ′                 ′                  Q                Q

S \ S ′ ⊆ T and v(xS ′ ) ̸= 0. Otherwise, v(xS ′ ) = 0. Then,
               X               ′
      US ′ =           (−1)|S |−|L| v(xL )
               L⊆S ′
                        X                        ′                                 X                       ′
           =                             (−1)|S |−|L| v(xL ) +                                   (−1)|S |−|L| v(xL )
               L⊆S ′ ,|L|<m−m′                                              L⊆S ′ ,L≥m−m′
                                                               |S ′ |−|L|                                                     ′
                                   X                                                                      X
           =0+                                         (−1)                  v(xL ) +                                  (−1)|S |−|L| v(xL )
                     L⊆S ′ ,L≥m−m′ ,L⊇S\T                                                   L⊆S ′ ,L≥m−m′ ,L⊉S\T
                            X                             ′
           =                                    (−1)|S |−|L| v(xL )
               L⊆S ′ ,L≥m−m′ ,L⊇S\T

 If the above US ′ = 0, it indicates that S \T ⊈ S ′ . In this case, there is no subset L ⊆ S ′ s.t. S \T ⊆ L.
                                                                               m′
In other words, only if S \ T ⊆ S ′ , US ′ ̸= 0. In this way, a total of k−(|S|−m

                                                                                    ′ ) causal patterns of the

k-th order emerge, where the order k of a causal pattern means that this causal pattern S ′ contains
                                                           m′           m′
k = |S ′ | variables. There are totally m
                                        P
                                           k=|S|−m′ k−(|S|−m′ ) = 2         causal patterns in x.
For example, if the input x is given as follows,
                                                (
                                                     δi + 2ϵi ,    i ∈ T = {1, . . . , m′ }
                                         xi =
                                                     δi + ϵi ,     i ∈ S \ T = {m′ + 1, . . . , m}

 where ϵi ̸= 0 are arbitrary non-zero scalars. In this case, we have ∀S ′ ⊆ T, US ′ ∪{m′ +1,...,m} =
                                                                                                           ′
ϵ1 ϵ2 ...ϵm ̸= 0. Besides, if {m′ + 1, ..., m} ⊈ S ′ , we have US ′ = 0. In this way, there are totally 2m
causal patterns in x.
• Experimental verification: We further conducted experiments to show that the incorrect setting
of baseline values makes a model/function consisting of high-order causal patterns be mistakenly
explained as a mixture of low-order and high-order causal patterns. To show this phenomenon, we
compare causal patterns computed using ground-truth baseline values and incorrect baseline values


                                                                              18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


in Table 9, and the results verify our conclusion. We find that when models/functions contain com-
plex collaborations between multiple variables (i.e. high-order causal patterns), incorrect baseline
values usually generate fewer high-order causal patterns and more low-order causal patterns than
ground-truth baseline values. In other words, the model/function is explained as massive low-order
causal patterns. In comparison, ground-truth baseline values lead to sparse and high-order salient
patterns.

F     P ROVING THAT MASKING INPUT VARIABLES REMOVES CAUSAL EFFECTS
In this section, we prove that for the causal pattern S ∋ i, if the input variable i is masked, then the
causal effect wS = 0.
Proof: let S = S ′ ∪ {i}. If i ∈ S is masked, then ∀L s.t. i ∈   / L, xL = xL∪{i} . Therefore,
v(L ∪ {i}) = v(L). According to the definition of Harsanyi dividend (Harsanyi, 1982), we have
                             X
                     US =          (−1)|S|−|L| v(L)
                             L⊆S
                                X               ′
                         =                (−1)|S |+1−|L| v(L)
                             L⊆(S ′ ∪{i})
                             X              ′                  X             ′
                         =           (−1)|S |+1−|L| v(L) +             (−1)|S |−|L| v(L ∪ {i})
                             L⊆S ′                             L⊆S ′
                             X              ′                  X             ′
                         =           (−1)|S |+1−|L| v(L) +             (−1)|S |−|L| v(L)
                             L⊆S ′                             L⊆S ′
                           X        ′                ′

                         =    (−1)|S |+1−|L| + (−1)|S |−|L| v(L)
                             L⊆S ′
                             X                        ′
                         =           (−1 + 1)(−1)|S |−|L| v(L)
                             L⊆S ′

                         =0

Note that the causal pattern not containing i will not be deactivated by the masking of i. For example,
{eyes, beak} is not deactivated by the absence of forehead, because this pattern represents the AND
relationship between eyes and beak, and it does not contain forehead.

G     M ORE EXPERIMENTAL DETAILS AND RESULTS
G.1    V ERIFICATION OF THE SPARSITY OF CAUSAL PATTERNS

In this subsection, we conducted experiments to verify the sparsity of causal effects, which is intro-
duced in Remark 1. To this end, we computed causal effects US of all 2n causal patterns encoded
by a DNN. Specifically, we trained a three-layer MLP on the income dataset and computed causal
effects in the model. Figure 4 shows the distribution of absolute causal effects |US | of causal pat-
terns in the first five samples of each category of the income dataset. These results show that most
causal patterns had insignificant causal effects, US ≈ 0. Only a few causal patterns had salient
causal effects.
Moreover, we also conducted experiments to demonstrate the universality of this phenomenon.
We trained the five-layer MLP, CNN, LSTM, ResNet-32, and VGG-16 on the UCI census income
dataset, the UCI TV news channel commercial detection dataset, the SST-2 dataset, and the MNIST
dataset, respectively. Figure 5 shows the absolute causal effects US in the descending order. These
results show that various DNNs learned on different tasks could be explained by a set of sparse
causal patterns.

G.2    V ERIFICATION OF USING CAUSAL PATTERNS TO EXAMINE THE STATE OF INPUT
       VARIABLES

In this subsection, we conducted experiments to verify that causal patterns reflect the states of re-
moving existing patterns. Given causal effects US in the normal input image and causal effects


                                                          19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                                   Sample 1                       Sample 2                               Sample 3                               Sample 4                      Sample 5


                            # of causal patterns
Category 0


                            # of causal patterns



Category 1


                                                                                                                                  |𝑈𝑆 |

Figure 4: Histograms of absolute causal effects of causal patterns encoded by the three-layer MLP
trained on the income dataset.
strength of causa


              16 MLP-5 trained on 60                               MLP-5 trained on 40         CNN trained on         16          LSTM trained on       7 ResNet-32 trained                  VGG-16 trained
                                                                                                                                                                                    8
                  income dataset                                   TV news dataset              SST-2 dataset                      SST-2 dataset          on MNIST dataset                  on MNIST dataset
                            salient                                 salient                     salient                              salient                      salient                    salient
   effects


                                 noisy                                   noisy                       noisy                                 noisy                       noisy                           noisy
                    0                                      0                           0                                 0                              0                           0
                        1                            212       1                 210       1                  28              1                    28       1                  28       1                      28
                                                                                                index of causal patterns

Figure 5: Absolute causal effects of different causal patterns shown in a descending order, which
shows that sparse causality is universal for various DNNs.

      (noise)
US       in the white noise input, we compared their distributions in Figure 6. Note that we assumed
that the white noise input naturally contained information for classification than the normal input
image. We found that most causal effects in the white noise input were close to zero, and there were
few salient causal patterns. Besides, we computed the average strength of causal effects in the above
two inputs. In the normal input, the average strength of causal effects ES⊆N |US | = 5.5285, while
                                                                               (noise)
in the white noise input, the average strength was much smaller, ES⊆N |US              | = 0.2321. These
results indicated that salient causal patterns could reflect the information encoded in the input.

                                                                                                                                                                               normal input
                                                                                                                causal patterns


Figure 6: The distribution of causal effects
                                                                                                                  Number of


US in the normal input, and the distribution                                                                                                                                   white noise input
                   (noise)
of causal effects US       in the white noise
input.

                                                                                                                                                   𝑈𝑆

G.3                     E FFECTS OF THE PROPOSED METHOD ON MULTI - ORDER S HAPLEY VALUES AND
                        MULTI - ORDER MARGINAL BENEFITS

In this section, we conducted experiments to verify that baseline values b learned by the proposed
loss function in Eq. (7) could effectively reduce causal effects of low-order causal patterns in Eq. (5).
To this end, we computed the metric Ex [(E|S|=m |US |)/(v(xN ) − v(x∅ ))] to measure the relative
strength of causal patterns of a specific order m, in order to evaluate the effectiveness of baseline
values. Fig. 7(a) shows that compared to zero baseline values, our method effectively reduced
low-order causal patterns. In addition, Fig. 8 and Fig. 7(b) verify that the loss LShapley in Eq. (7)
reduced the number of salient causal patterns in Ω, which means LShapley avoided the exponential
number of causal patterns caused by incorrect baseline values.

G.4                     D ISCUSSION ABOUT THE SETTING OF GROUND - TRUTH BASELINE VALUES .

This section discusses the ground truth of baseline values of synthetic functions in Section 5.1 of
the main paper. In order to verify the correctness of the learned baseline values, we conducted
experiments on synthetic functions with ground-truth baseline values. We randomly generated 100


                                                                                                             20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


      E 𝑆 =𝑘 𝑈 𝑆                                Number of causal patters in Ωcausal = {𝑆 ⊆ 𝑁| 𝑈 𝑆                  ≥ 𝜏}              Zero baseline values         Learned baseline values
E𝑥               ቤ computed on 𝑥                                                                                                           Count                    Count in the log space
      𝑣 𝑁 −𝑣 ∅                                  the census dataset        the credit dataset                                           4
          Learned baseline values by 𝐿Shapley
                                                                                                                                 8 x10
0.3                                                                       1010 Log number
                                                 5 5 Log number
                                                10                        10                          Zero baseline                                              104
          Zero baseline values
                                                                                                      values
                                                 44                           55                                                 4
                                                10                            10                                                                                 102
                                                                                                      Learned baseline
 0                                               33
                                                10                            00
      1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 order 𝑘          0.0   0.2   0.4   𝜏
                                                                              10
                                                                               0.0   0.2   0.4   𝜏    values by 𝐿Shapley         0-10         0        10
                                                                                                                                                                 100-40          0         40
                    (a)                                                 (b)                                                                  𝑈𝑆                                 𝑈𝑆

Figure 7: Our method successfully (a) reduced effects of                                                                         Figure 8: Distribution of causal ef-
low-order causal patterns on the MLP trained on the census                                                                       fects US of causal patterns in 20
dataset, and (b) reduced the number of salient patterns.                                                                         samples in the credit dataset.


                 Table 10: Examples of synthetic functions and their ground-truth baseline values.
                                Functions (∀i ∈ N, xi ∈ {0, 1})                                                                          The ground truth of baseline values
                      −0.185x1 (x2 + x3 )2.432 − x4 x5 x6 x7 x8 x9 x10 x11                                                                    b∗i = 0 for i ∈ {1, . . . , 11}
  −sigmoid(−4x1 − 4x2 − 4x3 + 2) − 0.011x4 (x5 + x6 + x7 + x8 + x9 + x10 + x11 )2.341                                           b∗i = 1 for i ∈ {1, 2, 3}, b∗i = 0 for i ∈ {4, . . . , 11}
    0.172x1 x2 x3 (x4 + x5 )2.543 − 0.171x6 (x7 + x8 )2.545 − 0.093(x9 + x10 + x11 )2.157                                                     b∗i = 0 for i ∈ {1, . . . , 11}
      −sigmoid(5x1 + 5x2 x3 x4 − 7.5) − sigmoid(−8x5 x6 + 8x7 + 4) + x8 x9 x10 x11                                         b∗i = 1 for i = 7, b∗i = 0 for i ∈ {1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 8, 9, 10, 11}
                    −x1 x2 x3 + 0.156(x4 + x5 + x6 )1.693 − x7 x8 x9 x10                                                                      b∗i = 0 for i ∈ {1, . . . , 10}


functions whose causal patterns and ground truth of baseline values could be easily determined. As
Table 10 shows, the generated functions were composed of addition, subtraction, multiplication,
exponentiation, and sigmoid operations.
The ground truth of baseline values in these functions was determined based on causal patterns be-
tween input variables. In order to represent the absence states of variables, baseline values should
activate as few salient patterns as possible, where activation states of causal patterns were consid-
ered as the most infrequent state. Thus, we first identified the activation states of causal patterns
of variables, and the ground-truth of baseline values was set as values that inactivated causal pat-
terns under different masks. We took the following examples to discuss the setting of ground-truth
baseline values (in the following examples, ∀i ∈ N, xi ∈ {0, 1} and b∗i ∈ {0, 1}).
• f (x) = x1 x2 x3 + sigmoid(x4 + x5 − 0.5) · · · . Let us just focus on the term of x1 x2 x3 in f (x).
The activation state of this causal pattern is x1 x2 x3 = 1 when ∀i ∈ {1, 2, 3}, xi = 1. In order to
inactivate the causal pattern, we set ∀i ∈ {1, 2, 3}, b∗i = 0.
• f (x) = −x1 x2 x3 + (x4 + x5 )3 + · · · . Let us just focus on the term of −x1 x2 x3 in f (x). The
activation state of this causal pattern is −x1 x2 x3 = −1 when ∀i ∈ {1, 2, 3}, xi = 1. In order to
inactivate the causal pattern, we set ∀i ∈ {1, 2, 3}, b∗i = 0.
• f (x) = (x1 + x2 − x3 )3 + · · · . Let us just focus on the term of (x1 + x2 − x3 )3 in f (x). The
activation state of this causal pattern is (x1 + x2 − x3 )3 = 8 when x1 = x2 = 1, x3 = 0. In order
to inactivate the causal pattern under different masks, we set b∗1 = b∗2 = 0, b∗3 = 1.
• f (x) = sigmoid(3x1 x2 − 3x3 − 1.5) + · · · . Let us just focus on the term of sigmoid(3x1 x2 −
3x3 − 1.5) in f (x). In this case, x1 , x2 , x3 form a salient causal pattern because sigmoid(3x1 x2 −
3x3 − 1.5) > 0.5 only if x1 = x2 = 1 and x3 = 0. Thus, in order to inactivate causal patterns,
ground-truth baseline values are set to b∗1 = b∗2 = 0, b∗3 = 1.
Ground-truth baseline values of functions in (Tsang et al., 2018). This section provides more
details about ground-truth baseline values of functions proposed in (Tsang et al., 2018). We evalu-
ated the correctness of the learned baseline values using functions proposed in (Tsang et al., 2018).
Among all the 92 input variables in these functions, the ground truth of 61 variables could be deter-
mined and are reported in Table 11. Note that some variables cannot be 0 or 1 (e.g. x8 cannot be
zero in the first function), and we set ∀i ∈ N, xi ∈ {0.001, 0.999} for variables in these functions
instead. Similarly, we set the ground truth of baseline values ∀i ∈ N, b∗i ∈ {0.001, 0.999}. Some
variables did not collaborate/interact with other variables (e.g. x4 in the first function), thereby hav-
ing no causal patterns. We did not assign ground-truth baseline values for these individual variables,
and these variables are not used for evaluation. Some variables formed more than one causal pattern
with other variables, and had different ground-truth baseline values w.r.t. different patterns. In this
case, the collaboration between input variables was complex and hard to analyze, so we did not
consider such input variables with conflicting patterns for evaluation, either.


                                                                                                     21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


               Table 11: Functions in (Tsang et al., 2018) and their ground-truth baseline values.
                                Functions (∀i ∈ N, xi ∈ {0.001, 0.999})                                                             The ground truth of baseline values
                            √                                         q
                     π x1 x2 2x3 − sin−1 (x4 ) + log(x3 + x5 ) − xx10
                                                                   9     x7
                                                                         x8 − x2 x7                                    b∗i = 0.999 for i ∈ {5, 8, 10}, b∗i = 0.001 for i ∈ {1, 2, 7, 9}
                                                                             q
                                −1
                  p                                                   x9         x7
          π x1 x2
                    2|x3 | − sin (0.5x4 ) + log(|x3 + x5 | + 1) + 1+|x  10 |   1+|x8 | − x2 x7                             b∗i = 0.999 for i = 5, b∗i = 0.001 for i ∈ {1, 2, 7, 9}
                                            2|x |
           exp |x1 − x2 | + |x2 x3 | − x3 4 + log(x24 + x25 + x27 + x28 ) + x9 + 1+x                1
                                                                                                      2                                b∗i = 0.999 for i ∈ {3, 5, 7, 8}
                                                                                                      10
                                     2|x |
      exp |x1 − x2 | + |x2 x3 | − x3 4 + (x1 x4 )2 + log(x24 + x25 + x27 + x28 ) + x9 + 1+x                 1
                                                                                                              2                        b∗i = 0.999 for i ∈ {3, 5, 7, 8}
                                        p                                                                     10

                         2
                            1
                               2
                      1+x1 +x2 +x3 2 +     exp(x  4 + x 5 ) +  |x 6 + x 7 | +   x 8 x 9 x 10                          b∗i = 0.999 for i ∈ {1, 2, 3}, b∗i = 0.001 for i ∈ {4, 5, 8, 9, 10}
                                                                                      p
        exp(|x1 x2 | + 1) − exp(|x3 + x4 | + 1) + cos(x5 + x6 − x8 ) + x8 + x9 + x10       2       2       2         b∗i = 0.999 for i ∈ {8, 9, 10}, b∗i = 0.001 for i ∈ {1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6}
                                                                                                     5 P
                                                                                             |x7 |              10
 (arctan(x1 ) + arctan(x2 ))2 + max(x3 x4 + x6 , 0) − 1+(x4 x51x6 x7 x8 )2 + 1+|x                9|
                                                                                                         + i=1 xi     b∗i = 0.999 for i = 9, b∗i = 0.001 for i ∈ {1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8}
         x1 x2 + 2x3 +x5 +xp
                             6
                                + 2 x3 +x4 +x5 +x7
                                                    + sin(x  7 sin(x 8 +    x 9 )) +   arccos(0.9x      10 )                        b∗i = 0.001 for i ∈ {1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6}
      tanh(x1 x2 + x3 x4 ) |x5 | + exp(x5 + x6 ) + log((x6 x7 x8 )2 + 1) + x9 x10 + 1+|x                    1
                                                                                                              10 |
                                                                                                                                     b∗i = 0.001 for i ∈ {6, 7, 8, 9, 10}
            sinh(x1 + x2 ) + arccos(tanh(x3 + x5 + x7 )) + cos(x4 + x5 ) + sec(x7 x9 )                                      bi = 0.999 for i = 3, b∗i = 0.001 for i ∈ {1, 2, 4}
                                                                                                                             ∗


G.5        D ISCUSSION ABOUT THE SETTING OF GROUND - TRUTH S HAPLEY VALUES .

This section discusses the ground truth of Shapley values in the extended Addition-Multiplication
dataset (Zhang et al., 2021c), which is used in Section 5.1 of the main paper. In order to verify the
correctness of the Shapley values obtained by the optimal baseline values in this paper, we conducted
experiments on the extended Addition-Multiplication dataset (Zhang et al., 2021c) with ground-truth
Shapley values.
The Addition-Multiplication dataset in (Zhang et al., 2021c) contained functions that only con-
sisted of addition and multiplication operations. For example, f (x) = x1 x2 + x3 x4 where each
input variable xi ∈ {0, 1} was a binary variable. Given x = [1, 1, 1, 1], the function contained
two salient causal patterns, i.e. {x1 , x2 } and {x3 , x4 }, and their benefits to the output were
U{x1 ,x2 } = U{x3 ,x4 } = 1, respectively. According to (Harsanyi, 1982), the Shapley value is a
uniform distribution of attributions. Therefore, the effect of a causal pattern was supposed to be
uniformly assigned to variables in the pattern. Thus, the ground-truth Shapley values of variables
were ϕ̂1 = ϕ̂2 = 1/2, and ϕ̂3 = ϕ̂4 = 1/2. However, if the input x = [1, 0, 1, 1], then the pattern
{x1 , x2 } was deactivated and U{x1 ,x2 } = 0. In this case, ϕ̂1 = ϕ̂2 = 0 while ϕ̂3 = ϕ̂4 = 1/2.
According to the analysis in Appendix G.4, ground-truth baseline values in the Addition-
Multiplication dataset were all zero. Then our method is equivalent to the zero baseline values.
Therefore, in order to avoid all ground-truth baseline values being zero, we added the subtraction
operation. We also added a coefficient before each term in the function to boost the diversity of
functions. For example, f (x) = 3.2x1 x2 + 1.5x3 (x4 − 1). This function also contained two causal
patterns, but the ground-truth baseline values of variables were different from the aforementioned
function. Here, b∗0 = b∗0 = b∗3 = 0 and b∗4 = 1. Given the input x = [1, 1, 1, 0], all patterns
were activated and f (x) = U{x1 ,x2 } + U{x3 ,x4 } = 3.2 + (−1.5) = 1.7. Ground-truth Shapley
values of input variables were ϕ̂1 = ϕ̂2 = 3.2/2 and ϕ̂3 = ϕ̂4 = −1.5/2. However, for the input
x = [1, 1, 1, 1], the pattern {x3 , x4 } was deactivated, thereby ϕ̂3 = ϕ̂4 = 0. Note that the above
function can also be considered to contain three patterns (f (x) = 3.2x1 x2 + 1.5x3 x4 − 1.5x3 ).
According to Occam’s Razor, we follow the principle of the most simplified interaction to recognize
causal patterns in the function, i.e. using the least number of causal patterns. Thus, we consider the
above function f (x) = 3.2x1 x2 + 1.5x3 (x4 − 1) containing two salient causal patterns.
Based on the extended Addition-Multiplication dataset, we randomly generated an input sample
for each function in the dataset. Each variable xi in input samples were independently sampled
following the Bernoulli distribution, i.e. p(xi = 1) = 0.7. Therefore, for the mean baseline,
baseline values of different input variables were all 0.7. For the baseline value based on the marginal
distribution, which was used in SHAP (Lundberg and Lee, 2017), p(x′i ) ∼ Bernoulli(0.7). Then,
we compared the accuracy of the computed Shapley values of input variables based on zero baseline
values, mean baseline values, baseline values in SHAP, and the optimal baseline values defined in
this paper, respectively. The result in Table 4 of the main paper shows that the optimal baseline
values correctly generated the ground-truth attributions/Shapley values of input variables.

G.6        E XPERIMENTAL RESULTS ON THE MNIST AND THE CIFAR-10 DATASETS

Experimental results on the MNIST datasets. Experimental settings on the MNIST dataset have
been introduced in Section 5.2 of the paper. Figure 9 shows the learned baseline values on the

                                                                                               22
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                         Using the loss 𝐿shapley .              Using the loss 𝐿marginal .
                         Zero-init         Mean-init            Zero-init        Mean-init
                                                                                                1.00



                                                                                                0.00


                                                                                                -1.00

        Figure 9: The learned baseline values on the MNIST dataset (better viewed in color).

             Zero       Mean                             Baseline     Ours            Ours         Ours       Ours
    Input   Baseline   Baseline      Blurring   Baseline in SAGE     𝐿shapley       𝐿shapley    𝐿marginal    𝐿marginal
   image     value      value         image     in SHAP magnitude x2 zero-init      mean-init    zero-init   mean-init
                                                                                                                         0.3



                                                                                                                         0


                                                                                                                         -0.3

      Figure 10: Shapley values computed with different baseline values on the MNIST dataset.


MNIST dataset by using LShapley and Lmarginal in Section 4 of the paper, respectively. Figure 10 shows
the computed Shapley values using different baseline values on the MNIST dataset. Compared
to zero/mean/blurring baseline values, the learned baseline values by our method removed noisy
variables on the background, which were far from digits in images. Compared to SHAP, our method
yielded more informative attributions. Shapley values computed using baseline values in SAGE
were dotted. In comparison, our method generated smoother attributions.
Experimental results on the CIFAR-10 datasets. First, let us clarify the experiment settings on
the CIFAR-10 dataset. We split each image into 8 × 8 grids. Each grid contained 4 × 4 pixels, which
shared a specific RGB color as their baseline value. Thus, we needed to learn a total of 8×8×3 color
values as baseline values. We learned baseline values by using the loss LShapley . Then, we computed
Shapley values for grids by using zero baseline values and computed Shapley values by using the
learned baseline values for comparison. Figure 11 shows that Shapley values computed with the
learned baseline values mainly focused on objects in images. In comparison, Shapley values based
on zero baselines values mainly focused on the background.


                               Input image
                                                                                 Figure 11: Shapley values com-
                                                                                 puted with different baseline val-
 using baseline values learned by 𝐿Shapley                                       ues. Images were selected from
                                                                                 the CIFAR-10 dataset.
               using zero baseline values



G.7    E XPERIMENTAL RESULTS ON THE UCI S OUTH G ERMAN C REDIT DATASET.

This section provides experimental results on the UCI South German Credit dataset (Dua and Graff,
2017). Based on the UCI datasets, we learned MLPs following settings in (Guidotti et al., 2018).
Figure 12 compares Shapley values computed using different baseline values. Just like results on the
UCI Census Income dataset, attributions (Shapley values) generated by our learned baseline values
are similar to results of the varying baseline values in SHAP and SAGE. However, the zero/mean
baseline values usually generated conflicting results with all other methods.
Besides, we also noticed that baseline values learned with different initialization settings (zero-init
                        Shapley values computed in RN-20 on CIFAR-10
and mean-init) all converged to similar baseline values, except for very few dimensions having
multiple local-minimum solutions, which proved the stability of our method. More specifically,
an input variable might have different optimal baseline values in real applications from different


                                                           23
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                         33


                                                                                                     Zero          Mean
                                                             Values of                             baseline       baseline              SHAP
                                                         the input sample                           values         values

                                  Foreign-worker
                                       Telephone
                                    People-liable
                                                Job
                                  Number-credits
                                          Housing
                          Other-installment-plans
                                               Age                                                     0              0                 0
                                               Age
                                          Property
                                             native-country


                               Present-residence
                                            hours-per-week
                                                                                                                      Ours              Ours
                                    Other-debtors
                                                capital-loss                                           SAGE
                             Personal-status-sexcapital-gain
                                                                                                                  zero-init         zero-init
                                  Installment-ratesex
                            Employment-duration         race


                                          Savings
                                               relationship


                                  Amount (x 0.01)
                                                occupation


                                          Purpose
                                              marital-status


                                    Credit-historyeducation


                                          Durationworkclass


                                            Statusage
                                                               00   5 40010   15800 20   1200
                                                                                          25  30   0              0                 0

                                                                                                              Shapley value


Figure 12: Shapley values computed with different baseline values on the UCI South German Credit
dataset.

perspectives. For example, in the function of y = (a−0.5)(b−3)(c+2)+(a+0.5)(d−3)(e+2)+f ,
the variable a had two equivalent baseline value ±0.5.

G.8    C OMPUTATIONAL COMPLEXITY OF THE PROPOSED LOSS FUNCTIONS

In this section, we will introduce both the theoretical complexity of the loss function and the real
complexity of approximating the loss in real applications.
In terms of the theoretical complexity, the complexity of the loss functions LShapley and Lmarginal
                  Pλ        n

in Eq. (7) is Dn · m=0 m        , where D denotes the number of samples x in the dataset. n is the
                                          Pλ       n

number of input variables in the input.     m=0 m denotes the computational complexity of all
        (m)
terms ϕi (x|b) of different orders m ≤ λ.
In terms of real implementation, as mentioned in Section 5.2, we used the sampling-based approxi-
mation (Castro et al., 2009) to compute the loss function. We randomly sampled K input variables
in each epoch, and we randomly sampled T contexts of each order m w.r.t. each variable i to ap-
             (m)
proximate ϕi (x|b). Thus, the real computational cost of LShapley and Lmarginal was reduced to
      Pλ
DK · m=0 T , where we set T = 100 in implementation.
We conducted an experiment to show the time cost of learning the optimal baseline values. We used
the MLP, LeNet, and ResNet-20 trained on the income dataset, the credit dataset, the MNIST dataset,
and the CIFAR-10 dataset. For the MNIST and the CIFAR-10 datasets, we randomly sampled
K = 100 pixels as the variable set N to compute the Loss LShapley and optimize their baseline
values. Table 12 reports the time cost of optimizing LShapley for an epoch w.r.t. DNNs trained on
different datasets. The time cost was measured by using PyTorch 1.10 on Ubuntu 20.04, with the
Intel(R) Core(TM) i9-10900X CPU @ 3.70GHz and one NVIDIA Geforce RTX 3090 GPU.

                        Table 12: Time cost of learning baseline values for an epoch.
    Model                 Dataset                                       Number of input variables n           Time per epoch   Overall computational time until convergence
 5-layer MLP     UCI Census Income dataset                                          12                            3.81s                   1h3min (1000 epochs)
 5-layer MLP   UCI South German Credit dataset                                      20                            5.58s                  1h33min (1000 epochs)
    LeNet                 MNIST                                                  28×28                           45.69s                   2h32min (200 epochs)
  ResNet-20              CIFAR-10                                                32×32                           64.44s                   3h44min (200 epochs)


H     M ULTI - ORDER S HAPLEY VALUES AND MARGINAL BENEFITS
                                                                                                                                                  (m)
In Section 4 of the main paper, we propose the Shapley values of different orders ϕi , and marginal
benefits of different orders ∆vi (S). Furthermore, we find that high-order causal effects are only con-
tained by high-order Shapley values and marginal benefits. Actually, the loss function on marginal


                                                                                                       24
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


benefits Lmarginal is more fine-grained than the loss function on the multi-order Shapley value LShapley .
This section provides proofs for the above claims.
First, the Shapley value ϕi can be decomposed into the sum of Shapley values of different orders
 (m)
ϕi and marginal benefits of different orders ∆vi (S), as follows.
                                      n−1        n−1
                                    1 X (m)    1 X
                          ϕi =            ϕi =       ES⊆N \{i},|S|=m ∆vi (S)                               (9)
                                    n m=0      n m=0

                                                     (m)   def
where the Shapley value of m-order ϕi                      = ES⊆N \{i}|S|=m v(xS∪{i} ) − v(xS ) , and the
                            def
marginal benefit ∆vi (S) = v(xS∪{i} ) − v(xS ).
• Proof :
                           X |S|!(n − 1 − |S|!)
                    ϕi =                                    v(xS∪{i} ) − v(xS )
                                              n!
                           S⊆N
                           n−1
                           X          X            |S|!(n − 1 − |S|!)
                       =                                                v(xS∪{i} ) − v(xS )
                           m=0 S⊆N,|S|=m
                                                           n!
                                n−1
                           1 X            X          |S|!(n − 1 − |S|!)
                       =                                                 v(xS∪{i} ) − v(xS )
                           n m=0                          (n − 1)!
                                      S⊆N,|S|=m
                                n−1
                           1    X
                       =         ES⊆N,|S|=m v(xS∪{i} ) − v(xS )
                           n m=0
                                n−1
                           1 X (m)
                       =        ϕ
                           n m=0 i
                                n−1
                           1 X
                       =         ES⊆N \{i},|S|=m ∆vi (S)
                           n m=0

Connection between multi-variate interactions and multi-order marginal benefits. The m-
order marginal benefit can be decomposed as the sum of multi-variate interaction benefits, as fol-
lows. Therefore, high-order causal effects US are only contained in high-order marginal benefits.
                                                 X
                                      ∆vi (S) =       UL∪{i}                                   (10)
                                                             L⊆S


• Proof :
                          X
                right =         UL∪{i}
                          L⊆S
                                                                                                     
                          X         X          |L|+1−|K|
                                                                      X            |L|−|K|
                     =                 (−1)               v(xK ) +         (−1)             v(xK∪{i} )
                          L⊆S     K⊆L                                 K⊆L
                          X X
                                      (−1)|L|−|K| v(xK∪{i} ) − v(xK )

                     =
                          L⊆S K⊆L
                          X X
                     =                (−1)|L|−|K| ∆vi (K)
                          L⊆S K⊆L
                          X         X
                     =                   (−1)|P | ∆vi (K)          % Let P = L \ K
                          K⊆S P ⊆S\K
                                                                   
                                    |S|−|K|
                                                           !
                          X         |S| − |K|
                                      X
                     =                        (−1)p  ∆vi (K)    % Let p = |P |
                              p=0
                                        p
                       K⊆S
                       Xh                    i
                     =     (1 + (−1)|S|−|K| ) ∆vi (K)   % Let p = |P |
                          K⊆S



                                                            25
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023



                                                                                
                                                       |S|−|K|
                                                                           !
                       X                     X          X        |S| − |K|      p
                   =         0 · ∆vi (K) +                                 (−1)   ∆vi (K)
                       K⊊S                   K=S        p=0
                                                                     p

                   = ∆vi (S) = left

Connection between multi-order interactions and multi-order Shapley values. The m-order
Shapley value can also be decomposed as the sum of interaction benefits, as follows. Therefore,
high-order causal effects US are only contained in high-order Shapley values.
                                                     X
                                  (m)
                                 ϕi = ES⊆N \{i}           UL∪{i}                           (11)
                                               |S|=m          L⊆S


• Proof :
                                   (m)
                                  ϕi     = ES⊆N,|S|=m ∆vi (S)
                                                                  
                                                        X
                                         = ES⊆N,|S|=m      UL∪{i} 
                                                                L⊆S
                                                                           
                                                                 X
                                         = ES⊆N,|S|=m                UL∪{i} 
                                                                L⊆S


                                                       26
