Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


L ONG T ERM FAIRNESS VIA P ERFORMATIVE D ISTRI -
BUTIONALLY ROBUST O PTIMIZATION

 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                              A BSTRACT
         Fairness researchers in machine learning (ML) have coalesced around several fair-
         ness criteria which provide formal definitions of what it means for an ML model
         to be fair. However, these criteria have some serious limitations. We identify four
         key shortcomings of these formal fairness criteria and address them by extending
         performative prediction to include a distributionally robust objective. Performa-
         tive prediction is a recent framework developed to understand the effects of when
         deploying a model influences the distribution on which it is making predictions.
         We prove a convergence result for our proposed repeated distributionally robust
         optimization (RDRO). We further verify our results empirically and develop ex-
         periments to demonstrate the impact of using RDRO on learning fair ML models.


1    I NTRODUCTION
In the past two decades, machine learning (ML) has moved from the confines of research institutes
and university laboratories to become a core element of the global economy. ML models are now
deployed at enormous scales in complex environments, often making high stakes decision. Too
often, however, this is done without adequate concern for the fairness and robustness of these ML
models. Fairness in ML is a burgeoning research area, but much of the work in fairness, particularly
in defining formal fairness criteria, has been limited to the static classification setting.
Efforts to define fairness in ML have resulted in myriad criteria being proposed, many of which are
equivalent to, or relaxations of, three core definitions of fairness: independence, separation, and
sufficiency Barocas et al. (2019); Chouldechova (2017); Corbett-Davies et al. (2017); Dwork et al.
(2012); Hardt et al. (2016b); Berk et al. (2021); Zafar et al. (2017); Kleinberg et al. (2017); Wood-
worth et al. (2017). These formal fairness criteria assume a sensitive characteristic or protected
demographic group for whom we want to ensure our model is non-discriminatory. The fairness
criteria are then properties of the joint distribution of this characteristic, the output of the classifier,
and the true labels of the data.
While these fairness definitions have been a useful starting point in the consideration of discrimina-
tion by ML models, they have several limitations. 1. They are not equivalent and, in most scenarios,
they are incompatible. 2. They apply only to static supervised learning problems and ignore the dy-
namic environments characteristic of many real world scenarios with fairness concerns. 3. They rely
on having access to demographic information. The definitions can only be used if one has access to
the sensitive characteristic, which is often not the case. 4. They ignore intersectionality. The criteria
do not take into account individuals who may sit at the intersection of several sensitive demographic
groups. Fairness is fundamentally a philosophical and political question, and the notion of having a
single, universal formal definition of fairness for ML is likely naı̈ve. For this reason, this work does
not attempt to formally define fairness and largely ignores the first problem noted above. We do,
however, attempt to address issues 2, 3, and 4 by drawing upon two recent areas of research with
implications for fairness in ML: performative prediction and distributionally robust optimization
(DRO).
DRO offers a compelling and flexible method for training non-discriminatory algorithms without
needing access to demographic information. Performative prediction, on the other hand, attempts
to outline a theoretical framework through which we can reason about ML models in dynamic en-
vironments, when the act of deploying a model influences the distribution on which it is making
decisions.


                                                     1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


We combine these two areas of research to extend the performative prediction framework developed
in Perdomo et al. (2020). The work in performative prediction has thus far only concerned risk
minimization and empirical risk minimization (ERM), so we extend definitions to include a distribu-
tionally robust objective and prove an analogous convergence result to that shown in Perdomo et al.
(2020). Due to space constraints, we provide an extended discussion of related work in section A.1
of the appendix.

2     BACKGROUND
2.1   D ISTRIBUTIONALLY ROBUST O PTIMIZATION

The de facto objective used in most supervised learning settings is ERM. In ERM we attempt to
approximate minimization of the expected loss over the data generating distribution by minimizing
the average loss over our data set:
                                                   n
                                                1X
                                   ĥ = arg min       ℓ(h(xi ), yi ),
                                          h∈H   n i=1
where h represents a hypothesis or model, H a hypothesis class, and ℓ a non-negative loss function.
ERM is intuitively appealing and has important theoretical guarantees associated with it Vapnik
(1991). It can, however, be problematic when it comes to fairness concerns. Since we are averaging
the loss over our data points, in general, ERM causes an algorithm to focus on majority cases while
ignoring minority cases or rare events.
DRO, on the other hand, considers the distributionally robust problem in which we construct an
uncertainty set around the data generating distribution and attempt to minimize the expected loss
on the worst-case distribution within this uncertainty set. Following Duchi & Namkoong (2021) we
define our uncertainty set as
                                  Uf (P ) = {Q : Df (Q||P ) ≤ ρ},
where Df (Q||P ) is an f -divergence between probability distributions Q and P .
Formally the distributionally robust problem is as follows:

                         minimize sup {EQ [ℓ(θ; X)] : Q ∈ Uf (P0 )} ,
                            θ∈Θ      Q≪P0
              d
where Θ ⊂ R is the parameter (model) space, P0 is the data generating distribution on the measure
space (X , A), X is a random element of X and ℓ : Θ × X → R is a loss function.
In this formulation of DRO, the uncertainty set is determined by an f -divergence between Q and
P0 and {EQ [ℓ(θ; X)] : Q ∈ Uf (P0 )} is the set of all expected losses over the f -divergence ball
of radius ρ, centred at P0 . Alternative DRO formulations utilizing different measures of distance
between probability distributions such as Wasserstein balls have also been explored Wald (1945);
Wozabal (2012); Pflug & Wozabal (2007); Lee & Raginsky (2018).
Unlike ERM, DRO does not equally weight each data point, but instead up-weights data points
on which the model is achieving high loss. This means that the model should achieve somewhat
uniform performance on individuals across demographic groups Duchi & Namkoong (2021); Duchi
et al. (2020); Namkoong & Duchi (2016); Hashimoto et al. (2018). Note that the distributionally
robust objective does not require any access to demographic information and, at least potentially,
naturally accounts for intersectionality.
One can optimize the distributionally robust objective directly via the primal form, specified above,
or alternatively through a dual formulation. For convex losses, the dual form is jointly convex in the
parameters of the model and the dual variables Duchi & Namkoong (2021). A detailed discussion
of the dual formulation can be found in A.2. The dual formulation also helps provide intuition for
why DRO is more likely to result in fair ML models.

2.2   P ERFORMATIVE P REDICTION

Performative prediction attempts to formalize the notion of a model affecting the distribution on
which it is making predictions in a type of feedback loop. There are many examples of scenarios with


                                                  2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


fairness concerns in which this is likely to occur, such as predictive policing or college admission
decisions.
This notion of performativity of an algorithm is captured by a distribution map, D(θ), which maps
the data generating distribution to a new distribution as a function of the parameters of the model
which has been deployed. In performative prediction, the problem of risk minimization becomes
performative risk minimization and involves minimizing the expected loss on the induced distribu-
tion rather than the data generating distribution. The performative risk of a model is defined as
                                    P R(θ) = EZ∼D(θ) [ℓ(Z; θ)].

Solution concepts differ for performative prediction and traditional supervised learning, as the dis-
tribution shift complicates the learning problem. To capture this distinctive problem, Perdomo et al.
(2020) define performative optimality and performative stability.
Definition 2.1. (performative optimality) A model, fθP O , is performatively optimal if the following
relationship holds:
                                  θP O = arg min EZ∼D(θ) [ℓ(Z; θ)].
                                            θ∈Θ
Equivalently, θP O = arg minθ∈Θ P R(θ) where P R(θ) is the performative risk as defined above.

A performatively optimal point is a minimizer of the performative risk. An alternative solution
concept is referred to as performative stability.
Definition 2.2. (performative stability) A model, fθP S , is performatively stable if the following
relationship holds:
                                θP S = arg min EZ∼D(θP S ) [ℓ(Z; θ)].
                                          θ∈Θ
Define DP R(θ, θ′ ) := EZ∼D(θ) [ℓ(Z; θ′ )] as the decoupled performative risk; then θP S =
arg minθ∈Θ DP R(θP S , θ).

A performatively stable model is not necessarily a minimizer of the performative risk, but it is
optimal on the distribution it induces.
Performative prediction presents a special case of learning under distribution drift, where the distri-
bution drift is a function of the model that was deployed. A common approach in supervised learning
under distribution drift is to retrain a model on newly collected data. While this does not directly
minimize performative risk, it is a realistic representation of the strategy taken by many machine
learning practitioners and can be a reasonable solution in some scenarios.
Definition 2.3. (repeated risk minimization) Repeated risk minimization (RRM) refers to the pro-
cedure where, starting from an initial model fθ0 , we perform the following sequence of updates for
every t ≥ 0:
                              θt+1 = G(θt ) := arg min EZ∼D(θt ) [ℓ(Z; θ)].
                                                  θ∈Θ

In Perdomo et al. (2020) the authors show that under certain smoothness and convexity conditions
on the loss function and distribution map, RRM is a contraction mapping that converges to a fixed
point which is a performatively stable model. The smoothness condition on the distribution map
is called ϵ-sensitivity and ensures that the distribution shift is relatively small for small changes in
the model parameters. Section A.3 contains an extended discussion of performative prediction and
formally defines all the relevant concepts.

3   C ONVERGENCE OF R EPEATED D ISTRIBUTIONALLY ROBUST
    O PTIMIZATION
In order to extend the performative prediction framework to encompass DRO, we need to redefine
many of the concepts from Perdomo et al. (2020) to account for the distributionally robust objec-
tive. The supremum over the uncertainty set introduces additional complications necessitating novel
definitions and an altered proof for convergence to a performatively stable model. We define ro-
bust performative risk, robust performative optimality, robust performative stability, and repeated
distributionally robust optimization (RDRO).


                                                   3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


We begin by redefining performative risk and performatively optimal and stable models in terms of
a robust objective. In the following D(θ) is a distribution map and Df (Q||D(θ)) is an f -divergence
ball of radius ρ.
Definition 3.1. (robust performative risk) The robust performative risk of a model, θ, is
                     RPR(θ) =       sup {EZ∼Q [ℓ(Z; θ)] : Df (Q||D(θ)) ≤ ρ}.
                                   Q≪D(θ)


Robust performative risk differs from performative risk in that the induced distribution, D(θ), is now
the centre of an f -divergence ball over which a supremum of the expected loss is taken.
Definition 3.2. (robust performative optimality) A model fθP O is robustly performatively optimal
if the following relationship holds:
                  θP O = arg min sup {EZ∼Q [ℓ(Z; θ)] : Df (Q||D(θ)) ≤ ρ}.
                             θ∈Θ    Q≪D(θ)

Equivalently, θP O = arg minθ∈Θ RPR(θ) where RPR(θ) is the robust performative risk as defined
above.
Definition 3.3. (robust performative stability) A model fθP S is robustly performatively stable if the
following relationship holds:
                θP S = arg min       sup     {EZ∼Q [ℓ(Z; θ)] : Df (Q||D(θP S )) ≤ ρ}.
                          θ∈Θ    Q≪D(θP S )

Define RDPR(θ, θ′ ) := supQ≪D(θ) {EZ∼Q [ℓ(Z; θ′ )] : Df (Q||D(θ)) ≤ ρ} as the robust decoupled
performative risk; then θP S = arg minθ∈Θ RDPR(θP S , θ).

We discussed earlier that previous work has shown that repeated risk minimization converges to a
performatively stable model under certain assumptions on the loss and distribution map Perdomo
et al. (2020). We can analogously define repeated distributionally robust optimization as follows.
Definition 3.4. (repeated distributionally robust optimization) Repeated distributionally robust op-
timization (RDRO) refers to the procedure where, starting from an initial model fθ0 , we perform the
following sequence of updates for every t ≥ 0:
            θt+1 = G(θt ) := arg min         sup {EZ∼Q [ℓ(Z; θ)] : Df (Q||D(θt )) ≤ ρ}.
                                   θ∈Θ     Q≪D(θt )


As with RRM, this is an iterative procedure where we optimize the distributionally robust objective
at each time step t. While it is only a small departure from RRM conceptually, the DRO objective has
fundamentally different mathematical properties than risk minimization making it unclear whether
RDRO and RRM should exhibit similar behaviour.
The assumptions on the loss function and distribution map required for convergence of RRM do not
suffice for RDRO, as the supremum over the uncertainty set alters the mathematical properties of the
robust objective. We adapt these conditions to extend them to the distributionally robust objective.
The original conditions from Perdomo et al. (2020) can be found in A.3.
Definition 3.5. (robust β-joint smoothness) We say the distributionally robust objective is robustly
β-jointly smooth if for all θ, θ′ ∈ Θ and z, z ′ ∈ Z the gradient,
                           ∇θ    sup {EZ∼Q [ℓ(Z; θ)] : Q ∈ Uf (D(θ))},
                                Q≪D(θ)

exists and is β-Lipschitz in z and θ.
Definition 3.6. (robust γ-strong convexity) We say the distributionally robust objective is robustly
γ-strongly convex if for all θ, θ′ ∈ Θ and z ∈ Z
                                sup {EZ∼Q [ℓ(Z; θ)] : Q ∈ Uf (D(θ))}
                             Q≪D(θ)

is γ-strongly convex.


                                                      4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Definition 3.7. (robust ϵ-sensitivity)
Let D∗ (θ) = arg maxQ:Q∈Uf (D(θ)) EZ∼Q [ℓ(Z; θ)]. Assume that a distribution map, D(·), is ϵ-
sensitive1 . We say that this distribution map is robustly ϵ-sensitive if there exists ω > 0 such that for
any θ, θ′ ∈ Θ
                      W1 (D∗ (θ), D∗ (θ′ )) ≤ ωW1 (D(θ), D(θ′ )) ≤ ωϵ||θ − θ′ ||,
where W1 denotes the Wasserstein-1 distance.

We now state our convergence theorem for DRO in the performative prediction setting. This the-
orem says that under the conditions outlined above, repeatedly optimizing a distributionally robust
objective will converge to a performatively stable model at a linear rate. The proof can be found in
A.4.
Theorem 3.8. Suppose that the distributionally robust objective satisfies definitions 3.5 and 3.6,
and that the distribution map satisfies definition 3.7. Then the following statements are true:

          1. ||G(θ) − G(θ′ )||2 ≤ ωϵ βγ ||θ − θ′ ||2 , for all θ, θ′ ∈ Θ

          2. If ωϵ < βγ , the iterates θt of RDRO converge to a unique robustly performatively stable
                                                                                 −1
             point θP S at a linear rate: ||θt − θP S ||2 ≤ δ for t ≥ 1 − ωϵ βγ     log ||θ0 −θδP S ||2 .

Note that G(θ) := arg minθ∈Θ supQ≪D(θ) {EZ∼Q [ℓ(Z; θ)] : Q ∈ Uf (D(θ))}.

The proof of this theorem shows that RDRO is a contraction mapping and is essentially an applica-
tion of the Banach fixed point theorem. Definitions 3.6, 3.5, and 3.7 provide smoothness conditions
for the mapping sufficient to ensure contraction.
The importance of this theorem is that it suggests that RDRO should exhibit similar convergence
behaviour to RRM. As discussed earlier, however, training models with ERM is liable to result
in models which are discriminatory towards minority subgroups, while models trained with DRO
should exhibit uniform performance across different subgroups. What this implies is that RRM may
converge to unfair fixed points, while RDRO should converge to fair fixed points.

4       E XPERIMENTS
We run experiments to empirically verify the convergence of RDRO as compared to RRM, as well
as to demonstrate the utility of DRO in learning fair models in the presence of data characterized by
majority and minority subgroups. Implementation details can be found in A.5.

4.1       RRM AND RDRO ON C REDIT E XTENSION D ECISIONS

For our first experiment we reproduce an experiment from Perdomo et al. (2020) using a credit ex-
tension dataset from the Kaggle competition Give Me Some Credit. The dataset contains information
about potential borrowers and the task is to predict whether or not an individual will default on their
debt. We construct a distribution map by strategically manipulating individuals features in response
to the deployed classifier Hardt et al. (2016a).
In order to add a performative element to the prediction problem, we identify 3 of the 10 features
as strategic features which will be altered as a function of the parameters of our model. Strategic
classification is a particular instance of performative prediction in which individuals adversarially
adjust their features to maximize the likelihood of classification to the positive class. Strategic
classification has been explored in relation to fairness concerns in previous work Hardt et al. (2016a);
Bruckner et al. (2012); Miller et al. (2020); Milli et al. (2019); D’Amour et al. (2020); Hu et al.
(2019).
As described in Perdomo et al. (2020) and Hardt et al. (2016a), we assume individuals have linear
utilities u(θ, x) = −⟨θ, x⟩ and quadratic costs c(x′ , x) = 2ϵ 1
                                                                 ||x′ − x||22 . The constant ϵ controls
the cost individuals incur by altering their features. Individuals thus pay a cost to manipulate their
    1
        The formal definition of ϵ-sensitivity is given in A.3.


                                                            5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Figure 1: Plot of the normalized distance be-           Figure 2: Plot of the normalized distance be-
tween successive values of θ for ERM.                   tween successive values of θ for DRO.


features in order to minimize the likelihood of the model predicting that they will default on their
loan, but are unable to change the true outcome, y ∈ {0, 1}, of whether or not they default. Given
linear utilities and quadratic costs as described here, the individuals’ best response is to manipulate
their features as
                                            x′S = xS − ϵθS ,
where xS , x′S R|S| and |S| is the number of strategic features. The explanation of why this distribu-
tion map is ϵ-sensitive can be found in Perdomo et al. (2020).
The procedure for updating the data according to the distribution map for strategic classification is
explained in the box below.
 Input: Base distribution P , a classifier fθ , a cost function c, a utility function u.
 Sampling procedure for D(θ):
       1. Sample (x, y) ∼ P
       2. Compute best response xBR ← arg maxx′ u(x′ , θ) − c(x′ , x)
       3. Output sample (xBR , y)

We train two logistic regression models using RRM and RDRO. The magnitude of the distribution
shift is controlled by a parameter, ϵ. The larger the value of ϵ, the larger the distribution shift. The
ϵ-sensitivity condition of the distribution map is thus only satisfied for small values of ϵ. Further
details are given in A.6.
Figures 1 and 2 contain the distance between the learned parameters of the model on successive iter-
ates. A distance of zero means that the model has converged to a performatively stable point. These
figures show us RRM and RDRO exhibit similar convergence behaviour. Both RRM and RDRO
converge for ϵ = 0.01, and RDRO also converges for ϵ = 1.0. Both RRM and RDRO converge to
small neighbourhoods for ϵ = 10, while neither converge for ϵ = 100. This result empirically sup-
ports our theoretical work, suggesting that RRM and RDRO exhibit similar convergence behaviour.

4.2   S TATIC C LASSIFICATION WITH ERM AND DRO

The credit dataset does not contain any demographic information, so to investigate the fairness prop-
erties of the fixed points resulting from RRM and RDRO we generate synthetic data, sampled from
two multivariate normal distributions with different means. We refer to the majority sub-probability
distribution as group A and the minority distribution as group B. Data from each individual distribu-
tion is linearly separable, but the combined distribution is not, meaning that a linear classifier must
trade-off performance between the two subgroups.
To build intuition for the differing behaviour of ERM and DRO on a classification task involving
subgroups and fairness concerns, we first investigate a static classification scenario, before exploring
long-term fairness via performative prediction.


                                                    6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Our data is generated from bivariate Gaussian distributions and the label, y, of a given data point is
1 if the sum of its features are greater than the sum of the means of the two Gaussian distributions
from which we draw samples and 0 otherwise. We have two subgroups within our data, A and B. We
vary the proportion of samples from each subgroup in the experiments. The exact data generating
process is given in A.6
Although this dataset is extremely simple, it is characterized by a feature that represents a cen-
tral concern for fairness in machine learning, namely that the conditional probability distributions,
P (y|x), are significantly different for distinct subsets of the data. This example is intended to rep-
resent a simplified abstract instance of a population with majority and minority subgroups in order
to see how the behaviour of ERM and DRO differ in this circumstance.
We generate three distinct datasets on which to train our algorithms, each made up of differing pro-
portions of the two subgroups A and B. Each dataset contains a sample of 10,000 data points, with
samples distributed according the values of cA and cB , parameters which control the proportion of
the data coming from each subgroup. The accuracy of the models on the three datasets is summa-
rized in Tables 5 and 6 below. For both ERM and DRO we use L2-regularized logistic regression
trained with stochastic gradient descent. The step-size for all algorithms is fixed at 0.05 and we train
for 15,000 epochs.
Models trained with the distributionally robust objective have the additional complication that we
must specify a value for the radius of the χ2 -divergence ball, i.e. ρ. The larger the value of ρ, the
more we can expect a DRO model to differ from an ERM model because as the χ2 -divergence ball
grows, the worst case distribution can be further and further from the data generating distribution.
Conversely, in the limit as ρ → 0, we recover ERM as the χ2 -divergence ball shrinks to contain only
the data generating distribution.
Choosing the value of ρ is a challenging decision, as the performance of a model varies significantly
as ρ changes. If one has access to demographic information, it is possible to conduct a grid search
over possible ρ values in order to find a value that results in a model with the desirable fairness
properties. Doing this, however, largely defeats the purpose of DRO. As explained earlier, a central
advantage to using DRO, rather than some fairness constrained optimization technique, is that DRO
does not require access to demographic information.
In this experiment we work directly with the dual formulation of DRO and set η = 0.56. The dual
formulation of DRO is explained in A.2 This value was chosen empirically to achieve relatively
uniform accuracy across group A and group B for an 80/20 split between the two subgroups. As the
values of cA and cB change, we can see that the performance of DRO changes for a given value of
η and hence ρ, as η ∗ depends on ρ.

 Objective     Group      [cA = 0.6, cB = 0.4]      [cA = 0.8, cB = 0.2]     [cA = 0.95, cB = 0.05]
 ERM             A               0.797                     0.907                     0.966
                 B               0.701                     0.652                     0.592
              All Data           0.759                     0.856                     0.948
 DRO             A               0.665                     0.751                     0.780
                 B               0.869                     0.744                     0.766
              All Data           0.747                     0.750                     0.780

                          Table 1: Accuracy by Group for ERM and DRO.


We first examine the performance of ERM (Table 1). As the data is not linearly separable, ERM
must learn a decision boundary that trades off performance between the two subgroups. Because the
ERM objective treats the loss on each data point equally, the model learns a decision boundary that
is more accurate for the majority group than for the minority group. This discrepancy in accuracy
of predictions worsens the smaller the majority group is. For instance, when 95% of the data comes
from group A, the logistic regression model trained with an ERM objective achieves 96% accuracy
on group A members, but only 59.2% accuracy on group B members.
Models trained with a DRO objective behave much differently (Table 1). For the 80/20 split and
95/5 split, the DRO models learn relatively fair decision boundaries, effectively balancing perfor-


                                                   7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


         Figure 3: Group A, DRO.                                 Figure 4: Group B, DRO.


         Figure 5: Group A, ERM.                                 Figure 6: Group B, ERM.

Figure 7: Decision boundaries for ERM and DRO classifiers with samples from groups A and B
with cA = 0.95 and cB = 0.05. Shading indicates predicted label and data point colour indicates
true label.


mance on both subgroups A and B. For the 60/40 split, however, DRO actually learns a model that
performs significantly better on the minority group than the majority group. This model is in a sense
discriminatory against the majority group. This is the result of the radius of the χ2 -divergence ball
being too large and the model thus overly focusing on a worst case distribution.
In Figures 3, 4, 5, and 6 we plot data from groups A and B for data generated with cA = 0.95, cB =
0.05 with the learned decision boundary from a DRO and ERM model, respectively, overlaid. The
background shading indicates the predicted label with blue representing ŷ = 0 and red representing
ŷ = 1, while the colour of the data points indicate their true label.

4.3   RRM AND RDRO WITH S UBGROUPS

We have seen empirical confirmation of convergence of RDRO and RRM in our first experiment, and
the static classification with subgroups has demonstrated the potential for DRO as a tool to achieve
fairness in ML models, but neither of these address the question of long term fairness under dynam-
ically changing distributions. To investigate this question, we generate data in a similar fashion to
the static classification experiment (details in A.6), and add a performative element to the model.
The data in this experiment is composed of a mixture of multivariate normal distributions with
different means. 80% of the data is drawn from the majority subgroup, while the remaining 20% is
drawn from the minority subgroup. We again implement a strategic manipulation distribution map
and train models using RRM and RDRO for 30 iterations. As we saw with the Give Me Some Credit
dataset, for small values of ϵ we observe convergence, whereas for larger values of ϵ we do not
observe convergence. Plots illustrating this behaviour can be found in A.6.
The accuracy of the models for the values of ϵ for which we observe convergence are given in Tables
4.3 and 4.3. We can see that RRM converges to a performatively stable model that achieves high


                                                  8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


            ERM Performative Accuracy                DRO Performative Accuracy
       Group   ϵ = 0.01 ϵ = 0.25 ϵ = 0.5            ϵ = 0.01 ϵ = 0.25 ϵ = 0.5
         A       0.893     0.896      0.898           0.687      0.710       0.738
         B       0.540     0.540      0.540           0.670      0.660       0.660
      All Data   0.834     0.837      0.838           0.684      0.701       0.725
                Table 2: Accuracy by Group for ERM and DRO after 30 iterations.


accuracy on the majority group, but performs poorly on the minority group. RDRO on the other
hand, results in models that perform similarly across both subgroups in the data.
This result, while perhaps not that surprising in light of the two previous experiments, is important,
as it demonstrates that not only does DRO exhibit similar convergence behaviour to ERM, but DRO
converges to fair fixed points, whereas ERM converges to discriminatory fixed points in the presence
of heterogeneous data composed of minority and majority subgroups. Recall also that DRO is not
given access to group information, but still learns to achieve more uniform performance across
subgroups, as it is attempting to minimize the worst case loss across all probability distributions
within the χ2 -divergence ball surrounding the data generating distribution. Further details of this
experiment, as well as additonal experiments are provided in A.6.

5   C ONCLUSION AND F UTURE W ORK
Performative prediction offers a rigorous framework in which to reason about decision making in
dynamic environments. Existing theory for performative prediction had only been developed for
models trained with ERM objectives, however, which is liable to result in models that discriminate
against minority groups.
We extend the performative prediction framework to DRO and prove a convergence result for RDRO.
We also investigate RRM and RDRO empirically and find that while they exhibit similar conver-
gence behaviour, RRM converges to fixed points that perform well on a majority subgroup, but
poorly on a minority subgroup, whereas RDRO converges to models which successfully balance
performance across majority and minority subgroups.
We hope that this work helps to further our still very limited understanding of fairness properties
of ML algorithms in changing and dynamic environments, which charactierize many real-world
settings with fairness concerns. By combining performative prediction with a distributionally robust
objective, we have tried to overcome some of the shortcomings of the dominant fairness criteria and
to offer a flexible and general tool to ML practitioners and researchers concerned with ensuring that
algorithms do not discriminate against vulnerable minority groups.
This work represents a preliminary investigation into the combination of DRO and performative
prediction as a method to understand and learn fair algorithms, and, as such, leaves many impor-
tant avenues for future work open. Further theoretical investigation of the convergence properties
of RDRO would yield better understanding of the distributionally robust objective, as this work es-
chewed answering important questions of stability of worst case distributions as well as questions
of smoothness and strong convexity of distributionally robust objectives.
It would also be very interesting to investigate both the convergence properties and practical efficacy
of a parametric DRO objective, rather than an f -divergence based robust objective. Recent work
suggests that parametric DRO can outperform f -divergence based DRO and offers practitioners and
theoreticians greater flexibility than with analytic DRO Michel et al. (2022; 2021).
Additionally, performative prediction and distributionally robust optimization have connections and
similarities to many other well established areas of research in machine learning, and it is likely
that existing results in areas such as bandits, reinforcement learning, online learning, stochastic
optimization, and out of distribution generalization could greatly contribute to our understanding of
DRO and performative prediction.


                                                  9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


R EFERENCES
AJ Abdallat. A push for digital transformation: The global ai investment boom. 2021.
Tara Balakrishnan, Michael Chui, Bryce Hall, and Nicolaus Henke. The state of ai in 2020. Mckinsey
  Analytics, 2020.
Solon Barocas, Moritz Hardt, and Arvind Narayanan. Fairness and Machine Learning. fairml-
  book.org, 2019. http://www.fairmlbook.org.
A. Ben-Tal, L. El Ghaoui, and A.S. Nemirovski. Robust Optimization. Princeton Series in Applied
  Mathematics. Princeton University Press, 2009.
Aharon Ben-Tal, Dick den Hertog, Anja De Waegenaere, Bertrand Melenberg, and Gijs Rennen. Ro-
  bust solutions of optimization problems affected by uncertain probabilities. Management Science,
  59(2):341–357, 2013. ISSN 0025-1909.
Richard Berk, Hoda Heidari, Shahin Jabbari, Michael Kearns, and Aaron Roth. Fairness in criminal
  justice risk assessments: The state of the art. Sociological Methods & Research, 50(1):3–44,
  2021.
Stephen Boyd and Lieven Vandenberghe. Convex Optimization. Cambridge University Press, 3
  2004. ISBN 0521833787.
Gavin Brown, Shlomi Hod, and Iden Kalemaj. Performative prediction in a stateful world. 2020.
Michael Bruckner, Christian Kanzow, and Tobias Scheffer. Static prediction games for adversarial
 learning problems. Journal of Machine Learning Research, 13(85):2617–2654, 2012.
Alexandra Chouldechova. Fair prediction with disparate impact: A study of bias in recidivism
  prediction instruments. Big data, 5 2:153–163, 2017.
Sam Corbett-Davies, Emma Pierson, Avi Feller, Sharad Goel, and Aziz Huq. Algorithmic decision
  making and the cost of fairness. KDD ’17, pp. 797–806. Association for Computing Machinery,
  2017. ISBN 9781450348874.
I. Csiszar. Information-type measures of difference of probability distributions and indirect obser-
   vation. Studia Scientifica Mathematica, 2:299–318, 1967.
I. Csiszár and P.C. Shields. Information theory and statistics: A tutorial. Foundations and Trends in
   Communications and Information Theory, 1(4):417–528, 2004. ISSN 1567-2190.
Alexander D’Amour, Hansa Srinivasan, James Atwood, Pallavi Baljekar, D. Sculley, and Yoni
  Halpern. Fairness is not static: Deeper understanding of long term fairness via simulation stud-
  ies. FAT* ’20, pp. 525–534, New York, NY, USA, 2020. Association for Computing Machinery.
  ISBN 9781450369367.
Roy Dong and Lillian J. Ratliff. Approximate regions of attraction in learning with decision-
  dependent distributions, 2021.
John C. Duchi and Hongseok Namkoong. Learning models with uniform performance via distribu-
  tionally robust optimization. The Annals of Statistics, 49(3):1378 – 1406, 2021.
John C. Duchi, Tatsunori Hashimoto, and Hongseok Namkoong. Distributionally robust losses for
  latent covariate mixtures. CoRR, abs/2007.13982, 2020.
Cynthia Dwork, Moritz Hardt, Toniann Pitassi, Omer Reingold, and Richard Zemel. Fairness
  through awareness. In Proceedings of the 3rd Innovations in Theoretical Computer Science
  Conference, ITCS ’12, pp. 214–226. Association for Computing Machinery, 2012. ISBN
  9781450311151.
Moritz Hardt, Nimrod Megiddo, Christos Papadimitriou, and Mary Wootters. Strategic classi-
 fication. In Proceedings of the 2016 ACM Conference on Innovations in Theoretical Com-
 puter Science, ITCS ’16, pp. 111–122. Association for Computing Machinery, 2016a. ISBN
 9781450340571.


                                                 10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Moritz Hardt, Eric Price, and Nathan Srebro. Equality of opportunity in supervised learning. In
 NIPS, 2016b.
Tatsunori B. Hashimoto, Megha Srivastava, Hongseok Namkoong, and Percy Liang. Fairness with-
  out demographics in repeated loss minimization. In ICML, 2018.
Lily Hu, Nicole Immorlica, and Jennifer Wortman Vaughan. The disparate effects of strategic manip-
  ulation. In Proceedings of the Conference on Fairness, Accountability, and Transparency, FAT*
  ’19, pp. 259–268, New York, NY, USA, 2019. Association for Computing Machinery. ISBN
  9781450361255.
Sookyo Jeong and Hongseok Namkoong. Robust causal inference under covariate shift via worst-
  case subpopulation treatment effects. In Jacob Abernethy and Shivani Agarwal (eds.), Proceed-
  ings of Thirty Third Conference on Learning Theory, volume 125 of Proceedings of Machine
  Learning Research, pp. 2079–2084. PMLR, 2020.
Jon Kleinberg, Sendhil Mullainathan, and Manish Raghavan. Inherent trade-offs in the fair determi-
  nation of risk scores. In Christos H. Papadimitriou (ed.), 8th Innovations in Theoretical Computer
  Science Conference (ITCS 2017), volume 67 of Leibniz International Proceedings in Informat-
  ics (LIPIcs), pp. 43:1–43:23. Schloss Dagstuhl–Leibniz-Zentrum fuer Informatik, 2017. ISBN
  978-3-95977-029-3.
Christian Kroer. Lecture Notes for Economics, AI, and Optimization. 2022.
Jaeho Lee and Maxim Raginsky. Minimax statistical learning with wasserstein distances. In S. Ben-
  gio, H. Wallach, H. Larochelle, K. Grauman, N. Cesa-Bianchi, and R. Garnett (eds.), Advances in
  Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 31. Curran Associates, Inc., 2018.
Celestine Mendler-Dünner, Juan Perdomo, Tijana Zrnic, and Moritz Hardt. Stochastic optimization
  for performative prediction. In H. Larochelle, M. Ranzato, R. Hadsell, M. F. Balcan, and H. Lin
  (eds.), Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 33, pp. 4929–4939. Curran
  Associates, Inc., 2020.
Paul Michel, Tatsunori Hashimoto, and Graham Neubig. Modeling the second player in distribu-
  tionally robust optimization. In 9th International Conference on Learning Representations, ICLR
  2021, Virtual Event, Austria, May 3-7, 2021. OpenReview.net, 2021.
Paul Michel, Tatsunori Hashimoto, and Graham Neubig. Distributionally robust models with para-
  metric likelihood ratios. In The Tenth International Conference on Learning Representations,
  ICLR 2022, Virtual Event, April 25-29, 2022. OpenReview.net, 2022.
John Miller, Smitha Milli, and Moritz Hardt. Strategic classification is causal modeling in disguise.
  In Hal Daumé III and Aarti Singh (eds.), Proceedings of the 37th International Conference on
  Machine Learning, volume 119 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pp. 6917–6926.
  PMLR, 2020.
John Miller, Juan Carlos Perdomo, and Tijana Zrnic. Outside the echo chamber: Optimizing the
  performative risk. International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML) 2021, 2021.
Smitha Milli, John Miller, Anca D. Dragan, and Moritz Hardt. The social cost of strategic classifi-
  cation. In Proceedings of the Conference on Fairness, Accountability, and Transparency, FAT*
  ’19, pp. 230–239. Association for Computing Machinery, 2019. ISBN 9781450361255.
Hongseok Namkoong and John C Duchi. Stochastic gradient methods for distributionally robust
  optimization with f-divergences. In D. Lee, M. Sugiyama, U. Luxburg, I. Guyon, and R. Garnett
  (eds.), Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 29. Curran Associates, Inc.,
  2016.
Hongseok Namkoong and John C Duchi. Variance-based regularization with convex objectives. In
  I. Guyon, U. V. Luxburg, S. Bengio, H. Wallach, R. Fergus, S. Vishwanathan, and R. Garnett
  (eds.), Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 30. Curran Associates, Inc.,
  2017.


                                                 11
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Juan Perdomo, Tijana Zrnic, Celestine Mendler-Dünner, and Moritz Hardt. Performative prediction.
  In Hal Daumé III and Aarti Singh (eds.), Proceedings of the 37th International Conference on
  Machine Learning, volume 119 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pp. 7599–7609.
  PMLR, 2020.
Georg Pflug and David Wozabal. Ambiguity in portfolio selection. Quantitative Finance, 7(4):
  435–442, 2007.
Alfred Renyi. On measures of entropy and information. In The 4th Berkeley Symposium on Mathe-
  matics, Statistics and Probability, pp. 547–561. University of California Press, 1961.
Alexander Shapiro. Distributionally robust stochastic programming. SIAM Journal on Optimization,
  27(4):2258–2275, 2017.
V. Vapnik. Principles of risk minimization for learning theory. In Proceedings of the 4th Inter-
  national Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems, NIPS’91, pp. 831–838. Morgan
  Kaufmann Publishers Inc., 1991. ISBN 1558602224.
Abraham Wald. Statistical decision functions which minimize the maximum risk. Annals of Math-
  ematics, 46:265–280, 1945.
Blake Woodworth, Suriya Gunasekar, Mesrob I. Ohannessian, and Nathan Srebro. Learning non-
  discriminatory predictors. In Satyen Kale and Ohad Shamir (eds.), Proceedings of the 2017
  Conference on Learning Theory, volume 65 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pp.
  1920–1953. PMLR, 2017.
David Wozabal. A framework for optimization under ambiguity. Annals of Operations Research,
  193(1):21–47, 2012.
Muhammad Bilal Zafar, Isabel Valera, Manuel Gomez Rodriguez, and Krishna P. Gummadi. Fair-
 ness beyond disparate treatment and disparate impact: Learning classification without disparate
 mistreatment. In Proceedings of the 26th International Conference on World Wide Web, WWW
 ’17, pp. 1171–1180. International World Wide Web Conferences Steering Committee, 2017.
 ISBN 9781450349130.


                                               12
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


A     A PPENDIX

A.1    R ELATED W ORK

The two most influential areas of research for this work are performative prediction and distribution-
ally robust optimization, and the papers most important for this work are Perdomo et al. (2020) and
Duchi & Namkoong (2021). Perdomo et al. develop the performative prediction framework, while
Duchi and Namkoong give a thorough summary of distributionally robust optimization and explain
its potential application to fairness concerns in machine learning.
Following the publication of Performative Prediction Perdomo et al. (2020), there have been a num-
ber of papers which have further explored performative prediction and extended some of the results
from the original paper. For instance, Mendler-Dünner et al. (2020) prove results for stochastic op-
timization in performative prediction, Miller et al. (2021) prove new results relating performatively
stable points to performatively optimal points, Brown et al. (2020) attempt to move toward sequen-
tial games for performative prediction by adding a notion of state to the performative prediction
problem, and Dong & Ratliff (2021) approach performative prediction from a dynamical systems
perspective allowing a move away from strict contraction mappings when examining convergence
to performatively stable models.
Distributionally robust optimization is an older area of research as compared to performative pre-
diction, but it has only recently received more attention within the machine learning community,
largely due to work by Hongseook Namkoong and John Duchi Namkoong & Duchi (2017); Duchi
et al. (2020); Jeong & Namkoong (2020). Areas such as finance, where robust optimization is impor-
tant as rare events have the potential to be catastrophic for a portfolio, have seen research on robust
optimization for decades. See Ben-Tal et al. (2009) for a survey. Ben-Tal et al. (2013) Shapiro
(2017) provide rigorous mathematical treatments of DRO with f -divergence balls.
A number of recent papers have also attempted to better understand fairness in machine learning
over time, albeit not within the performative prediction framework. Closely related to performative
prediction, strategic classification Hardt et al. (2016a) models the prediction problem as an adversar-
ial game where individuals manipulate their features in response to deployed models. Recent work
Milli et al. (2019); Hu et al. (2019) has examined how strategic classification interacts with fairness
concerns. Strategic classification is an interesting problem setting, but is not as general as perfor-
mative prediction and only captures scenarios that can rightly be modelled as adversarial games.
D’Amour et al. (2020) on the other hand, approach long-term fairness questions from a purely em-
pirical perspective and use simulation studies to understand the long-term dynamics of algorithmic
choices on populations in a variety of scenarios designed to reflect real-world applications. This ap-
proach is interesting, but the lack of theoretical framework limits their ability to generalize beyond
specific simulations.
Finally, the work most closely related to this paper, Hashimoto et al. (2018), examines the impact
of repeatedly minimizing loss and deploying a model using empirical risk minimization and distri-
butionally robust optimization on a population that changes as a function of the loss incurred. This
work, however, does not fit into the performative prediction framework and applies only to a specific
scenario in which individuals arrive according to a Poisson process and depart as a function of the
loss. This research aims to extend this work by combining DRO and performative prediction in
order to leverage the known results in both areas to provide a more general understanding of how
DRO can impact long-term fairness.


A.2    D ISTRIBUTIONALLY ROBUST O PTIMIZATION

The notation Q ≪ P0 means that Q is absolutely continuous with respect to P0 2 . An f -divergence,
Df (Q||P ), is a function that measures the difference between two probability distributions Q and P ,
although it is not a metric. There are a variety of different f -divergences, but their general definition
is as follows Renyi (1961); Csiszár & Shields (2004); Csiszar (1967).

   2
     If two measures, µ and ν, are on the same measure space (X , A), µ is said to be absolutely continuous
with respect to ν if µ(A) = 0 for every set A for which ν(A) = 0.


                                                    13
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Df (Q||P ) := f ( dQ
                R
                    dP )dP where f is a convex function such that f (1) = 0. If Q and P are
absolutely continuous with respect to a reference distribution µ, then their probability densities q
and p satisfy dP = p and dQ = q and the f -divergence can be written as
                                               Z
                                                    q(x)
                                Df (Q||P ) = f (          )dµ(x).
                                                    p(x)

Some examples of f -divergences are KL-divergence (f (t) = t log t), Pearson χ2 -divergence
(f (t) = (t − 1)2 , t2 − 1, t2 − t), and total variation distance (f (t) = 12 |t − 1|). An f -divergence
ball centred at P of radius ρ is a set that contains all probability distributions whose f -divergence
is within ρ of P . For example, {Q : Df (Q||P0 ) ≤ ρ} is an f -divergence ball that contains all
probability distributions Q that are within ρ f -divergence distance from P0 . This is analogous to the
notion of an ϵ-ball surrounding a vector in a vector space.
The distributionally robust problem therefore, is to find a set of parameters, θ ∈ Θ, that minimize
the worst case expected loss of all probability distributions Q that are within the f -divergence ball
of radius ρ of our data generating distribution. This differs from ERM in that we do not seek to min-
imize the expected loss over our data generating distribution, but instead seek to minimize the worst
case expected loss over a set of probability distributions nearby our data generating distribution.
As the name suggests, learning parameters that minimize the distributionally robust risk gives us a
model that is robust to changes in the data generating distribution. Traditional risk minimization will
return a model that minimizes risk for the data generating distribution, but offers no performance
guarantees when that distribution changes, and can result in models that are brittle and do not per-
form well on out of distribution (OOD) examples. DRO, on the other hand, is a more conservative
procedure that minimizes worst-case risk and should thus be robust to changes to the probability
generating distribution that lie within the f -divergence ball of radius ρ.
As with traditional risk minimization, we do not have access to the theoretical data generating dis-
tribution. Instead, we solve the distributionally robust problem via the plug-in estimator
                             (                                                        )
              θ̂n ∈ arg min Rf (θ, P̂n ) := sup {EQ [ℓ(θ; X)] : Df (Q||P̂n ) ≤ ρ}
                      θ∈Θ                     Q≪P̂n

where P̂n is the empirical measure on Xi ∼iid P0 . Duchi and Namkoong prove convergence
guarantees and rates for the plug-in estimator along with some asymptotic results such as showing
consistency of the estimator Duchi & Namkoong (2021).
It is not necessarily clear from the discussion so far what DRO has to do with fairness concerns in
machine learning, but DRO in fact has characteristics that are very desirable for addressing issues
of fairness and discrimination in learning algorithms. We will explain this shortly, but first we
introduce dual reformulations of the distributionally robust problem as it provides some intuition as
to the connection with fairness concerns.
The following theorem comes from Shapiro (2017). Let f ∗ (s) := supt {st − f (t)} be the Fenchel
conjugate.
Theorem A.1. ([Shapiro (2017), Section 3.2]). Let P be a probability measure on (X , A) and
ρ > 0. Then
                                                ℓ(θ; X) − η
               Rf (θ; P ) = inf       EP λf ∗                  + λρ + η
                           λ≥0,η∈R                   λ
for all θ. Moreover, if the supremum on the left hand side is finite, there are finite λ(θ) ≥ 0 and
η(θ) ∈ R attaining the infimum on the right hand side.

Additionally, Duchi & Namkoong (2021) provide a simplified version of this dual formulation for
the Cressie-Read family of f -divergences, obtained by minimizing out λ > 0 from Theorem A.1.
Theorem A.2. ([Duchi & Namkoong (2021), Section 2]). For any probability P on (X , A), k ∈
(1, ∞), k∗ = k/(k − 1), any ρ > 0, and ck (ρ) = (1 + k(k − 1)ρ)1/k , we have for all θ ∈ Θ
                                               h                i1/k∗
                                                             k∗
                   Rf (θ; P ) = inf ck (ρ)EP (ℓ(θ; X) − η)+           +η
                                   η∈R



                                                  14
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


The above formulations are jointly convex in (θ, λ, η) and (θ, η), respectively, for convex losses,
ℓ(θ; X), making them amenable to techniques from convex optimization such as interior point meth-
ods Boyd & Vandenberghe (2004).
                                                                                           k
The Cressie-Read family of f -divergences are parameterized by k ∈ (−∞, ∞) \ {0, 1}, k∗ = k−1 ,
with

                           tk − kt + k − 1                        1h                     i
               fk (t) :=                      and    fk∗ (s) :=     ((k − 1)s + 1)k+∗ − 1 .
                              k(k − 1)                            k

Issues of fairness arise in machine learning when an algorithm treats different demographic groups
in a disparate fashion. As outlined above, this often means that algorithmic performance varies
across different demographic groups. If this occurs, it is almost certainly the case that there exist
distinct probability distributions over the demographic groups because if all demographic groups
were characterized the the same probability distribution, classification algorithms should exhibit
uniform performance across demographic groups.
This realization makes it easy to see why ERM is likely to discriminate, particularly against minority
groups. ERM treats the loss on each data point equally, thus, if there is a majority and minority
probability distribution and a learning algorithm must balance performance on these groups, an
ERM objective is likely to result in a model that performs better on the majority group and worse on
the minority group. It is exactly this type of problem that DRO is designed to resolve.
Unlike ERM, DRO does not equally weight each data point, but instead up-weights data points
on which the model is achieving high loss. This means that the model should achieve somewhat
uniform performance on individuals across demographic groups. This can be seen by looking at the
dual formulation in Theorem A.2. The DRO objective only considers losses above the optimal dual
variable η ∗ (θ) and these losses are up-weighted by the Lk∗ (P )-norm. Losses that are less than the
optimal dual variable are set to zero in the objective. Another way of saying this is that the DRO
objective is equivalent to optimizing the tail-performance of a model Duchi & Namkoong (2021).
If DRO performs poorly on a subset of the data that is correlated with a distinct demographic group,
these losses will be up-weighted by the dual formulation of the distributionally robust objective,
pushing the model to improve performance on this subset. DRO does not offer any guarantees of
uniform performance across demographic groups, but as we increase the value of ρ we will increase
the loss incurred on “hard” regions of the data where the model performs poorly.

A.3    P ERFORMATIVE P REDICTION

In supervised learning we assume that our data is sampled i.i.d. from an unknown data generating
distribution and that our model is then deployed to make predictions on data that follows this same
distribution. In many scenarios, however, the very act of making predictions influences the data on
which we wish to make these predictions. That is to say, our models are performative and instead of
passively describing the world and making predictions about it, they actually induce change in the
world.
A simple example of this is predictive policing. In predictive policing we train a model to predict
where crimes are likely to occur based on historical data and then deploy more resources to areas
where the model predicts crimes are more likely to occur. The increased police patrols and surveil-
lance results in more crimes being detected which might further increase the perceived crime rate in
those areas. If this data is then used for future predictions it will result in a shifted distribution of the
data as a result of the predictions of the previous model. Another example of performativity is an
algorithm that weights different elements of a student’s CV such as SAT scores and GPA in order to
make college admissions decisions. If the algorithm heavily weights SAT scores, over time it will
become apparent to applicants that SAT scores are very important and they will dedicate more re-
sources to improving SAT scores, thus changing the distribution of the data on which the algorithm
is making predictions as a result of those very predictions.
Performative prediction is closely related to many other fields in machine learning including bandits,
reinforcement learning, strategic classification, causal inference, convex optimization, and game
theory, but the precise notion and formalism for performative prediction was only developed very


                                                     15
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


recently in Perdomo et al. (2020). We formally specify the performative prediction problem now
and contrast it with the supervised learning problem.
Assume we have a measure space (Z, A) with Z a random element of Z and D the data generating
distribution on this space. Let Θ ⊂ Rd be the parameter (model) space and ℓ : Θ × Z → R be a loss
function. The supervised learning problem is to minimize the the objective over this distribution. In
the case of risk minimization the objective is the expected loss, ℓ(Z; θ) with respect to D.
                                       R(θ) = EZ∼D [ℓ(Z; θ)].
In contrast to this, performative prediction involves making predictions on a distribution that has
been shifted as a result of deploying the model, D(θ). We refer to D(θ) as the distribution map. The
concept that captures this notion of risk is known as performative risk and is formalized as follows:
                                    P R(θ) = EZ∼D(θ) [ℓ(Z; θ)].
The difference between this and the supervised learning problem is that expected loss is now taken
with respect to the induced distribution rather than the data generating distribution.
The notion of what constitutes a good model is different in supervised learning and performative
prediction. In supervised learning the task is simpler - minimize the risk on the data generating
distribution. In performative prediction however, we now need to consider how to minimize risk on
a distribution that is different from that which generated our training data, and is in fact a function
of whatever model we deploy. To capture these notions, Perdomo et al. (2020) define performative
optimality and performative stability.
Definition A.3. (performative optimality) A model fθP O is performatively optimal if the following
relationship holds:
                                   θP O = arg min EZ∼D(θ) [ℓ(Z; θ)].
                                            θ∈Θ
Equivalently, θP O = arg minθ∈Θ P R(θ) where P R(θ) is the performative risk as defined above.
A performatively optimal point is a minimizer of the performative risk. An alternative solution
concept is referred to as performative stability.
Definition A.4. (performative stability) A model fθP S is performatively stable if the following re-
lationship holds:
                                θP S = arg min EZ∼D(θP S ) [ℓ(Z; θ)].
                                          θ∈Θ
Define DP R(θ, θ′ ) := EZ∼D(θ) [ℓ(Z; θ′ )] as the decoupled performative risk; then θP S =
arg minθ∈Θ DP R(θP S , θ).
A performatively stable model is not necessarily a minimizer of the performative risk, but it is
optimal on the distribution it induces. Hence, if you have performative stability there is no need to
retrain a model to cope with the induced distribution drift. Performative optimality and performative
stability are distinct concepts and a performatively optimal point is not necessarily performatively
stable, and vice versa. As explained in Perdomo et al. (2020), performatively stable models are fixed
points of risk minimization. In game theoretic terms, we can consider performative prediction as a
game in which one player deploys a model, θ, and the environment responds with some distribution
map, D(θ). If D(θ) is a best response, then a performatively optimal point corresponds to a Stack-
elberg equilibrium, whereas a performatively stable point corresponds to a Nash equilibrium. From
game theory we know that except in special cases (e.g. finite zero-sum games), Nash equilibria and
Stackelberg equilibria do not necessarily coincide Kroer (2022).
Performative prediction presents a special case of learning under distribution drift, where the distri-
bution drift is a function of the model deployed. A common approach in supervised learning under
distribution drift is to retrain a model on newly collected data. While this does not directly minimize
performative risk, it is a potentially reasonable solution in a variety of scenarios. Perdomo et al.
(2020) prove theorems under which repeated risk minimization and repeated gradient descent con-
verge to performatively stable models. We present these findings in detail here as they are relevant
for our work.
Definition A.5. (ϵ-sensitivity) We say that a distribution map D(·) is ϵ-sensitive if for all θ, θ′ ∈ Θ:
                                  W1 (D(θ), D(θ′ )) ≤ ϵ||θ − θ′ ||2 ,
where W1 denotes the Wasserstein-1 distance.


                                                  16
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


We also make assumptions on the loss function ℓ(z; θ). Let Z := ∪θ∈Θ supp(D(θ)).
Definition A.6. (joint smoothness) We say that a loss function ℓ(z; θ) is β-jointly smooth if the
gradient ∇θ is β-Lipschitz in θ and z, that is
      ||∇θ ℓ(z; θ) − ∇θ ℓ(z; θ′ )||2 ≤ β||θ − θ′ ||2 ,        ||∇θ ℓ(z; θ) − ∇θ ℓ(z ′ ; θ)||2 ≤ β||z − z ′ ||2 ,
for all θ, θ′ ∈ Θ and z, z ′ ∈ Z
Definition A.7. (strong convexity) We say that a loss function ℓ(z; θ) is γ-strongly convex if
                                                                              γ
                        ℓ(z; θ) ≥ ℓ(z; θ′ ) + ∇θ ℓ(z; θ′ )T (θ − θ′ ) +         ||θ − θ′ ||22 ,
                                                                              2
for all θ, θ′ ∈ Θ and z ∈ Z. If γ = 0 this condition is equivalent to convexity.
Definition A.8. (repeated risk minimization) Repeated risk minimization (RRM) refers to the pro-
cedure where, starting from an initial model fθ0 , we perform the following sequence of updates for
every t ≥ 0:
                           θt+1 = G(θt ) := arg min EZ∼D(θt ) [ℓ(Z; θ)].
                                                    θ∈Θ

Definitions A.5, A.6, and A.7 are assumptions on the loss and distribution map that are required for
Theorem 3.5 in Perdomo et al. (2020). We state that theorem now.
Theorem A.9. ([Perdomo et al. (2020), Theorem 3.5]) Suppose that the loss ℓ(z; θ) is β-jointly
smooth and γ-strongly convex. If the distribution map D(·) is ϵ-sensitive, then the following state-
ments are true:

      1. ||G(θ) − G(θ′ )||2 ≤ ϵ βγ ||θ − θ′ ||2 , for all θ, θ′ ∈ Θ

      2. If ϵ < βγ , the iterates θt of RRM converge to a uniquely performatively stable point θP S at
                                                              −1
         a linear rate: ||θt − θP S ||2 ≤ δ for t ≥ 1 − ϵ βγ     log ||θ0 −θδP S ||2

This theorem says that with the appropriate smoothness and convexity conditions satisfied on the loss
and distribution map, repeatedly retraining a model by minimizing risk will converge to a unique
performatively stable model at a linear rate. The proof proceeds by demonstrating that under the
assumptions stated in Theorem A.9, the RRM operator is a contraction mapping. Perdomo et al.
(2020) also show that without any of ϵ-sensitivty, β-joint smoothness, or γ-strong convexity one
can produce examples that do not converge to a fixed point. Hence these assumptions are necessary
conditions to guarantee convergence of RRM to a performatively stable model in the general case.

A.4    D EFINITIONS AND P ROOF FOR D ISTRIBUTIONALLY ROBUST P ERFORMATIVE
       P REDICTION

We begin by redefining performative risk and performatively optimal and stable models in terms of
a robust objective. In the following D(θ) is a distribution map and Df (Q||D(θ)) is an f -divergence
ball of radius ρ.
Definition A.10. (robust performative risk) The robust performative risk of a model, θ, is
                      RP R(θ) =       sup {EZ∼Q [ℓ(Z; θ)] : Df (Q||D(θ)) ≤ ρ}.
                                     Q≪D(θ)


Robust performative risk differs from performative risk in that the induced distribution, D(θ), is now
the centre of an f -divergence ball over which a supremum of the expected loss is taken.
Definition A.11. (robust performative optimality) A model fθP O is robustly performatively optimal
if the following relationship holds:
                    θP O = arg min sup {EZ∼Q [ℓ(Z; θ)] : Df (Q||D(θ)) ≤ ρ}.
                               θ∈Θ    Q≪D(θ)

Equivalently, θP O = arg minθ∈Θ RP R(θ) where RP R(θ) is the robust performative risk as defined
above.


                                                         17
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Definition A.12. (robust performative stability) A model fθP S is robustly performatively stable if
the following relationship holds:
                 θP S = arg min       sup     {EZ∼Q [ℓ(Z; θ)] : Df (Q||D(θP S )) ≤ ρ}.
                           θ∈Θ    Q≪D(θP S )

Define RDP R(θ, θ′ ) := supQ≪D(θ) {EZ∼Q [ℓ(Z; θ′ )] : Df (Q||D(θ)) ≤ ρ} as the robust decoupled
performative risk; then θP S = arg minθ∈Θ RDP R(θP S , θ).

We discussed earlier that previous work has shown that repeated risk minimization converges to a
performatively stable model under certain assumptions on the loss and distribution map Perdomo
et al. (2020). We can analogously define repeated distributionally robust optimization as follows.
Definition A.13. (repeated distributionally robust optimization) Repeated distributionally robust
optimization (RDRO) refers to the procedure where, starting from an initial model fθ0 , we perform
the following sequence of updates for every t ≥ 0:
             θt+1 = G(θt ) := arg min         sup {EZ∼Q [ℓ(Z; θ)] : Df (Q||D(θt )) ≤ ρ}.
                                    θ∈Θ     Q≪D(θt )


As with RRM, this is an iterative procedure where we optimize the distributionally robust objective
at each time step t. While it is only a small departure from RRM conceptually, the DRO objective has
fundamentally different mathematical properties than risk minimization making it unclear whether
RDRO and RRM should exhibit similar behaviour.
We now re-state and prove our convergence theorem for RDRO. The proof of this theorem is a
straightforward adaptation of the proof in Perdomo et al. (2020). We first introduce two lemmas
used in Perdomo et al. (2020) which we will make use of in our proof.
Lemma A.14. (First-order optimality condition) Let f be convex and let Ω be a closed convex set
on which f is differentiable, then
                                        x∗ ∈ arg min f (x)
                                                       x∈Ω
if and only if
                               ∇f (x∗ )T (y − x∗ ) ≥ 0, ∀y ∈ Ω.
Lemma A.15. (Kantorovich-Rubinstein) A distribution map D(·) is robustly ϵ-sensitive if and only
if for all θ, θ′ ∈ Θ:
      sup EZ∼D∗ (θ) [g(Z)] − EZ∼D∗ (θ′ ) [g(Z)] : g : RP → R, g 1-Lipschitz ≤ ωϵ||θ − θ′ ||2


where D∗ (θ) =       arg max        EZ∼Q [ℓ(Z; θ)].
                 Q:Df (Q||D(θ))≤ρ

We now state our theorem.
Theorem A.16. Suppose that the distributionally robust objective satisfies definitions 3.5 and 3.6,
and that the distribution map satisfies definition 3.7. Then the following statements are true:

      1. ||G(θ) − G(θ′ )||2 ≤ ωϵ βγ ||θ − θ′ ||2 , for all θ, θ′ ∈ Θ

      2. If ωϵ < βγ , the iterates θt of RDRO converge to a unique robustly performatively stable
                                                                             −1
         point θP S at a linear rate: ||θt − θP S ||2 ≤ δ for t ≥ 1 − ωϵ βγ     log ||θ0 −θδP S ||2 .

Note that G(θ) := arg minθ∈Θ supQ≪D(θ) {EZ∼Q [ℓ(Z; θ)] : Df (Q||D(θ)) ≤ ρ}.

Proof. Fix θ, θ′ ∈ Θ. Let
                               D∗ (θ) =        arg max         EZ∼Q [ℓ(Z; θ)].
                                          Q:Df (Q||D(θ))≤ρ

That is, D∗ (θ) is the distribution within the f -divergence ball centred at D(θ) with radius ρ that
maximizes the expected loss. Further, let
                   f (ξ) = EZ∼D∗ (θ) [ℓ(Z; ξ)] and           f ′ (ξ) = EZ∼D∗ (θ′ ) [ℓ(Z; ξ)].


                                                       18
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


That is, f (ξ) and f ′ (ξ) are the worst case losses for f -divergence balls centred at θ and θ′ respec-
tively with radius ρ.
We now use Definition 3.6 and Definition 3.5 to ensure that f is γ-strongly convex and that the
gradient of f exists and is β-jointly smooth. With our assumption of γ-strong convexity of f , G(θ)
is the unique minimizer of f (x) and we have the following two inequalities
                                                                        γ
            f (G(θ)) − f (G(θ′ )) ≥ (G(θ) − G(θ′ ))T ∇f (G(θ′ )) +        ||G(θ) − G(θ′ )||22       (1)
                                                                        2
                                      γ
            f (G(θ′ )) − f (G(θ)) ≥     ||G(θ) − G(θ′ )||22                                         (2)
                                      2
Inequality (1) comes from the definition of γ-strong convexity and inequality (2) comes from γ-
strong convexity and the first-order optimality condition since Lemma A.14 tells us (G(θ′ ) −
G(θ))T ∇f (G(θ)) ≥ 0 because G(θ) is the minimizer of f (x).
Using these two inequalities we can derive the following
                                                               γ
                −γ||G(θ) − G(θ′ )||22 ≥ f (G(θ)) − f (G(θ′ )) −  ||G(θ) − G(θ′ )||22
                                                               2
                                       ≥ (G(θ) − G(θ′ ))T ∇f (G(θ′ ))
where we get the first inequality from (2) and the second from (1).
Now, using β-joint smoothness in z and Cauchy-Schwarz we get
              ||(G(θ) − G(θ′ ))T ∇θ ℓ(z; G(θ′ )) − (G(θ) − G(θ′ ))T ∇θ ℓ(z ′ ; G(θ′ ))||2
                                                  ≤ ||G(θ) − G(θ′ )||2 β||z − z ′ ||2

That is, (G(θ) − G(θ′ ))T ∇θ ℓ(z; G(θ′ ) is ||G(θ) − G(θ′ )||2 β-Lipschitz in z. We will now use this
and Kantorovich-Rubinstein (Lemma A.15). Let
                                       (G(θ) − G(θ′ ))T ∇θ ℓ(z; G(θ′ ))
                              g(z) =
                                            ||G(θ) − G(θ′ )||2 β
The function g(z) is 1-Lipschitz in z because we have just divided (G(θ) − G(θ′ ))T ∇θ ℓ(z; G(θ′ ))
by its Lipschitz constant. From Lemma A.15 and Definition 3.7 we have the following, with g(Z)
as defined above
                        EZ∼D∗ (θ) [g(Z)] − EZ∼D∗ (θ′ ) [g(Z)] ≤ ωϵ||θ − θ′ ||2
Using linearity of expectation and multiplying by ||G(θ) − G(θ′ )||2 β we get the following

                 (G(θ) − G(θ′ ))T ∇f (G(θ′ )) − (G(θ) − G(θ′ ))T ∇f ′ (G(θ′ ))
                                                ≥ −ωϵβ||G(θ) − G(θ′ )||2 ||θ − θ′ ||2

Now again using Lemma A.14, we have (G(θ) − G(θ′ ))T ∇f ′ (G(θ′ )) ≥ 0, hence (G(θ) −
G(θ′ ))T ∇f (G(θ′ )) ≥ ωϵβ||G(θ) − G(θ′ )||2 ||θ − θ′ ||2 . From our work above we showed that
−γ||G(θ) − G(θ′ )||22 ≥ (G(θ) − G(θ′ ))T ∇f (G(θ′ )). Putting this all together we get
                     −γ||G(θ) − G(θ′ )||22 ≥ −ωϵβ||G(θ) − G(θ′ )||2 ||θ − θ′ ||2
We rearrange the above to get
                                                        β
                                 ||G(θ) − G(θ′ )||2 ≤ ωϵ ||θ − θ′ ||2
                                                        γ
which proves claim (1) of the theorem.
Claim (2) follows easily. We note that θt = G(θt−1 ) from the definition of RDRO and G(θP S ) =
θP S by the definition of robust performative stability. Using the result of claim (1) we get
                                                                     t
                                       β                         β
                   ||θt − θP S ||2 ≤ ωϵ ||θt−1 − θP S ||2 ≤ ωϵ         ||θ0 − θP S ||2
                                       γ                         γ


                                                   19
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Now we set
                                                 t
                                            β
                                         ωϵ          ||θ0 − θP S ||2 ≤ δ
                                            γ
and solve for t.
                           t
                        β
                     ωϵ      ||θ0 − θP S ||2 ≤ δ
                        γ

                 β
       t log ωϵ      + log(||θ0 − θP S ||2 ) ≤ log(δ)
                 γ

                                       β
                             t log ωϵ        ≤ log(δ) − log(||θ0 − θP S ||2 )
                                       γ

                     β             β
            t log ωϵ      ≤ t ωϵ − 1 ≤ log(δ) − log(||θ0 − θP S ||2 )
                     γ             γ
                                                                                         −1
                                                                                      β
                                            t ≥ (log(δ) − log(||θ0 − θP S ||2 )) ωϵ − 1
                                                                                      γ
                                                            −1
                                                         β            ||θ0 − θP S ||2
                                            t ≥ 1 − ωϵ          log
                                                         γ                   δ
Note that this theorem is essentially just an application of the Banach fixed point theorem as ωϵ <
γ           β
β =⇒ ωϵ γ < 1.


While this proof provides us with conditions under which RDRO converges, it is somewhat unsat-
isfying as it leaves as an open question what is required for Definitions 3.5, 3.6, and 3.7 to be true.
Unlike for performative prediction with risk minimization, making assumptions on our loss function
does not guarantee that the distributionally robust objective will share those properties. In order to
have smoothness of our objective and also robust ϵ-sensitivity of the distribution map we require
some sort of stability or regularity of the worst case distributions as the centre of the f -divergence
ball moves as a function of θ.
The robust ϵ-sensitivity condition could possibly be equivalently expressed as a smoothness con-
dition for the f -divergence ball surrounding the data generating distribution. Further exploration
of these questions would likely yield further understanding of the distributionally objective, even
outside of the context of performative prediction.
It could also be possible that robust β-joint smoothness is not a necessary condition for convergence
of RDRO and that a convergence proof may be possible working with subgradients or directional
derivatives, but if this is the case it would necessitate a different, and likely more involved, proof
technique than the one used here. An alternative approach would also be to work with the dual
reformulation of the DRO problem given in Theorem A.2 or to use an alternative probability distance
measure rather than f -divergence balls that may be more amenable to this type of analysis.
These approaches come with their own complications, however, and likely require answering similar
questions. We believe these are interesting questions worthy of further research, but their investiga-
tion is beyond the scope of this work. Instead, we present empirical work which demonstrates the
convergence of RDRO in a variety of scenarios.

A.5   I MPLEMENTATION

We provide a brief explanation of the implementation details for ERM and DRO. Both risk mini-
mization and distributionally robust optimization require access to the data generating distribution,
i.e. infinite data, which is obviously impossible, so we perform empirical risk minimization and
utilize the plug-in estimator for distributionally robust optimization instead. Further, for DRO we
make use of the dual formulation (Theorem A.2) and perform optimization on this objective rather
than working with the primal form. Following Duchi & Namkoong (2021) and Hashimoto et al.
(2018), we use χ2 -divergence balls in our implementation.


                                                        20
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


In all of our experiments we use linear models trained with gradient descent. We use a fixed step-
size and a fixed number of epochs for training. The logistic regression utilizes an L2-regularized
cross-entropy loss function.
The dual formulation of the distributionally robust objective allows for a simple training procedure
where we treat the dual variable η as a hyperparameter. Recall that for convex losses, ℓ(θ; Z), the
dual formulation is jointly convex in (θ, η). The training procedure is thus as follows, for a given η,
compute the approximate minimizer θbη
                                     minimize E(ℓ(θ; Z) − η)2+ .
                                        θ∈Θ

Because the dual is convex in η we can use binary search to find the optimal dual variable η ∗ .
The loss (ℓ(θ; Z) − η)2+ is merely the ReLu function applied to the usual loss with η subtracted
and then squared which allows us to train models using gradient descent methods. Hence, using
binary search we train models with different values of η until we find the optimal η ∗ . The optimal
value, η ∗ , depends on the data and also the radius of our f -divergence ball, ρ. The value of ρ is a
hyperparameter that we must specify before training our model.

A.6     E XPERIMENTS

A.6.1    RRM AND RDRO FOR C REDIT DATASET
Our first experiment reproduces the experimental work from Perdomo et al. (2020). We use a dataset
from a Kaggle competition titled Give Me Some Credit. The dataset contains relevant information
for predicting credit scores. The target variable is a binary variable indicating whether or not an
individual has experienced financial distress in the past two years. The original dataset contains
historical information for 250,000 borrowers.
Following Perdomo et al. (2020) we balance the dataset to contain an equal number of positive and
negative cases for the target variable and normalize predictor variables to have a mean of zero and
variance of one. The reduced dataset contains 18,358 entries.
We train L2-regularized logistic regression models on the data for both ERM and DRO. Both models
are trained with stochastic gradient descent with a fixed step-size of α = 0.03 for 5000 epochs. The
step-size and number of epochs were chosen empirically to approximately replicate performance
from Perdomo et al. (2020) on the base distribution. Additionally, a fixed value of ρ was chosen as
a radius of the χ2 -divergence ball for DRO. The value of ρ was chosen so that the accuracy of the
DRO model on the full dataset was significantly, but not drastically, different than that of the ERM
model.
In order to add a performative element to the prediction problem, we identify 3 of the 10 features
as strategic features which will be altered as a function of the parameters of our model. Strategic
classification is a particular instance of performative prediction in which individuals adversarially
adjust their features to maximize the likelihood of classification to the positive class. Strategic
classification has been explored in relation to fairness concerns in previous work Hardt et al. (2016a);
Bruckner et al. (2012); Miller et al. (2020); Milli et al. (2019); D’Amour et al. (2020); Hu et al.
(2019).
As described in Perdomo et al. (2020) and Hardt et al. (2016a), we assume individuals have linear
utilities u(θ, x) = −⟨θ, x⟩ and quadratic costs c(x′ , x) = 2ϵ  1
                                                                  ||x′ − x||22 . The constant ϵ controls
the cost individuals incur by altering their features. Individuals thus pay a cost to manipulate their
features in order to minimize the likelihood of the model predicting that they will default on their
loan, but are unable to change the true outcome, y ∈ {0, 1}, of whether or not they default. Given
linear utilities and quadratic costs as described here, the individuals’ best response is to manipulate
their features as
                                            x′S = xS − ϵθS ,
where xS , x′S R|S| and |S| is the number of strategic features. The explanation of why this distribu-
tion map is ϵ-sensitive can be found in Perdomo et al. (2020).
The procedure for updating the data according to the distribution map for strategic classification is
explained in the box below.



                                                  21
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


 Input: Base distribution P , a classifier fθ , a cost function c, a utility function u. Sampling proce-
 dure for D(θ):
        1. Sample (x, y) ∼ P
        2. Compute best response xBR ← arg maxx′ u(x′ , θ) − c(x′ , x)
        3. Output sample (xBR , y)

Using a logistic regression classifier and the strategic classification distribution map sam-
pling procedure outlined above, we run ERM and DRO for 30 iterations on our dataset with values
of ϵ ∈ {0.1, 1, 10, 100}. We observe similar convergence behaviour for both ERM and DRO. As the
value of ϵ grows, the inequality ϵ < βγ no longer holds, meaning that the conditions of Theorems
A.9 and 3.8 are not satisfied and we do not necessarily have a contraction mapping. We plot the
normalized distance between values of θ for successive iterations of ERM and DRO in Figures 1
and 2. The distance between iterates is calculated as
                                          1
                                                · ||θt+1 − θt ||2 ,
                                       ||θS ||2
where θS is the value of θ0 on the strategic features.

A.6.2    B UILDING I NTUITION T HROUGH S IMPLE E XAMPLES
We now investigate the convergence of ERM and DRO on simple synthetic datasets to build intuition
for the behaviour of the two algorithms. We move away from the assumptions required for our
general theoretical guarantees for convergence to a fixed point and experiment with distribution
maps that are not necessarily ϵ-sensitive. We begin with a regression problem and then investigate a
classification problem.
Regression
We start with a simple mean prediction task with data sampled from a mixture of two univariate
Gaussians, XA ∼ N (µA , σ 2 ) and XB ∼ N (µB , σ 2 ). 80% of the data is sampled from XA and
20% from XB , i.e. X = 0.2XA + 0.8XB . We train a linear regression model using gradient descent
with backtracking line search to predict the mean of the data. We initialize our data with values
µA = 4, µB = 4, and σ 2 = 0.01. We choose a small value of σ 2 so that the variance and finite
samples have only a small impact on the convergence behaviour of ERM and DRO. We select an
f -divergence ball radius of ρ = 4 for DRO.
We use θ to denote the learned parameter of the model, µ to denote the true mean of the data
generating distribution, and µA and µB to denote the true means of the XA and XB . In other words,
θ = µ̂ is the estimated mean from the model. Where necessary, we indicate with subscripts ERM
and DRO to indicate which model we are referring to.
We investigate three different distribution maps which we call D0 , D1 , and D2 . For each map the
means of the normal distributions from which we sample are adjusted as a function of θ. Hence, the
induced distribution is
                           Di (θ) = 0.2N (DiA (θ), σ 2 ) + 0.8N (DiB (θ), σ 2 ).
These distribution maps were chosen because they are simple to understand, but reveal important
differences in the way ERM and DRO behave when their predictions alter the distribution on which
they are learning. The distribution maps are specified in Table 3.

                       D0 (·)                      D1 (·)                     D2 (·)
                D0A (θ) = N (θ, σ 2 )      D1A (θ) = N (µA , σ 2 )    D2A (θ) = N (2θ, σ 2 )
                D0B (θ) = N ( θ2 , σ 2 )   D1B (θ) = N ( θ2 , σ 2 )   D2B (θ) = N ( θ2 , σ 2 )

                     Table 3: Distribution maps for mean-prediction experiment.

The distribution map determines the evolution of the distribution over the data at each iteration of
deploying and learning our model, which in turn changes the learned θt = µ̂t . Despite starting from


                                                      22
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


  Figure 8: Learned values of θ for ERM.                   Figure 9: Learned values of θ for DRO.


the same initial distribution in each case, the induced distributions vary widely. This demonstrates
the importance of performativity and illustrates why a static supervised learning framework fails to
adequately capture the complex dynamics of prediction problems which involve performativity.
We run the experiment for 50 iterations, where one iteration involves training a model on data
sampled from the current distribution and then updating the distribution via the distribution map. We
summarize the evolution of the learned parameter θt over time for both ERM and DRO in Figures 8
and 9. Given the simplicity of the learning problem, the learned values of θ closely approximate true
mean of the distribution, µ, over time. The approximate values to which ERM and DRO converge
are given in Table 4.
It is interesting to note that even with this simple mean prediction task we observe significant dif-
ferences in the behaviour of ERM and DRO over time. For all three distribution maps we observe
ERM’s tendency to focus on the majority group over the minority group. Recall that 20% of the
data is sampled from XA and 80% from XB so we refer to group A as the minority group and
group B as the majority group. For D0 , ERM quickly converges toward zero as group B’s mean
evolves as µB = θ2 . Interestingly, however, it does not converge to zero, but instead remains fixed at
approximately θ = 0.004 even though θ = 0 is the performatively optimal value.
DRO displays similar behaviour for this distribution map, but does not converge as close to zero. As
noted, performative stability and performative optimality are distinct solution concepts, and perfor-
matively optimal points only coincide with performatively stable points in specific settings.

                   Method        D0 (·)             D1 (·)            D2 (·)
                    ERM       θERM = 0.004       θERM = 1.33       θERM = 0.008
                    DRO       θDRO = 0.128       θDRO = 2.66        θDRO = ∞

                     Table 4: Values to which θ converges for ERM and DRO.


The second distribution map, D1 , reveals differences in ERM and DRO that are relevant for fairness.
For D1 , the mean of the majority group again evolves as µB = θ2 , but this time the minority group’s
mean remains unchanged with µA = 4. As ERM averages the loss over all data points, it converges
to a predicted mean much closer to µB than to µA . DRO, on the other hand, converges to a value
that balances performance on prediction of the means of both minority and majority groups. In fact
the distance from the true means of group A and group B is almost identical.

                               |θDRO − µA | = |2.66 − 4| = 1.34
                               |θDRO − µB | = |2.66 − 1.33| = 1.33

ERM, however, is a much better predictor of the global mean of the data. This simple example
illustrates a trade-off we can expect between ERM and DRO in terms of fairness versus global


                                                  23
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Figure 10: Learned values of θ for ERM with                  Figure 11: Learned values of θ for DRO with
D2 .                                                         D2 .


performance.
                   µERM = 0.2µA + 0.8µB = (0.2)(4) + (0.8)(0.665) = 1.332
                   µDRO = 0.2µA + 0.8µB = (0.2)(4) + (0.8)(0.1.33) = 1.864

The final distribution map, D2 , demonstrates that ERM and DRO can behave entirely differently
under some circumstances. For this distribution map ERM converges to a similar value to that under
D0 , that is θERM = 0.008. This makes some sense intuitively as µA = 2θ whereas for D0 we had
µA = θ. DRO, on the other hand, diverges with θDRO going to infinity. The reason for this is that
for the first iteration DRO learns a value of θDRO that is larger than 4. Similarly, for each successive
iteration the learned value of θDRO gets larger which in turn causes the true means of the data to
grow as a function of the learned θDRO . Interestingly, if you swap the majority and minority groups
the behaviour of DRO remains nearly identical, while ERM diverges at a faster rate than DRO. This
again demonstrates how DRO treats minority and majority groups similarly, while ERM learns a
function that prioritizes performance on majority groups. We illustrate this in Figures 10 and 11
Classification
We now move to a classification task and analyze the behaviour of logistic regression classifiers
trained using ERM and DRO. The classification task is more complex than the simple mean predic-
tion task, so for this experiment we analyze only the static supervised learning setting in order to
reduce complexity and elucidate the relevant differences between ERM and DRO.
Our data is generated from bivariate Gaussian distributions and the label, y, of a given data point is
1 if the sum of its features are greater than the sum of the means of the two Gaussian distributions
from which we draw samples and 0 otherwise. As with the regression experiments, we have two
subgroups within our data, A and B. We vary the proportion of samples from each subgroup in the
experiments. Precisely, the data generating process is as follows:
                    XA ∼ N (µ
                            µA , Σ A )
                    XB ∼ N (µ
                            µB , Σ B )
                     X = cA XA + cB XB           cA , cB ∈ (0, 1), and cA + cB = 1
where
              1                   1                      1                          1
             µ                   µ                      σ           0              σ         0
        µA = A   ,          µB = B   ,             ΣA = A           2 ,       ΣB = B         2 .
             µ2A                 µ2B                     0         σA               0       σB
And for a data point, x = [x1i , x2i ]T , with i ∈ {A, B},

                                               if x1i + x2i ≤ µ1i + µ2i

                                           0
                                  y=                                    .
                                           1   if x1i + x2i > µ1i + µ2i
Hence, if µ A ̸= µ B , the data is not linearly separable and the logistic regression model must trade off
performance across the two subgroups. We provide scatter plots of samples from the data generating


                                                    24
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Figure 12: Sample of 360 data points from the data generating distribution with cA = 0.8 and
cB = 0.2.


Figure 13: Sample of 600 data points from the data generating distribution with cA = 0.8 and
cB = 0.2.


distribution below with µiA = 1 and µiB = 0.7, σA   i
                                                      = σBi
                                                             = 0.1 for i ∈ {0, 1}, and cA = 0.8,
cB = 0.2. Figure 12 contains a sample of 360 data points coloured by the value of their target
variable, with crosses representing data points belonging to group B and circles representing data
points belonging to group A. Figure 13 contains a sample of 500 and 100 data points respectively
from group A and group B coloured by the value of their target variable.
In Figure 12 we can see that the data is not linearly separable, as some members of group B who
belong to the positive class have features that place them lower than the threshold for positive clas-
sification for group A. Although this dataset is extremely simple, it is characterized by a feature that
represents a central concern for fairness in machine learning, namely that the conditional probabil-
ity distributions, P (y|x), are significantly different for distinct subsets of the data. This example


                                                  25
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


is intended to represent a simplified abstract instance of a population with majority and minority
subgroups in order to see how the behaviour of ERM and DRO differ in this circumstance.
We generate three distinct datasets on which to train our algorithms, each made up of differing
proportions of the two subgroups A and B. Each dataset contains a sample of 10,000 data points,
with samples distributed according the values of cA and cB . The accuracy of the models on the three
datasets is summarized in Tables 5 and 6 below. For both ERM and DRO we use L2-regularized
logistic regression trained with stochastic gradient descent. The step-size for all algorithms is fixed
at 0.05 and we train for 15,000 epochs.
Models trained with the distributionally robust objective have the additional complication that we
must specify a value for the radius of the χ2 -divergence ball, i.e. ρ. The larger the value of ρ, the
more we can expect a DRO model to differ from an ERM model because as the χ2 -divergence ball
grows, the worst case distribution can be further and further from the data generating distribution.
Conversely, in the limit as ρ → 0, we recover ERM as the χ2 -divergence ball shrinks to contain only
the data generating distribution.
Choosing the value of ρ is a challenging decision, as the performance of a model varies significantly
as ρ changes. If one has access to demographic information, it is possible to conduct a grid search
over possible ρ values in order to find a value that results in a model with the desirable fairness
properties. Doing this, however, largely defeats the purpose of DRO. As explained earlier, a central
advantage to using DRO rather than some fairness constrained optimization technique is that DRO
does not require access to demographic information. In this experiment we work directly with the
dual formulation of DRO and set η = 0.56. This value was chosen empirically to achieve relatively
uniform accuracy across group A and group B for an 80/20 split between the two subgroups. As the
values of cA and cB change, we can see that the performance of DRO changes for a given value of
η and hence ρ, as η ∗ depends on ρ.

         Group      [cA = 0.6, cB = 0.4]     [cA = 0.8, cB = 0.2]     [cA = 0.95, cB = 0.05]
           A               0.797                    0.907                     0.966
           B               0.701                    0.652                     0.592
        All Data           0.759                    0.856                     0.948

                               Table 5: Accuracy by Group for ERM.


         Group      [cA = 0.6, cB = 0.4]     [cA = 0.8, cB = 0.2]     [cA = 0.95, cB = 0.05]
           A               0.665                    0.751                     0.780
           B               0.869                    0.744                     0.766
        All Data           0.747                    0.750                     0.780

                               Table 6: Accuracy by Group for DRO.

We first examine the performance of ERM (Table 5). As the data is not linearly separable, ERM
must learn a decision boundary that trades off performance between the two subgroups. Because the
ERM objective treats the loss on each data point equally, the model learns a decision boundary that
is more accurate for the majority group than for the minority group. This discrepancy in accuracy
of predictions worsens the smaller the majority group is. For instance, when 95% of the data comes
from group A, the logistic regression model trained with an ERM objective achieves 96% accuracy
on group A members, but only 59.2% accuracy on group B members.
Models trained with a DRO objective behave much differently. For the 80/20 split and 95/5 split, the
DRO models learn relatively fair decision boundaries, effectively balancing performance on both
subgroups A and B. For the 60/40 split, however, DRO actually learns a model that performs signifi-
cantly better on the minority group than the majority group. This model is in a sense discriminatory
against the majority group. This is the result of the radius of the χ2 -divergence ball being too large
and the model thus overly focusing on a worst case distribution.
As mentioned above, the correct choice of ρ is not necessarily obvious, but it greatly impacts the
performance of the model. Duchi et al. provide some recommendations and heuristics for choosing


                                                  26
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


         Figure 14: Group A, DRO.                                Figure 15: Group B, DRO.


        Figure 16: Group A, ERM.                                 Figure 17: Group B, ERM.

Figure 18: Decision boundaries for ERM and DRO classifiers with samples from groups A and B
with cA = 0.95 and cB = 0.05. Shading indicates predicted label and data point colour indicates
true label.



values of ρ in Duchi & Namkoong (2021). Along with altering the value of ρ, one can change the
f -divergence ball by varying the the value of k for f -divergences in the Cressie-Read family. This
has a similar effect to changing the value of ρ.
In Figures 14, 15, 16, and 17 we plot data from groups A and B for data generated with cA =
0.95, cB = 0.05 with the learned decision boundary from a DRO and ERM model, respectively,
overlaid. The background shading indicates the predicted label with blue representing ŷ = 0 and
red representing ŷ = 1, while the colour of the data points indicate their true label.
Neither the regression nor the classification experiments in this section are designed to be realistic
representations of real-world applications, but rather are intended to provide a simple setting in
which to investigate important differences in the behaviour of models trained with ERM versus
DRO objectives. In the next section we investigate a slightly more complex classification task in the
performative prediction setting and examine how DRO and ERM may impact fairness considerations
when deploying a model influences the distribution on which it is making predictions.


A.6.3   FAIRNESS AND RDRO

The data generating process is as follows:


                    XA ∼ N (µ
                            µA , Σ A )
                    XB ∼ N (µ
                            µB , Σ B )
                     X = cA XA + cB XB        cA , cB ∈ (0, 1), and cA + cB = 1


                                                 27
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


where
                          1                   1                             1                  
          µ1A               µB                    σA       ···     0              σB       ···     0
   µ A =  ...  ,
                            ..                  ..      ..      ..  ,         ..      ..      ..  .
                      µB =  .  ,          ΣA =  .                        ΣB =  .
          
                                                              .     .                        .     . 
          µ10A              µ10
                              B                       0    ···     10
                                                                  σA                 0     ···     10
                                                                                                  σB
And for a data point, x = [x1i , . . . , x10 T
                                          i ] , with i ∈ {A, B},


                                         if x1i + · · · + x10   1            10

                                     0                     i ≤ µi + · · · + µi
                            y=                                                  .
                                     1   if xi + · · · + xi > µi + · · · + µ10
                                              1            10   1
                                                                             i

For our experiment we set the parameters of the data generating process as
                  µiA = 1                          i
                                                  σA = 0.1                     cA = 0.8
                  µiB = 0.8,                       i
                                                  σB = 0.1,                    cB = 0.2.
These parameters were selected as an attempt to capture the notion that an underprivileged minority
group may have features that make them appear to be less qualified, despite having the same propor-
tion of qualified individuals as a dominant majority group. The data generating process obviously
represents this at a high level of abstraction and is much less complex than most real-world applica-
tions. With that said, we believe the data generating process effectively encapsulates this abstracted
characteristic that is central to concerns for learning fair models. Examples of the type of situation
that this experiment is intended to represent are college admissions or hiring, where an underprivi-
leged minority group may not, on average, have CVs that appear as impressive as their peers from
the majority group due to a lack of opportunity, but are nevertheless equally qualified for the school
or job.
We once again examine a strategic classification scenario, as in experiment 1, but our data now
contains subgroups, allowing us to analyze the impact of ERM and DRO on fairness and model
performance in the performative setting. We examine four different distribution maps by varying
the parameter ϵ ∈ {0.01, 0.25, 0.5, 10} and set 5 of the 10 features to be strategic (i.e. manipulable).
For both ERM and DRO we train L2-regularized logistic regression models with λ = 0.0001. We
use stochastic gradient descent with a fixed step-size of α = 0.2 and train for 8000 epochs on
samples of 1,200 data points. We use a fixed radius ρ of the χ2 -divergence ball for DRO. All
parameters were chosen empirically to give good performance on the base distribution.
First, we examine the convergence behaviour of both algorithms by plotting the normalized distance
between successive iterates of the learned parameters, θt , in Figures 19 and 20. We observe that
ERM does not converge for any value of ϵ, while DRO converges for only ϵ = 0.01. It is unclear
why the algorithms do not converge for other values of ϵ. The failure to converge could be related to
using a fixed, rather than decaying step-size, or because the conditions for the contraction mapping
are not met (recall that the conditions are sufficient, but not necessary for convergence of a particular
instance). For the three smaller values of ϵ, both ERM and DRO converge to a small neighbourhood,
whereas for ϵ = 10, neither ERM nor DRO exhibit any convergence.
To demonstrate the effect of the convergence, or lack thereof, of θ on the model’s performance, we
plot the average supervised and performative L2-regularized binary cross-entropy loss for ERM and
DRO for ϵ = 0.5 and ϵ = 10 in Figure 21. The blue lines indicate the optimization phase and
the green lines indicate the effect of the distribution shift after the classifier deployment. That is,
the dots at the end of a green dotted line represent performative loss, while the dots at the end of
a blue line represent supervised loss. In the plots we can see that even though ERM and DRO do
not converge for ϵ = 0.5, the models quickly achieve relatively stable loss on the classification task.
Note that the average L2-regularized binary cross-entropy loss is the objective for which ERM is
optimizing, but not the objective for which DRO is optimizing.
Given that this experiment is a balanced binary classification task, the metric in which we are prin-
cipally interested is accuracy. Furthermore, as we are interested in comparing the fairness properties
of DRO and ERM, it is important to analyze the performance of the models on the subgroups within
the population, as well as the population as a whole. In Figures 22 and 23 we plot the the accuracy
of the two models for ϵ = 0.5. We see that the performative accuracy of ERM initially degrades
significantly, before quickly converging to approximately 84% on the full population.


                                                     28
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


       Figure 19: Plot of the normalized distance between successive values of θ for ERM.


        Figure 20: Plot of the normalized distance between successive values of θ for DRO.


Conversely, the performative accuracy for DRO is actually initially higher than the accuracy on the
distribution on which the model was trained, but it also converges relatively quickly to an accuracy
of approximately 72.5% on the full population. This is once again due to DRO having a different
optimization objective than ERM. The average cross-entropy loss acts as a surrogate loss for the 0-1
loss and hence aims to maximize accuracy on the full dataset. The objective used for DRO focuses
on the tails of the distribution and therefore does not maximize accuracy across the full dataset. The
improvement of the DRO model’s accuracy after the distribution shift is not an inherent property
of DRO, but rather is specific to this particular dataset and distribution map. We see in Figure 22
at iteration t = 2 that ERM also occasionally achieves better performance after distribution shift.
In general, the improvement or degradation of accuracy depends on the learned parameters of the
model, the distribution map, the data, and the loss function.
In Figure 25 we plot the accuracy of ERM and DRO for the subgroups A and B for ϵ = 0.5. We can
see from these plots that the fairness properties of ERM and DRO are preserved in the performative
prediction setting.
ERM converges to an accuracy of approximately 90% on group A and only approximately 54% on
group B. DRO, on the other hand, converges to much more equal accuracy across the two subgroups,
achieving an accuracy of approximately 74% for group A and approximately 66% for group B. We
summarize the accuracies to which ERM and DRO converge in Tables 7 and 8. We do not include


                                                 29
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Figure 21: Plots of the average L2-regularized binary cross-entropy supervised and performative
loss.


                                              30
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                          Figure 22: ERM


                                           Figure 23: DRO

      Figure 24: ERM and DRO accuracy on the full population across successive iterations.


the accuracy for ϵ = 10 because neither ERM nor DRO converged to a small enough neighbourhood,
and therefore did not converge in accuracy. We see that the algorithms converge to similar accuracy
values for all the values of ϵ.
This result, while perhaps not that surprising, is important, as it demonstrates that not only does DRO
exhibit similar convergence behaviour to ERM, but DRO converges to fair fixed points, whereas
ERM converges to discriminatory fixed points in the presence of heterogeneous data composed of
minority and majority subgroups. Recall also that DRO is not given access to group information, but
still learns to achieve more uniform performance across subgroups, as it is attempting to minimize
the worst case loss across all probability distributions within the χ2 -divergence ball surrounding the
data generating distribution.

                                   ERM Performative Accuracy
                              Group   ϵ = 0.01 ϵ = 0.25 ϵ = 0.5
                                A       0.893     0.896      0.898
                                B       0.540     0.540      0.540
                             All Data   0.834     0.837      0.838

                     Table 7: Accuracy by Group for ERM after 30 iterations.



A.7   F INAL T HOUGHTS

We began this work with a discussion of why research into fairness in machine learning is such an
urgent issue and we would like to reemphasize this point. Machine learning is no longer a niche
research area. It has become a fundamental driving force of the global economy and now attracts
billions of dollars in investment around the world Abdallat (2021); Balakrishnan et al. (2020). This


                                                  31
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


     Figure 25: ERM and DRO accuracy on subgroups A and B across successive iterations.


                                             32
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                 DRO Performative Accuracy
                            Group   ϵ = 0.01 ϵ = 0.25 ϵ = 0.5
                              A       0.687     0.710      0.738
                              B       0.670     0.660      0.660
                           All Data   0.684     0.701      0.725

                     Table 8: Accuracy by Group for DRO after 30 iterations.


change has resulted in enormous opportunity for individuals with expertise in machine learning and
it appears that this trend will only increase in the coming years.
The reality, however, is that this emergence of AI as an economic powerhouse has not occurred
in a particularly responsible manner. Machine learning researchers and engineers have benefited
greatly from the investment in AI and the community has a responsibility to ensure that the future
development of the field aligns with and supports universal rights, freedoms, and values. Chief
among these responsibilities is ensuring that the development and deployment of machine learning
models do not harm the most vulnerable among us. We hope that this work contributes to this
endeavor.


                                               33
