Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


FA DI N : FAST D ISCRETIZED I NFERENCE FOR H AWKES
P ROCESSES WITH G ENERAL PARAMETRIC K ERNELS
 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                            A BSTRACT
         Temporal point processes (TPP) are a natural tool for modeling event-based data.
         Among all TPP models, Hawkes processes have proven to be the most widely
         used, mainly due to their adequate modeling for various applications, in par-
         ticular when considering exponential or non-parametric kernels. Although non-
         parametric kernels are an option, such models require large datasets. While expo-
         nential kernels are more data efficient and relevant for certain applications where
         events immediately trigger more events, they are ill-suited for applications where
         latencies need to be estimated, such as in neuroscience. This work aims to offer
         an efficient solution to TPP inference using general parametric kernels with finite
         support. The developed solution consists of a fast L2 gradient-based solver lever-
         aging a discretized version of the events. After supporting the use of discretization
         theoretically, the statistical and computational efficiency of the novel approach is
         demonstrated through various numerical experiments. Finally, the effectiveness of
         the method is evaluated by modeling the occurrence of stimuli-induced patterns
         from brain signals recorded with magnetoencephalography (MEG). Given the use
         of general parametric kernels, results show that the proposed approach leads to a
         more plausible estimation of pattern latency compared to the state-of-the-art.


1   I NTRODUCTION
The statistical framework of Temporal Point Processes (TPPs; see e.g., Daley & Vere-Jones 2003) is
well adapted for modeling event-based data. It offers a principled way to predict the rate of events as
a function of time and the previous events’ history. TPPs are historically used to model intervals be-
tween events, such as in renewal theory, which studies the sequence of intervals between successive
replacements of a component susceptible to failure. TPPs find many applications in neuroscience,
in particular, to model single-cell recordings and neural spike trains (Truccolo et al., 2005; Okatan
et al., 2005; Kim et al., 2011; Rad & Paninski, 2011), occasionally associated with spatial statis-
tics (Pillow et al., 2008) or network models (Galves & Löcherbach, 2015). In the machine learning
community, there is a growing interest in these statistical tools (Bompaire, 2019; Shchur et al., 2020;
Mei et al., 2020). Multivariate Hawkes processes (MHP; Hawkes 1971) are likely the most popular,
as they can model interactions between each univariate process. They also have the peculiarity that
a process can be self-exciting, meaning that a past event will increase the probability of having an-
other event in the future on the same process. The conditional intensity function is the key quantity
for TPPs. With MHP, it is composed of a baseline parameter and kernels. It describes the probability
of occurrence of an event depending on time. The kernel function represents how processes influ-
ence each other or themselves. The most commonly used inference method to obtain the baseline
and the kernel parameters of MHP is the maximum likelihood (MLE; see e.g., Daley & Vere-Jones,
2007 or Lewis & Mohler, 2011). One alternative and often overlooked estimation criterion is the
least squares `2 error, inspired by the theory of empirical risk minimization (Reynaud-Bouret &
Rivoirard, 2010; Hansen et al., 2015; Bacry et al., 2020).
A key feature of MHP modeling is the choice of kernels. Non-parametric and parametric kernels are
the two possibilities. In the non-parametric setting, kernel functions are approximated by histograms
(Lewis & Mohler, 2011; Lemonnier & Vayatis, 2014), by a linear combination of pre-defined func-
tions (Zhou et al., 2013a; Xu et al., 2016), by functions lying in a RKHS (Yang et al., 2017) or, alter-
natively, by neural networks (Mei & Eisner, 2017; Shchur et al., 2019; Pan et al., 2021). In addition
to the frequentist approach, many Bayesian approaches, such as Gibbs sampling (Ishwaran & James,


                                                   1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


2001) or (stochastic) variational inference (Hoffman et al., 2013), have been adapted to MHP in par-
ticular to fit non-parametric kernels. Bayesian methods also rely on the modelling of the kernel by
histograms (e.g., Donnet et al., 2020) or by a linear combination of pre-defined functions (e.g., Lin-
derman & Adams, 2015). These approaches are designed whether in continuous-time (Rasmussen,
2013; Zhang et al., 2018; Donnet et al., 2020; Sulem et al., 2021) or in discrete-time (Mohler et al.,
2013; Linderman & Adams, 2015; Zhang et al., 2018; Browning et al., 2022). These functions allow
great flexibility for the shape of the kernel, yet this comes at the risk of poor estimation of it when
only a small amount of data is available (Xu et al., 2017). Another approach to estimate the intensity
function is to consider kernels parametrized by ⌘. Although it can introduce a potential bias by as-
suming a particular shape for kernels, this approach has several benefits. First, it reduces inference
difficulties , as ⌘ is typically lower dimensional compared to non-parametric kernels. Moreover,
for kernels satisfying the Markov property (Bacry et al., 2015), computing the conditional intensity
function is linear in the total number of timestamps/events. The most popular kernel belonging to
this family is the exponential kernel (Ogata, 1981). It is defined by ⌘ = (↵, ) 7! ↵ exp( t),
where ↵ and are the scaling and the decay parameters, respectively (Veen & Schoenberg, 2008;
Zhou et al., 2013b). However, as pointed out by Lemonnier & Vayatis (2014), the maximum likeli-
hood estimator for MHP with exponential kernels is efficient only if the decay is fixed. Thus, only
the scaling parameter is usually inferred. This implies that the hyperparameter must be chosen in
advance, usually by using a grid search, a random search, or Bayesian optimization. This leads to a
computational burden when the dimension of the MHP is high. The second option is to define a de-
cay parameter common to all kernels, which results in a loss of expressiveness of the model. In both
cases, the relevance of the exponential kernel relies on the choice of the decay parameter, which may
not be adapted to the data (Hall & Willett, 2016). For more general parametric kernels which do not
verify the Markov property, the inference procedure with both MLE or `2 loss scales poorly as they
have quadratic computational scaling with the number of events, making their use limited in practice
(see e.g., Bompaire, 2019, Chapter 1). These limitations for parametric and non-parametric kernels
prevent their usage in some applications, as pointed out by Carreira (2021) in finance or Allain et al.
(2021) in neuroscience. A strong motivation for this work is also neuroscience applications.
The quantitative analysis of electrophysiological signals such as electroencephalography (EEG)
or magnetoencephalography (MEG) is a challenging modern neuroscience research topic (Cohen,
2014). By giving a non-invasive way to record human neural activity with a high temporal res-
olution, EEG and MEG offer a unique opportunity to study cognitive processes as triggered by
controlled stimulation (Baillet, 2017). Convolutional dictionary learning (CDL) is an unsupervised
algorithm that has recently been proposed to study M/EEG signals (Jas et al., 2017; Dupré la Tour
et al., 2018). It consists in extracting patterns of interest in M/EEG signals. It learns a combination
of time-invariant patterns – called atoms – and their activation function to reconstruct the signal
sparsely. However, while CDL recovers the local structure of signals, it does not provide any global
information, such as interactions between patterns or how their activations are affected by stimuli.
Atoms typically correspond to transient bursts of neural activity (Sherman et al., 2016) or artifacts
such as eye blinks or heartbeats. By offering an event-based perspective on non-invasive electro-
magnetic brain signals, CDL makes Hawkes processes amenable to M/EEG-based studies. Given
the estimated events, one important goal is then to uncover potential temporal dependencies between
external stimuli presented to the subject and the appearance of the atoms in the data. More precisely,
one is interested in statistically quantifying such dependencies, e.g., by estimating the mean and
variance of the neural response latency following a stimulus. In Allain et al. (2021), the authors ad-
dress this precise problem. Their approach is based on an EM algorithm and a Truncated Gaussian
kernel, which can cope with only a few brain data, as opposed to non-parametric kernels, which
are more data hungry. Beyond neuroscience, Carreira (2021) use a likelihood-based approach using
exponential kernels to model order book events. Their approach use high-frequency trading data,
taking account of latency at hand in the proposed loss.
This paper proposes a new inference method – named FaDIn – to estimate any parametric kernels
for Hawkes processes. Our approach is based on two key features. First, we use finite-support
kernels and a discretization applied to the ERM-inspired least-squares loss. Second, we propose
to employ some precomputations that significantly reduce the computational cost. We then show
that the implicit bias induced by the discretization procedure is negligible compared to the statistical
error. Further, we highlight the efficiency of FaDIn in computation and statistical estimation over the
non-parametric approach. Finally, we demonstrate the benefit of using a general kernel with MEG



                                                   2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


data. The flexibility of FaDIn allows us to model neural response to external stimuli with a much
better-adapted kernel than the existing method derived in Allain et al. (2021).

2     FAST D ISCRETIZED I NFERENCE FOR H AWKES PROCESSES (FA DI N )
2.1   H AWKES PROCESSES

Given a stopping time T 2 R+ and an observation period [0, T ], a temporal point process (TPP) is a
stochastic process whose realization consists of a set of distinct timestamps FT = {tn , tn 2 [0, T ]}
occurring in continuous time. The behavior of a TPP is fully characterized by its intensity function
that corresponds to the expected infinitesimal rate at which events are occurring at time t 2 [0, T ].
The values of this function may depend on time (e.g., inhomogeneous Poisson processes) or rely on
past events such as self-exciting processes (see Daley & Vere-Jones 2003 for an excellent account of
TPP). For the latter, the occurrence of one event will modify the probability of having a new event
in the near future. The conditional intensity function : [0, T ] ! R+ have the following form:
                                                  P (Nt+dt    Nt = 1|Ft )
                               (t|Ft ) := lim                             ,
                                           dt!0              dt
              P
where Nt := n 1 1tn t is the counting process associated to the PP. Among this family, Mul-
tivariate Hawkes processes (MHP; Hawkes, 1971) model the interactions of p 2 N⇤ self-exciting
                                                            NTi
TPPs. Given p sets of timestamps FTi = {tin , tin 2 [0, T ]}n=1 , i = 1, . . . , p , each process is
described by the following intensity function:
                                            Xp Z t

                               i (t) = µi +        ij (t s) dNsj ,                               (1)
                                                j=1   0

where µi is the baseline parameter, Nt = [Nt1 , . . . , Ntp ] the associated multivariate counting process
and ij : [0, T ] ! R+ the excitation function – called kernel – representing the influence of j-th
process’ past events onto i-th process’ future events. From an inference perspective, the goal is to
estimate the baseline and kernels associated with the MHP from the data. In this paper, we focus on
the ERM-inspired least squares loss. Assuming a class of parametric kernel parametrized by ⌘, the
objective is to find parameters that minimize (see e.g., Eq. (I.2) in Bompaire, 2019, Chapter 1):
                                          0                                        1
                                        p   Z
                                    1 X@ T                2
                                                                        X
                                                                                i A
                     L (✓, FT ) =                    i (s) ds       2        i tn     ,                (2)
                                   NT i=1     0                       i    i
                                                                    tn 2FT
                Pp
where NT =             i
                  i=1 NT   is the total number of timestamps, and where we denote by ✓ = (µ, ⌘).
Interestingly, when used with an exponential kernel, this loss benefits from some precomputations
of complexity O(NT ), making the subsequent iterative optimization procedure independent of NT .
This computational ease is the main advantage of the loss L over the log-likelihood function. How-
ever, when using a general parametric kernel, these precomputations require O((NT )2 ) operations
killing the computational benefit of the `2 loss L over the log-likelihood. It is worth noting that this
loss differs from the quadratic error minimized between the counting processes and the integral of
the intensity function, as used in Wang et al. (2016); Eichler et al. (2017) and Xu et al. (2018).

2.2   FA DI N

The approach we propose in this paper fills the need for general parametric kernels in many appli-
cations. We provide a computationally and statistically efficient solver – coined FaDIn – that works
with many parametric kernels using gradient-based algorithms. Precisely, it relies on the three key
ideas: (i) the use of parametric finite-support kernels, (ii) a discretization of the time interval [0, T ],
and (iii) precomputations allowing an efficient optimization procedure detailed below.

Finite support kernels A core bottleneck for MLE or `2 estimation of parametric kernels is the
need to compute the intensity function for all events. For general kernels, the intensity function
usually requires O((NT )2 ) operations, which makes it intractable for long-time length processes.
To make this computation more efficient, we consider finite support kernels. Using a finite support


                                                      3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


kernel amounts to setting a limit in time for the influence of a past event on the intensity, i.e., 8t 2
                                                                                                       /
[0 , W ] , ij (t) = 0, where W denotes the length of the kernel’s support. This assumption matches
applications where an event cannot have influence far in the future, such as in neuroscience (Krumin
et al., 2010; Eichler et al., 2017; Allain et al., 2021) or high-frequency trading (Bacry et al., 2015;
Carreira, 2021). The intensity function (3) can P   then be reformulated as a convolution between the
kernel ij and the sum of Dirac functions zi := tin 2F i tin located at the event occurrences tin :
                                                                  T

                                                  p
                                                  X
                                   i (t) = µi +         ij ⇤ zj (t),   t 2 [0 , T ] .
                                                  j=1

As ij has a finite support, the intensity can be computed efficiently with this formula. Indeed, only
events in the interval [t W , t] need to be considered. This usually amounts to a fraction of the
events of the full process.

Discretization To make these computations even more efficient, we propose to rely on discretized
processes. Most Hawkes processes estimation procedures involve a continuous paradigm to min-
imize (2) or its log-likelihood counterpart. Discretization has been investigated so far for non-
parametric kernels (Kirchner, 2016; Kirchner & Bercher, 2018; Kurisu, 2018). The discretization
      ⌅ T ⇧consists in projecting each event tn on a regular grid G = {0, , 2 , . . . , G }, where
of a TPP                                      i

G=         . We refer to as the stepsize of the discretization. Here b·c denotes the floor function.
     f
Let FT be the set of projected timestamps of FTi on the grid G. The intensity function of the i-th
       i

process of our discretized MHP is defined as:
                    p
                    X     X                                    p X
                                                               X L
   ˜ i [s] = µi +                    ij (s    t̃jm ) = µi +                                      s 2 J0 , GK ,   (3)
                                                                          ij [⌧ ]zj [s    ⌧ ],
                    j=1 t̃jm 2F
                              ej                               j=1 ⌧ =1
                              s                                    |          {z           }
                                                                          ( ij ⇤zj )[s]
            ⌅ ⇧
where L = W denotes the number of points on the discretized support, ij [s] = ij (s ) is the
kernel value on the grid and zi [s] = # |tin s |  2 denotes the number of events projected on
the grid timestamp s. From now and throughout the rest of the paper, we denote ij (·) : R+ ! R+
as a function while ij [·] represents the discrete vector ij 2 RL   + . Compared to the continuous
formulation, the intensity function can be computed more efficiently as one can rely on discrete
convolutions, whose worst case complexity scales as O(NT L). It can also be further accelerated
using Fast Fourier Transform when NT is large. Another benefit of the discretization is that for
kernel whose values are costly to compute, at most L values need to be computed. This can have a
strong computational impact when NT         L as all values can be precomputed and stored.
While discretization improves the computational efficiency, it also introduces a bias in the computa-
tion of the intensity function and, thus potentially, in estimating the kernel parameters. The impact of
the discretization on the estimation is considered in Section 2.3 and Section 3.1. Note that this bias
is similar to the one incurred by quantizing the kernel as histograms for non-parametric estimators.

Loss and precomputations FaDIn aims at minimizing the discretized `2 loss, which approximates
the integral on the left part of (2) by a sum on the grid G after projecting timestamps of FT on it. It
boils down to optimizing the following loss:
                                           0                                        1
                   ⇣        ⌘         X p       X ⇣             ⌘2     X        i
                         fT =      1       @            ˜ i [s]                 t̃
                                                                             ˜i n A .
               LG ✓, F                                             2                               (4)
                                  NT i=1
                                                    s2J0 ,GK               i         e
                                                                               t̃in 2FT


To find the parameters of the intensity function ✓, FaDIn minimizes LG using a first-order gradient-
based algorithm. The computational bottleneck of the proposed algorithm is thus the computation of
the gradient rLG regarding parameters ✓. Using the discretized finite-support kernel, this gradient
can be computed using convolution, giving the same computational complexity as the computation
of the intensity function O(NT L).
However, gradient computation can still be too expensive for long processes with many events to get
reasonable inference times. Using the least squares error of the process (4), one can further reduce


                                                          4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


the complexity of computing the gradient by precomputing some constants j (⌧ ; G), j,k (⌧, ⌧ 0 ; G)
and j (⌧ ; Ffi ) that do not depend on the parameter ✓. Indeed, by developing and rearranging the
              T
terms in (4), one obtains:
                                                                             !
               ⇣       ⌘                 Xp    Xp XL           XG
      NT LG ✓, F   fT = T ||µ|| + 2
                                 2
                                            µi            [⌧ ]     zj [s ⌧ ]
                                      2                               ij
                                                 i=1     j=1 ⌧ =1                    s=1
                                                                                |              {z             }
                                                                                              j (⌧ ;G)

                                     p X
                                       p X
                                         p X
                                           L X
                                             L                                               G
                                                                                                                                        !
                                     X                                                       X
                                                                                     0                                             0
                            +                                    ij [⌧ ] ik [⌧ ]                   zj [s       ⌧ ] zk [s           ⌧]
                                     i=1 k=1 j=1 ⌧ =1 ⌧ 0 =1                                 s=1
                                                                                         |                     {z                       }
                                                                                                                      0 ;G)
                                                                                                           j,k (⌧,⌧

                                     p                 p X
                                                         p X
                                                           L                                               i                 !!
                                     X                 X                                     X             t̃n
                                 2         NTi µi +                        ij [⌧ ]                  zj                 ⌧            .
                                     i=1               i=1 j=1 ⌧ =1                            ei
                                                                                         t̃in 2FT
                                                                                     |                   {z                    }
                                                                                                    j   (⌧ ;FeTi )
The term j,k (⌧, ⌧ 0 ; G) dominates the computational cost of our precomputations. It requires O(G)
operations for each tuples (⌧, ⌧ 0 ) and (j, k). Thus, it has a total complexity of O(p2 L2 G) and is the
bottleneck of the precomputation phase. For any m 2 {1, . . . , p}, the gradient of the loss w.r.t. the
baseline parameter is given by:
                                                                 p X
                                                                 X L
                          @LG
                     NT       = 2T µm            2NTm + 2                            mj [⌧ ]     j (⌧ ; G)        .
                          @µm                                    j=1 ⌧ =1

For any tuple (m, l) 2 {1, . . . , p}2 , the gradient of ⌘ml is:
                   X L                                          p X
                                                                X L X
                                                                    L
       @LG              @ m,l [⌧ ]                                                                0
                                                                                                        @ m,l [⌧ ]                     0
  NT        = 2 µm                           l (⌧ ; G) + 2                                   mk [⌧ ]                          l,k (⌧, ⌧ ; G)
       @⌘ml              @⌘m,l                                                                           @⌘m,l
                   ⌧ =1                                         k=1 ⌧ =1 ⌧ 0 =1
                               L
                               X    @ m,l [⌧ ]
                           2                             fm
                                                  l (⌧ ; FT )    .
                               ⌧ =1
                                     @⌘m,l
Gradients of kernel parameters dominate the computational cost of gradients. The complexity is of
O(pL2 ) for each kernel parameter, leading to a total complexity of O(p3 L2 ) and is independent of
the number of events NT . Thus, a trade-off can be made between the precision of the method and
its computational efficiency when varying the size of the kernel’s support or the discretization.

Optimization The inference is then conducted using gradient descent for the `2 loss LG . FaDIn
thus allows for very general parametric kernels, as exact gradients for each parameter involved in
the kernels can be derived efficiently as long as the kernel is differentiable and has a finite support.
Gradient-based optimization algorithms can therefor be used without limitation, in contrast with the
EM algorithm which requires close form solution to zero the gradient, which is difficult for many
kernels. An important remark is that the problem is generally non-convex and may converge to a
local minimum.

2.3    I MPACT OF THE DISCRETIZATION

While discretization allows for efficient computations, it also introduces a perturbation in the loss
value. In this section, we quantify the impact of this perturbation on the parameter estimation when
   goes to 0. Through this section, consider we observe a process FT whose intensity function is
given by the parametric form (·; ✓⇤ ). Note that if the process FT ’s intensity is not in the parametric
family (·; ✓), ✓⇤ is defined as the best approximation of its intensity function in the `2 sense. The
goal of the inference process is thus to recover the parameters ✓⇤ .
When working with the discrete process F   fT , the events ti of the original process are replaced with
                                                            n
a projection on a grid t̃n = tn + n . Here, ni is uniformly distributed on [
                         i    i   i
                                                                                 /2, /2]. We consider


                                                           5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


the discrete FaDIn estimator ✓b defined as ✓b = arg min ✓ LG (✓). We can upper-bound the error
incurred by ✓b by the decomposition:
                              ✓b     ✓⇤        ✓bc ✓⇤ + ✓b    ✓bc    ,                                 (5)
                                          2           2
                                               | {z } |     {z     }2
                                                    (⇤)          (⇤⇤)

where ✓bc = arg min✓ L (✓) is the reference estimator for ✓⇤ based on the standard `2 estimator for
continuous point processes. This decomposition involves the statistical error (⇤) and the bias error
(⇤⇤) induced by the discretization. The statistical term measures how far the parameters obtained by
minimizing the `2 continuous loss having access to a finite amount of data are from the true ones. In
contrast, the term (⇤⇤) represents the discretization bias induced by minimizing the discrete loss (4)
instead of the continuous one (2). In the following proposition, we focus on the discretization error
(⇤⇤) which is related to the computational trade-off offered by our method and not on the statistical
error of the continuous `2 estimator (⇤⇤). Our work showcases that this disregarded estimator can
be efficiently computed, and we hope it will promote research to describe its asymptotic behavior.
We now study the perturbation of the loss due to the discretization.
Proposition 1. Let FT and F   fT be respectively a MHP process and its discretized version on a grid
G with stepsize . Assume that the intensity function of FT possesses continuously differentiable
finite support kernels on [0, W ]. Thus, assuming < minti ,tjm 2FT |tin tjm |, for any i 2 J1 , pK, it
                                                               n
holds:
                                      Xp     X
                  ei [s] = i (s )                   j @ ij
                                                    m       (s    tjm ; ✓) + O( 2 ) ,
                                      j=1  j    j
                                                       @t
                                           tm 2Fs
                                    p
                                    X    X X p    X
                                 2                      j            i @ ij i
    LG (✓) = L(✓) +   .h(✓) +                         ( m            n)    (tn     tjm ; ✓) + O(   2
                                                                                                       ) .
                                NT i=1 i  i j=1 j   j
                                                                         @t
                                          tn 2FT     tm 2Fs

The technical proof is deferred to Section B.1 in the Appendix. The first result is a direct appli-
cation of the Taylor expansion of the intensity for the kernels. For the loss, the first perturbation
term .h(✓) comes from approximating the integral with a finite Euler sum (Tasaki, 2009) while
the second one derives from the perturbation of the intensity. This proposition shows that as the
discretization step goes to 0, the perturbed intensity and `2 loss are good estimates of their con-
tinuous counterpart. We now quantify the discretization error (⇤⇤) as goes to 0.
Proposition 2. We consider the same assumption as in Proposition 1. Then, if the estimators ✓bc =
arg min✓ L(✓) and ✓b = arg min✓ LG (✓) are uniquely defined, ✓b converges to ✓bc as                ! 0.
Moreover, if L is C 2 and its hessian r2 L(✓bc ) is positive definite with " > 0 its smallest eigenvalue,
then k✓b     ✓bc k2  g(✓b ) , with g(✓b ) = O(1).
                      "

This proposition shows that asymptotically on , the estimator ✓b is equivalent to ✓bc . It also shows
that the discrete estimator converges to the continuous one at the same speed as decreases. This
is confirmed experimentally by results shown in Figure A.7 in the Appendix. Thus, one would need
to select so that the discretization error is small compared to the statistical one.

3     N UMERICAL EXPERIMENTS
We present various synthetic data experiments to support the advantages of the proposed approach.
To begin, we investigate the bias induced by the discretization in Section 3.1. Afterwards, the sta-
tistical and computational efficiency of FaDIn is highlighted through a benchmark with popular
non-parametric approaches Section 3.2. Due to the space limitation, sensitivity analysis regard-
ing the parameter W and additional non-parametric comparisons are provided in Section A.1 and
Section A.2, respectively.

3.1    C ONSISTENCY OF D ISCRETIZATION

In order to study the estimation bias due to discretization, we run two experiments and report the
results in Figure 1 (details and further experiments are presented in Section A.3 and Section A.4


                                                     6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


in the Appendix). The general paradigm is a one-dimensional TPP with intensity parametrized as
in (1) with a Truncated Gaussian kernel of mean m 2 R and standard deviation > 0, with fixed
support [0 , W ] ⇢ R+ , W > 0. It corresponds to (·) = ↵(·), ↵ 0 with
                                               1        f · m
                    (·) :=  (·; m, , W ) =        W m            m
                                                                       10·W ,
                                                 F             F
where f (resp. F ) is the probability density function (resp. cumulative distribution function) of the
standard normal distribution. Hence, the parameters to estimate are µ and ⌘ = (↵, m, ).
In both experiments, for multiple process length T , the discrete estimates are computed for vary-
ing grid stepsize , from 10 1 to 10 3 . The parameter W is set to 1. The `2 norm of the dif-
ference between estimates and the true parameter values –the ones used for data simulation– is
computed and reported. We first computed the parameter estimates with our FaDIn method for
T 2 {103 , 105 , 104 , 106 }, for 100 simulations each time. Second, since we wish to separate dis-
cretization bias from statistical bias, we compute the estimates with an EM algorithm, both con-
tinuously and discretely, and that for 50 random data simulations. For the latter, the process is not
self-excited, but rather driven by an exogenous homogeneous Poisson Process (Allain et al., 2021).
One can observe that the `2 errors between discrete estimates and true parameters tend towards
zero as T increases. For T fixed, one can see plateaus starting for stepsize values that are not
particularly small, indicating that the discretization bias is limited. The second experiment with
the EM algorithm shows that when the plateau mentioned above is reached, it corresponds to some
statistical error. In other words, even for a reasonably coarse stepsize, the bias induced by the
discretization is slight compared to the statistical error.


Figure 1: Median and interquartile error bar of the `2 norm between true parameters and parameter
estimates computed with FaDIn (left) and with EM algorithm (right), continuously and discretely,
w.r.t. the stepsize of the grid .

3.2   S TATISTICAL AND COMPUTATIONAL EFFICIENCY OF FA DI N

We compare FaDIn with non-parametric methods by assessing approaches’ statistical and compu-
tational efficiency. To learn the non-parametric kernel, we select various existing methods. The
first benchmarked method uses histogram kernels and relies on the EM algorithm, provided in Zhou
et al. (2013a) and implemented in the tick library (Bacry et al., 2017). The kernel is set with one
basis function. The three other approaches involve a linear combination of pre-defined raised cosine
functions as non-parametric kernels. The inference is made either by stochastic gradient descent
algorithm (Non-param SGD; Linderman & Adams, 2014) or by Bayesian approaches such as Gibbs
sampling (Gibbs) or Variational Inference (VB) from Linderman & Adams (2015). These algo-
rithms are implemented in the pyhawkes library. In the following experiments, we set the number
of basis to five for each method. More precisely, we simulate a two-dimensional Hawkes process
(repeated ten times) using the tick library with baseline µ = [0.1, 0.2] and Raised Cosine kernels:
                              ✓             ◆
                                 · ui,j
        i,j (·) = ↵i,j 1 + cos          ⇡ ⇡ I {· 2 [ui,j ; ui,j + 2 i,j ]} , (i, j) 2 {1, 2}2
                                    i,j
                                                                
                            1.5 0.1          0.1 0.3                0.3 0.25
with parameters ↵ =                  , u =               and   =                . Further, we infer
                            0.1 1.5          0.3 0.3                0.3 0.3
the intensity function of these underlying Hawkes processes using FaDIn and the four previously


                                                  7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


mentioned methods setting = 0.01 for all these discrete approaches. This experiment is repeated
for varying values of T 2 {103 , 104 , 105 }. The averaged (over the ten runs) normalized `1 error
on the intensity (evaluated on the same discrete grid), as well as the associated computation time,
are reported in Figure 2. From a statistical perspective, we can observe the advantages of FaDIn
inference for varying T over the benchmarked methods. It is worth noting that this result is expected
by a parametric approach when the used kernel belongs to the same family as the one with which
events have been simulated. From a computational perspective, FaDIn is very efficient compared
to benchmarked approaches. Indeed, it scales very well with an increasing time T and then with a
growing number of events. In contrast, other methods depend on the number of events and scale
linearly with the time T . For completeness, different kernel shapes are provided in Section A.2.1.



                         Estimation error                                      Computation time
    ||1 / G


              100
                                                                       103


                                                           Time (s.)
    ⇤


                                                                       102
    || ˆ


         10 1
                                                                       101
                     3              4              5
                10             10             10                         103          104         105
                                T                                                      T
Figure 2: Comparison of the statistical and computational efficiency of FaDIn with four bench-
marked methods. The averaged (over ten runs) statistical error on the intensity function (left) and
the computational time (right) are computed regarding the time T (and thus the number of events).


4       A PPLICATION TO MEG DATA

Electrophysiology signals recorded with M/EEG contain recurring prototypical waveforms that
can be related to human behavior (Shin et al., 2017). Convolutional Dictionary Learning (CDL;
Jas et al. 2017) is an unsupervised method to efficiently extract such patterns and study them in a
quantitative way. With CDL, multivariate neural signals are represented by a set of spatio-temporal
patterns, called atoms, with their respective onsets, called activations. Here, we make use of the
alphacsc software for CDL with rank-1 constraint (Dupré la Tour et al., 2018), as it includes
physical priors for the patterns to recover, namely that the spatial propagation of the signal from the
brain to sensors is linear and instantaneous. The schema in Figure A.14 in the Appendix presents
how CDL applies to MEG recordings.
Experiments on magnetoencephalography (MEG) data were run on two datasets from the MNE
Python package (Gramfort et al., 2013; 2014): the sample dataset and the somatosensory (somato)
dataset1 . These datasets were selected as they elicit two distinct types of event-related neural ac-
tivations: evoked responses which are time-locked to the onsets of the stimulation, and induced
responses which exhibit larger random jitters. The sample dataset contains M/EEG recordings of
a human subject presented with audio and visual stimuli. This experiment presents checkerboard
patterns to the subject in the left and right visual field, interspersed with tones to the left or right
ear. The experiment lasts about 4.6 min, and approximately 70 stimuli per type are presented to the
subject. For the somato dataset, a human subject is scanned with MEG during 15 min, while 111
stimulations of his left median nerve were made.
For both datasets, raw data are first preprocessed as done by Allain et al. (2021), and CDL is then
applied: 40 atoms of duration 1 s each are extracted on the sample dataset, and 20 atoms of duration
0.53 s for the somato dataset. Finally, each dataset is represented by two sets of Temporal Point
Processes: a set of stochastic ones representing atoms’ activations, and a set of deterministic ones
coding for external stimuli events. The main goal of applying the TPP framework to such data
    1
        Both available at https://mne.tools/stable/overview/datasets_index.html


                                                       8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Figure 3: Spatial and temporal patterns of 4 atoms from sample dataset, and their respective esti-
mated intensity functions following a stimulus (cue at time = 0 s), for auditory and visual stimuli
with non-parametric kernel (NP) and two kernel parametrizations: Truncated Gaussian (TG) and
Raised Cosine (RC).


is to characterize directly when and how each stimulus is responsible for the occurrence of neural
responses, especially by estimating the distribution of latencies. We are interested in the paradigm of
Driven Point Process (DriPP; Allain et al. 2021) and for every extracted atom, its intensity function
related to the corresponding stimuli is estimated using a non-parametric kernel (NP) and two kernel
parametrizations: Truncated Gaussian (TG) and Raised Cosine (RC). Results on the sample (resp.
somato) dataset are presented in Figure 3 (resp. Figure A.15 in the Appendix), where only the kernel
related to each type of stimulus is plotted, for the sake of clarity. See Appendix A.5 for more details.

Results show that all three kernels agree on a peak latency around 90 ms for the auditory condition
and 190 ms for the visual condition. Due to the limited number of events, one can observe that the
non-parametric kernel estimated is less smooth, with spurious peaks later in the interval. Overall,
these results on real MEG data demonstrate that our approach with a RC kernel parametrization is
able to recover correct latency estimates even with the discretization of stepsize 0.02. Furthermore,
the usage of RC allows us to have sharper peaks in the intensity compared to TG, enforcing the link
between the external stimulus and the atom’s activation. This difference mainly comes from the fact
that RC does not need to have its support pre-determined. This advantage is even more pronounced
in the case of induced responses, such as in the somato dataset (see Figure A.15), where the range
of possible latency values is more difficult to determine beforehand.

5   D ISCUSSION
This work proposed an efficient approach, FaDIn, to infer general parametric kernels for Multivari-
ate Hawkes processes. Our method makes the use of parametric kernels computationally tractable,
beyond exponential kernels. The development of FaDIn is based on the three key features: (i) finite-
support kernels, (ii) timeline discretization and (iii) precomputations reducing the computational
cost of the gradients. These allow for a computationally efficient gradient-based approach, improv-
ing state-of-the-art methods while providing flexible use of kernels well-fitted to the considered
applications. Moreover, this work shows that the bias induced by the discretization is negligible,
both theoretically and numerically. By allowing the use of a general parametric kernel in Hawkes
processes, this contribution opens new possibilities for many applications. This is the case with
M/EEG data, where estimating information about the rate and latency of occurrences of brain signal
patterns is at the core of neuroscience questions. Therefore, FaDIn makes it possible to use a Raised
Cosine kernel, allowing for efficient retrieval of these parameters.


                                                   9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


R EFERENCES
Cédric Allain, Alexandre Gramfort, and Thomas Moreau. DriPP: Driven point processes to model
   stimuli induced patterns in M/EEG signals. In International Conference on Learning Represen-
   tations, 2021.
Emmanuel Bacry, Iacopo Mastromatteo, and Jean-François Muzy. Hawkes processes in finance.
  Market Microstructure and Liquidity, 1(01):1550005, 2015.
Emmanuel Bacry, Martin Bompaire, Philip Deegan, Stéphane Gaı̈ffas, and Søren V. Poulsen.
  Tick: A python library for statistical learning, with an emphasis on hawkes processes and time-
  dependent models. Journal of Machine Learning Research, 18(1):7937–7941, 2017.
Emmanuel Bacry, Martin Bompaire, Stéphane Gaı̈ffas, and Jean-Francois Muzy. Sparse and low-
  rank multivariate hawkes processes. Journal of Machine Learning Research, 21(50):1–32, 2020.
Sylvain Baillet. Magnetoencephalography for brain electrophysiology and imaging. Nature Neuro-
  science, 20:327 EP –, 02 2017.
Martin Bompaire. Machine learning based on Hawkes processes and stochastic optimization. The-
 ses, Université Paris Saclay (COmUE), July 2019.
Raiha Browning, Judith Rousseau, and Kerrie Mengersen. A flexible, random histogram kernel for
  discrete-time hawkes processes. arXiv preprint arXiv:2208.02921, 2022.
Marcos Costa Santos Carreira. Exponential Kernels with Latency in Hawkes Processes: Applica-
 tions in Finance. preprint ArXiv, 2101.06348, 2021.
Mike X Cohen. Analyzing Neural Time Series Data: Theory and Practice. The MIT Press, 01 2014.
 ISBN 9780262319553. doi: 10.7551/mitpress/9609.001.0001.
Daryl J. Daley and David Vere-Jones. An introduction to the theory of point processes. Volume I:
  Elementary theory and methods. Probability and Its Applications. Springer-Verlag New York,
  2003.
Daryl J. Daley and David Vere-Jones. An introduction to the theory of point processes. Volume II:
  general theory and structure. Probability and Its Applications. Springer-Verlag New York, 2007.
Sophie Donnet, Vincent Rivoirard, and Judith Rousseau. Nonparametric Bayesian estimation for
  multivariate Hawkes processes. The Annals of Statistics, 48(5):2698 – 2727, 2020.
Tom Dupré la Tour, Thomas Moreau, Mainak Jas, and Alexandre Gramfort. Multivariate convolu-
  tional sparse coding for electromagnetic brain signals. Advances in Neural Information Process-
  ing Systems, 31:3292–3302, 2018.
Michael Eichler, Rainer Dahlhaus, and Johannes Dueck. Graphical modeling for multivariate
 hawkes processes with nonparametric link functions. Journal of Time Series Analysis, 38(2):
 225–242, 2017.
Antonio Galves and Eva Löcherbach. Modeling networks of spiking neurons as interacting processes
  with memory of variable length. arXiv preprint arXiv:1502.06446, 2015.
Alexandre Gramfort, Martin Luessi, Eric Larson, Denis A. Engemann, Daniel Strohmeier, Christian
  Brodbeck, Roman Goj, Mainak Jas, Teon Brooks, Lauri Parkkonen, et al. MEG and EEG data
  analysis with MNE-Python. Frontiers in neuroscience, 7:267, 2013.
Alexandre Gramfort, Martin Luessi, Eric Larson, Denis A. Engemann, Daniel Strohmeier, Christian
  Brodbeck, Lauri Parkkonen, and Matti S. Hämäläinen. MNE software for processing MEG and
  EEG data. Neuroimage, 86:446–460, 2014.
Roger Grosse, Rajat Raina, Helen Kwong, and Andrew Y. Ng. Shift-invariant sparse coding for
  audio classification. In 23rd Conference on Uncertainty in Artificial Intelligence (UAI), pp. 149–
  158. AUAI Press, 2007. ISBN 0-9749039-3-0.


                                                10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Eric C. Hall and Rebecca M. Willett. Tracking dynamic point processes on networks. IEEE Trans-
  actions on Information Theory, 62(7):4327–4346, 2016.
Niels Richar Hansen, Patricia Reynaud-Bouret, Vincent Rivoirard, et al. Lasso and probabilistic
  inequalities for multivariate point processes. Bernoulli, 21(1):83–143, 2015.
Riitta Hari. Action–perception connection and the cortical mu rhythm. Progress in brain research,
  159:253–260, 2006.
Alan G. Hawkes. Point spectra of some mutually exciting point processes. Journal of the Royal
  Statistical Society: Series B (Methodological), 33(3):438–443, 1971.
Matthew D Hoffman, David M Blei, Chong Wang, and John Paisley. Stochastic variational infer-
 ence. Journal of Machine Learning Research, 2013.
Hemant Ishwaran and Lancelot F James. Gibbs sampling methods for stick-breaking priors. Journal
  of the American Statistical Association, 96(453):161–173, 2001.
Mainak Jas, Tom Dupré La Tour, Umut Şimşekli, and Aexandre Gramfort. Learning the morphology
 of brain signals using alpha-stable convolutional sparse coding. In Advances in Neural Informa-
 tion Processing Systems (NIPS), pp. 1–15, 2017.
Sanggyun Kim, David Putrino, Soumya Ghosh, and Emeri N. Brown. A granger causality measure
  for point process models of ensemble neural spiking activity. PLoS Comput Biol, 7(3):e1001110,
  2011.
Matthias Kirchner. Hawkes and INAR( 1 ) processes. Stochastic Processes and their Applications,
 126(8):2494–2525, August 2016.
Matthias Kirchner and A Bercher. A nonparametric estimation procedure for the hawkes process:
 comparison with maximum likelihood estimation. Journal of Statistical Computation and Simu-
 lation, 88(6):1106–1116, 2018.
Michael Krumin, Inna Reutsky, and Shy Shoham. Correlation-based analysis and generation of
 multiple spike trains using hawkes models with an exogenous input. Frontiers in computational
 neuroscience, 4:147, 2010.
Daisuke Kurisu. Discretization of self-exciting peaks over threshold models. Technical report,
  Tokyo Tech IEEE Working Paper 2018-3, Tokyo Institute of Technology. https . . . , 2018.
Remi Lemonnier and Nicolas Vayatis. Nonparametric markovian learning of triggering kernels for
  mutually exciting and mutually inhibiting multivariate hawkes processes. In Joint European Con-
  ference on Machine Learning and Knowledge Discovery in Databases, pp. 161–176. Springer,
  2014.
Erik Lewis and George Mohler. A nonparametric EM algorithm for multiscale Hawkes processes.
  Journal of Nonparametric Statistics, 1(1):1–20, 2011.
Scott Linderman and Ryan Adams. Discovering latent network structure in point process data. In
  Proceedings of the 31st International Conference on Machine Learning, volume 32, pp. 1413–
  1421, 2014.
Scott W Linderman and Ryan P Adams. Scalable bayesian inference for excitatory point process
  networks. arXiv preprint arXiv:1507.03228, 2015.
Hongyuan Mei and Jason M Eisner. The neural hawkes process: A neurally self-modulating multi-
  variate point process. Advances in neural information processing systems, 30, 2017.
Hongyuan Mei, Tom Wan, and Jason Eisner. Noise-contrastive estimation for multivariate point
  processes. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 33, pp. 5204–5214.
  Curran Associates, Inc., 2020.
George Mohler et al. Modeling and estimation of multi-source clustering in crime and security data.
  The Annals of Applied Statistics, 7(3):1525–1539, 2013.


                                                11
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Yosihiko Ogata. On lewis’ simulation method for point processes. IEEE transactions on information
  theory, 27(1):23–31, 1981.
Murat Okatan, Matthew A. Wilson, and Emery N. Brown. Analyzing functional connectivity using a
 network likelihood model of ensemble neural spiking activity. Neural computation, 17(9):1927–
 1961, 2005.
Zhimeng Pan, Zheng Wang, Jeff M Phillips, and Shandian Zhe. Self-adaptable point processes with
  nonparametric time decays. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 34:4594–4606,
  2021.
Jonathan W. Pillow, Jonathon Shlens, Liam Paninski, Alexander Sher, Alan M. Litke, E. J.
  Chichilnisky, and Eero P. Simoncelli. Spatio-temporal correlations and visual signalling in a
  complete neuronal population. Nature, 454(7207):995–999, 2008.
Kamiar Rad and Liam Paninski. Information rates and optimal decoding in large neural populations.
  Advances in neural information processing systems, 24:846–854, 2011.
Jakob Gulddahl Rasmussen. Bayesian inference for hawkes processes. Methodology and Computing
  in Applied Probability, 15(3):623–642, 2013.
Patricia Reynaud-Bouret and Vincent Rivoirard. Near optimal thresholding estimation of a poisson
  intensity on the real line. Electronic journal of statistics, 4:172–238, 2010.
Oleksandr Shchur, Marin Biloš, and Stephan Günnemann. Intensity-free learning of temporal point
  processes. arXiv preprint arXiv:1909.12127, 2019.
Oleksandr Shchur, Nicholas Gao, Marin Biloš, and Stephan Günnemann. Fast and flexible temporal
  point processes with triangular maps. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems,
  volume 33, pp. 73–84. Curran Associates, Inc., 2020.
Maxwell A. Sherman, Shane Lee, Robert Law, Saskia Haegens, Catherine A. Thorn, Matti S.
 Hämäläinen, Christopher I. Moore, and Stephanie R. Jones. Neural mechanisms of transient neo-
 cortical beta rhythms: Converging evidence from humans, computational modeling, monkeys,
 and mice. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 113(33):E4885–E4894, 2016.
Hyeyoung Shin, Robert Law, Shawn Tsutsui, Christopher I Moore, and Stephanie R Jones. The rate
  of transient beta frequency events predicts behavior across tasks and species. eLife, 6:e29086,
  nov 2017.
Deborah Sulem, Vincent Rivoirard, and Judith Rousseau. Bayesian estimation of nonlinear hawkes
  process. arXiv preprint arXiv:2103.17164, 2021.
Hiroyuki Tasaki. Convergence rates of approximate sums of riemann integrals. Journal of Approxi-
  mation Theory, 161(2):477–490, 2009. ISSN 0021-9045.
Wilson Truccolo, Uri T. Eden, Matthew R. Fellows, John P. Donoghue, and Emeri N. Brown. A
 point process framework for relating neural spiking activity to spiking history, neural ensemble,
 and extrinsic covariate effects. Journal of neurophysiology, 93(2):1074–1089, 2005.
Alejandro Veen and Frederic P Schoenberg. Estimation of space–time branching process models
  in seismology using an em–type algorithm. Journal of the American Statistical Association, 103
  (482):614–624, 2008.
Yichen Wang, Bo Xie, Nan Du, and Le Song. Isotonic hawkes processes. In Proceedings of The
  33rd International Conference on Machine Learning, volume 48, pp. 2226–2234. PMLR, 2016.
Hongteng Xu, Mehrdad Farajtabar, and Hongyuan Zha. Learning granger causality for Hawkes
  processes. In International conference on machine learning, pp. 1717–1726, 2016.
Hongteng Xu, Dixin Luo, and Hongyuan Zha. Learning hawkes processes from short doubly-
  censored event sequences. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 3831–3840.
  PMLR, 2017.


                                               12
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Hongteng Xu, Dixin Luo, Xu Chen, and Lawrence Carin. Benefits from superposed hawkes pro-
  cesses. In International Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Statistics, pp. 623–631. PMLR,
  2018.
Yingxiang Yang, Jalal Etesami, Niao He, and Negar Kiyavash. Online learning for multivariate
  hawkes processes. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 30. Curran
  Associates, Inc., 2017.
Rui Zhang, Christian Walder, Marian-Andrei Rizoiu, and Lexing Xie. Efficient non-parametric
  bayesian hawkes processes. arXiv preprint arXiv:1810.03730, 2018.
Ke Zhou, Hongyuan Zha, and Le Song. Learning triggering kernels for multi-dimensional hawkes
  processes. In International conference on machine learning, pp. 1301–1309. PMLR, 2013a.
Ke Zhou, Hongyuan Zha, and Le Song. Learning social infectivity in sparse low-rank networks
  using multi-dimensional hawkes processes. In Artificial Intelligence and Statistics, pp. 641–649.
  PMLR, 2013b.


                                                13
