Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


M ULTI - SKILL M OBILE M ANIPULATION FOR O BJECT
R EARRANGEMENT
    Jiayuan Gu1 , Devendra Singh Chaplot2 , Hao Su1 , Jitendra Malik2,3
 1
    UC San Diego, 2 Meta AI Research, 3 UC Berkeley



                                             A BSTRACT
            We study a modular approach to tackle long-horizon mobile manipulation tasks
            for object rearrangement, which decomposes a full task into a sequence of sub-
            tasks. To tackle the entire task, prior work chains multiple stationary manipula-
            tion skills with a point-goal navigation skill, which are learned individually on
            subtasks. Although more effective than monolithic end-to-end RL policies, this
            framework suffers from compounding errors in skill chaining, e.g., navigating
            to a bad location where a stationary manipulation skill can not reach its target
            to manipulate. To this end, we propose that the manipulation skills should in-
            clude mobility to have flexibility in interacting with the target object from mul-
            tiple locations and at the same time the navigation skill could have multiple end
            points which lead to successful manipulation. We operationalize these ideas by
            implementing mobile manipulation skills rather than stationary ones and training
            a navigation skill trained with region goal instead of point goal. We evaluate our
            multi-skill mobile manipulation method M3 on 3 challenging long-horizon mobile
            manipulation tasks in the Home Assistant Benchmark (HAB), and show superior
            performance as compared to the baselines.


1        I NTRODUCTION
Building AI with embodiment is an important future mission of AI. Object rearrangement (Batra
et al., 2020) is considered as a canonical task for embodied AI. The most challenging rearrangement
tasks (Szot et al., 2021; Ehsani et al., 2021; Gan et al., 2021) are often long-horizon mobile ma-
nipulation tasks, which demand both navigation and manipulation abilities, e.g., to move to certain
locations and to pick or place objects. It is challenging to learn a monolithic RL policy for complex
long-horizon mobile manipulation tasks, due to challenges such as high sample complexity, compli-
cated reward design, and inefficient exploration. A practical solution to tackle a long-horizon task
is to decompose it into a set of subtasks, which are tractable, short-horizon, and compact in state
or action spaces. Each subtask can be solved by designing or learning a skill, so that a sequence of
skills can be chained to complete the entire task (Lee et al., 2018; Clegg et al., 2018; Lee et al., 2019;
2021). For example, skills for object rearrangement can be picking or placing objects, opening or
closing fridges and drawers, moving chairs, navigating in the room, etc.
Achieving successful object rearrangement using this modular framework requires careful subtask
formulation such that skills trained for these subtasks can be chained together effectively. We define
three desirable properties for skills to solve diverse long-horizon tasks: achievability, composabil-
ity, and reusability. Note that we assume each subtask is associated with a set of initial states.
Then, achievability quantifies the portion of initial states solvable by a skill. A pair of skills are
composable if the initial states achievable by the succeeding skill can encompass the terminal states
of the preceding skill. This encompassment requirement is necessary to ensure robustness to mild
compounding errors. However, trivially enlarging the initial set of a subtask increases learning dif-
ficulty and may lead to many unachievable initial states for the designed/learned skill. Last, a skill
is reusable if it can be directly chained without or with limited fine-tuning (Clegg et al., 2018; Lee
et al., 2021). According to our experiments, effective subtask formulation is critical though largely
overlooked in the literature.
     1
         Project website: https://sites.google.com/view/hab-m3
     2
         Codes: https://github.com/Jiayuan-Gu/hab-mobile-manipulation


                                                    1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


   Initial states                                  Terminal states                            Previous approaches


                                                    Initial states                                   Terminal states

                     Point-goal navigation skill                     Stationary manipulation skill



   Initial states                                  Terminal states                                    Our approach


                                                    Initial states                                   Terminal states
                    Region-goal navigation skill                      Mobile manipulation skill


                                      (a) Method Overview                                                              (b) The Home Assistant Benchmark

Figure 1: 1a provides an overview of our multi-skill mobile manipulation (M3) method. The inactive
part of the robot is colored gray. Previous approaches exclusively activate either the mobile platform
or manipulator for each skill, and suffer from compounding errors in skill chaining given limited
composability of skills. We introduce mobility to manipulation skills, which effectively enlarges the
feasible initial set, and a region-goal navigation reward to facilitate learning the navigation skill. 1b
illustrates one task (SetTable) in the Home Assistant Benchmark (Szot et al., 2021), where the robot
needs to navigate in the room, open the drawers or fridge, pick multiple objects in drawers or fridge
and place them on the table. Best viewed in motion at the project website1 .


In the context of mobile manipulation, skill chaining poses many challenges for subtask formulation.
For example, an imperfect navigation skill might terminate at a bad location where the target object
is out of reach for a stationary manipulation skill (Szot et al., 2021). To tackle such “hand-off”
problems, we investigate how to formulate subtasks for mobile manipulation. First, we replace
stationary (fixed-base) manipulation skills with mobile counterparts, which allow the base to move
when the manipulation is undertaken. We observe that mobile manipulation skills are more robust
to compounding errors in skill chaining, and enable the robot to make full use of its embodiment
to better accomplish subtasks, e.g., finding a better location with less clutter and fewer obstacles
to pick an object. We emphasize how to generate initial states of manipulation skills as a trade-off
between composability and achievability in Sec 4.1. Second, we study how to translate the start of
manipulation skills to the navigation reward, which is used to train the navigation skill to connect
manipulation skills. Note that the goal position in mobile manipulation plays a very different role
from that in point-goal (Wijmans et al., 2019; Kadian et al., 2020) navigation. On the one hand,
the position of a target object (e.g., on the table or in the fridge) is often not directly navigable; on
the other hand, a navigable position close to the goal position can be infeasible due to kinematic
and collision constraints. Besides, there exist multiple feasible starting positions for manipulation
skills, yet previous works such as Szot et al. (2021) train the navigation skill to learn a single one,
which is selected heuristically and may not be suitable for stationary manipulation. Thanks to the
flexibility of our mobile manipulation skills, we devise a region-goal navigation reward to address
those issues, detailed in Sec 4.2.
In this work, we present our improved multi-skill mobile manipulation method M3, where mobile
manipulation skills are chained by the navigation skill trained with our region-goal navigation re-
ward. It achieves an average success rate of 63% on 3 long-horizon mobile manipulation tasks in
the Home Assistant Benchmark (Szot et al., 2021), as compared to 50% for our best baseline. Fig 1
provides an overview of our method and tasks. Our contributions are listed as follows:

1. We study how to formulate mobile manipulation skills, and empirically show that they are more
   robust to compounding errors in skill chaining than stationary counterparts;
2. We devise a region-goal navigation reward for mobile manipulation, which shows better perfor-
   mance and stronger generalizability than the point-goal counterpart in previous works;
3. We show that our improved multi-skill mobile manipulation pipeline can achieve superior per-
   formance on long-horizon mobile manipulation tasks without bells and whistles, which can serve
   as a strong baseline for future study.


                                                                                                            2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


2     R ELATED W ORK

2.1   M OBILE M ANIPULATION

Rearrangement (Batra et al., 2020) is “to bring a given physical environment into a specified state”.
We refer readers to Batra et al. (2020) for a comprehensive survey. Many existing RL tasks can be
considered as instances of rearrangement, e.g., picking and placing rigid objects (Zhu et al., 2020;
Yu et al., 2020) or manipulating articulated objects (Urakami et al., 2019; Mu et al., 2021). However,
they mainly focus on stationary manipulation (Urakami et al., 2019; Zhu et al., 2020; Yu et al., 2020)
or individual, short-horizon skills (Mu et al., 2021). Recently, several benchmarks like Home Assis-
tant Benchmark (HAB) (Szot et al., 2021), ManipulaTHOR (Ehsani et al., 2021) and ThreeDWorld
Transport Challenge (Gan et al., 2021), are proposed to study long-horizon mobile manipulation
tasks. They usually demand that the robot rearranges household objects in a room, requiring explo-
ration and navigation (Anderson et al., 2018; Chaplot et al., 2020) between interacting with objects
entirely based on onboard sensing, without any privileged state or map information.
Mobile manipulation (RAS, 2022) refers to “robotic tasks that require a synergistic combination
of navigation and interaction with the environment”. It has been studied long in the robotics com-
munity. Ni et al. (2021) provides a summary of traditional methods, which usually require perfect
knowledge of the environment. One example is task-and-motion-planning (TAMP) (Srivastava et al.,
2014; Garrett et al., 2021; 2020). TAMP relies on well-designed state proposals (grasp poses, robot
positions, etc.) to sample feasible trajectories, which is computationally inefficient and unscalable
for complicated scenarios.
Learning-based approaches enable the robot to act according to visual observations. Xia et al. (2021)
proposes a hierarchical method for mobile manipulation in iGibson (Xia et al., 2020), which pre-
dicts either a high-level base or arm action by RL policies and executes plans generated by motion-
planning to achieve the action. However, the arm action space is specially designed for a primitive
action pushing. Sun et al. (2022) develops a real-world RL framework to collect trash on the floor,
with separate navigation and grasping policies. Ehsani et al. (2021); Ni et al. (2021) train an end-to-
end RL policy to tackle mobile pick-and-place in ManipulaTHOR (Ehsani et al., 2021). However,
the reward function used to train such an end-to-end policy usually demands careful tuning. For
example, Ni et al. (2021) shows that a minor modification (a penalty for disturbance avoidance) can
lead to a considerable performance drop. The vulnerability of end-to-end RL approaches restricts
scalability. Most prior works in both RL and robotics separate mobile the platform and manipulator,
to “reduce the difficulty to solve the inverse kinematics problem of a kinematically redundant sys-
tem” (Sereinig et al., 2020; Sandakalum & Ang Jr, 2022). Wang et al. (2020) trains an end-to-end
RL policy based on the object pose and proprioception to simultaneously control the base and arm.
It focuses on picking a single object up in simple scenes, while our work addresses long-horizon
rearrangement tasks that require multiple skills.
Szot et al. (2021) adopts a different hierarchical approach for mobile manipulation. It uses task-
planning (Fikes & Nilsson, 1971) to generate high-level symbolic goals, and individual skills are
trained by RL to accomplish those goals. It outperforms the monolithic end-to-end RL policy and
the classical sense-plan-act robotic pipeline. It is scalable since skills can be composited to solve
different tasks, and benefit from progress in individual skill learning (Yu et al., 2020; Mu et al.,
2021). Moreover, different from other benchmarks, the HAB features continuous motor control
(base and arm), interaction with articulated objects (opening drawers and fridges), and complicated
scene layouts. Thus, we choose the HAB as the platform to study long-horizon mobile manipulation.

2.2   S KILL C HAINING FOR L ONG - HORIZON TASKS

Szot et al. (2021) observes that sequentially chaining multiple skills suffers from “hand-off” prob-
lems, where a preceding skill terminates at a state that the succeeding skill has either never seen
during training or is infeasible to solve. Lee et al. (2018) proposes to learn a transition policy to con-
nect primitive skills, but assumes that such a policy can be found through random exploration. Lee
et al. (2021) regularizes the terminal state distribution of a skill to be close to the initial set of the fol-
lowing skill, through a reward learned with adversarial training. Most prior skill chaining methods
focus on fine-tuning learned skills. In this work, we instead focus on subtask formulation for skill
chaining, which directly improves composability and reusability without additional computation.


                                                      3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


3       P RELIMINARY
3.1     H OME A SSISTANT B ENCHMARK (HAB)

The Home Assistant Benchmark (HAB) (Szot et al., 2021) includes 3 long-horizon mobile ma-
nipulation rearrangement tasks (TidyHouse, PrepareGroceries, SetTable) based on the ReplicaCAD
dataset, which contains a rich set of 105 indoor scene layouts. For each episode (instance of task),
rigid objects from the YCB (Calli et al., 2015) dataset are randomly placed on annotated supporting
surfaces of receptacles, to generate clutter in a randomly selected scene. Here we provide a brief
description of these tasks.
TidyHouse: Move 5 objects from starting positions to goal positions. Objects and goals are located
in open receptacles (e.g., table, kitchen counter) rather than containers. Complex scene layouts,
diverse receptacles, dense clutter all pose challenges. The task implicitly favors collision-free be-
havior since a latter target object might be knocked out of reach when a former object is moved by
the robot.
PrepareGroceries: Move 2 objects from the fridge to the counters and move an object from the
counter to the fridge. The fridge is fully open initially. The task requires picking and placing an
object in a cluttered receptacle with restricted space.
SetTable: Move a bowl from a drawer to a table, and move a fruit from the fridge to the bowl on the
table. Both the drawer and fridge are closed initially. The task requires interaction with articulated
objects as well as picking objects from containers.
All the tasks demand onboard sensing instead of privileged information (e.g., ground-truth object
positions and navigation map). All the tasks use the GeometricGoal (Batra et al., 2020) specification
(s0 , s∗ ), which describes the initial 3D (center-of-mass) position s0 of the target object and the goal
position s∗ . For example, TidyHouse is specified by 5 tuples {(si0 , si∗ )}i=1...5 .

3.2     S UBTASK AND S KILL
In this section, we present the definition of subtask and skill in the context of reinforcement learning.
A long-horizon task can be formulated as a Markov decision process (MDP) 1 defined by a tuple
(S, A, R, P, I) of state space S, action space A, reward function R(s, a, s′ ), transition distribution
P (s′ |s, a), initial state distribution I. A subtask ω is a smaller MDP (S, Aω , Rω , P, Iω ) derived
from the original MDP of the full task. A skill (or policy), which maps a state s ∈ S to an action
a ∈ A, is learned for each subtask by RL algorithms.
Szot et al. (2021) introduces several parameterized skills for the HAB: Pick, Place, Open fridge,
Close fridge, Open drawer, Close drawer, Navigate. Each skill takes a 3D position as input, either
s0 or s∗ . See Appendix C for more details. Here, we provide a brief description of these skills.
Pick(s0 ): pick the object initialized at s0
Place(s∗ ): place the held object at s∗
Open [container](s): open the container containing the object initialized at s or the goal position s
Close [container](s): close the container containing the object initialized at s or the goal position s
Navigate(s): navigate to the start of other skills specified by s
Note that s0 is constant per episode instead of a tracked object position. Hence, the target object
may not be located at s0 at the beginning of a skill, e.g., picking an object from an opened drawer.
Next, we will illustrate how these skills are chained in the HAB.

3.3     S KILL C HAINING
Given a task decomposition, a hierarchical approach also needs to generate high-level actions to
select a subtask and perform the corresponding skill. Task planning (Fikes & Nilsson, 1971) can be
applied to find a sequence of subtasks before execution, with perfect knowledge of the environment.
An alternative is to learn high-level actions through hierarchical RL. In this work, we use the subtask
sequences generated by a perfect task planner (Szot et al., 2021). Here we list these sequences, to
highlight the difficulty of tasks 2 .
    1
    To be precise, the tasks studied in this work are partially observable Markov decision process (POMDP).
    2
    We only list the subtask sequence of TidyHouse for one object here for illustration. The containers are
denoted with subscripts f r (fridge) and dr (drawer) if included in the skill.


                                                    4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


TidyHouse(si0 , si∗ ): Navigate(si0 ) → Pick(si0 ) → Navigate(si∗ ) → Place(si∗ )
PrepareGroceries(s10 , s1∗ , s20 , s2∗ , s30 , s3∗ ): Navigatefr (s10 ) → Pickfr (s10 ) → Navigate(s1∗ ) →
Place(s1∗ ) → Navigatefr (s20 ) → Pickfr (s20 ) → Navigate(s2∗ ) → Place(s2∗ ) → Navigate(s30 ) →
Pick(s30 ) → Navigatefr (s3∗ ) → Placefr (s3∗ )
SetTable(s10 , s1∗ , s20 , s2∗ ): Navigatedr (s10 ) → Opendr (s10 ) → Pickdr (s10 ) → Navigate(s1∗ ) →
Place(s1∗ ) → Navigatedr (s10 ) → Closedr (s10 ) → Navigatefr (s20 ) → Openfr (s20 ) → Navigatefr (s20 ) →
Pickfr (s20 ) → Navigate(s2∗ ) → Place(s2∗ ) → Navigatefr (s20 ) → Closefr (s20 )

4     S UBTASK F ORMULATION AND S KILL L EARNING FOR M OBILE
      M ANIPULATION

Following the proposed principles (composability, achievability, reusability), we revisit and refor-
mulate subtasks defined in the Home Assistant Benchmark (HAB). The core idea is to enlarge the
initial states of manipulation skills to encompass the terminal states of the navigation skill, given our
observation that the navigation skill is usually more robust to initial states. However, manipulation
skills (Pick, Place, Open drawer, Close drawer) in Szot et al. (2021), are stationary. The compos-
ability of a stationary manipulation skill is restricted, since its feasible initial states are limited due
to kinematic constraints. For instance, the robot can not open the drawer if it is too close or too
far from the drawer. Therefore, these initial states need to be carefully designed given the trade-off
between composability and achievability, which is not scalable and flexible. On the other hand, the
navigation skill, which is learned to navigate to the start of manipulation skills, is also restricted by
stationary constraints, since it is required to precisely terminate at a small set of “good” locations
for manipulation. To this end, we propose to replace stationary manipulation skills with mobile
counterparts. Thanks to mobility, mobile manipulation skills can have better composability without
sacrificing much achievability. For example, a mobile manipulator can learn to first get closer to
the target and then manipulate, to compensate for errors from navigation. It indicates that the initial
states can be designed in a more flexible way, which also enables us to design a better navigation
reward to facilitate learning.
In the context of mobile manipulation, the initial state of a skill consists of the robot base position,
base orientation, and joint positions. For simplicity, we do not discuss the initial states of rigid
and articulated objects in the scene, which are usually defined in episode generation. Moreover, we
follow previous works (Szot et al., 2021; Lee et al., 2021) to initialize the arm at its resting position
and reset it after each skill in skill chaining. Such a reset operation is common in robotics (Garrett
et al., 2020). Each skill is learned to reset the arm after accomplishing the subtask as in Szot et al.
(2021). Furthermore, for base orientation, we follow the heuristic in Szot et al. (2021) to make the
robot face the target position s0 or s∗ .

4.1   M ANIPULATION S KILLS WITH M OBILITY
We first present how initial base positions are generated in previous works. For stationary manip-
ulation, a feasible base position needs to satisfy several constraints, e.g., kinematic (the target is
reachable) and collision-free constraints. Szot et al. (2021) uses heuristics to determine base posi-
tions. For Pick, Place without containers (fridge and drawer), a navigable position closest to the
target position is selected. For Pick, Place with containers, a fixed position relative to the container
is selected. For Open, Close, a navigable position is randomly selected from a handcrafted region
relative to each container. Noise is added to base position and orientation in addition, and infeasible
initial states are rejected by constraints. See Fig 2 for examples.
The above example indicates the difficulty and complexity to design feasible initial states for sta-
tionary manipulation. One naive solution is to enlarge the initial set with infeasible states, but this
can hurt learning as shown later in Sec 5.4. Besides, rejection sampling can be quite inefficient in
this case, and Szot et al. (2021) actually computes a fixed number of feasible initial states offline.
Manipulation Skills with Mobility. To this end, we propose to use mobile manipulation skills
instead. The original action space (only arm actions) is augmented with base actions. We devise
a unified and efficient pipeline to generate initial base positions. Concretely, we first discretize the
floor map with a resolution of 5 × 5cm2 , and get all navigable (grid) positions. Then, different
candidates are computed from these positions based on subtasks. Candidates are either within a
radius (e.g., 2m) around the target position for Pick, Place, or a region relative to the container for


                                                    5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


      (a) Pick(stationary)         (b) Pick(mobile)             (c) Close drawer              (d) Close fridge

Figure 2: Initial base positions of manipulation skills. We only show the examples for Pick, Close
drawer, Close fridge, as Place, Open drawer, Open fridge share the same initial base positions
respectively. Positions are visualized as green points on the floor. The target object in Pick is
highlighted by a circle in cyan. Note that the initial base position of Pick(stationary) is a single
navigable position closest to the object.

Open, Close. Finally, a feasible position is sampled from the candidates with rejection and noise.
Compared to stationary manipulation, the rejection rate of our pipeline is much lower, and thus can
be efficiently employed on-the-fly during training. See Fig 2 for examples.

4.2     NAVIGATION S KILL WITH R EGION -G OAL NAVIGATION R EWARD
The navigation skill is learned to connect different manipulation skills. Hence, it needs to terminate
within the set of initial achievable states of manipulation skills. We follow Szot et al. (2021) to
randomly sample a navigable base position and orientation as the initial state of navigation skill. The
challenge is how to formulate the reward function, which implicitly defines desirable terminal states.
A common navigation reward (Wijmans et al., 2019) is the negative change of geodesic distance to
a single 2D goal position on the floor. Szot et al. (2021) extends it for mobile manipulation, which
introduces the negative change of angular distance to the desired orientation (facing the target). The
resulting reward function, rt (s, a), for state s and action a is the following (Eq 1):
         rt (s, a) = −∆geo (g) − λang ∆ang I[dgeo (g)≤D̃] + λsucc I[dgeo
                                                                     t   (g)≤D∧dang
                                                                                t   ≤Θ] − rslack                 (1)
                                                    t


∆geo (g) = dgeot (xt
                     base
                          , g) − dgeo       base
                                    t−1 (xt−1 , g), where dt (xt
                                                                 geo base
                                                                            , g) is the geodesic distance between
the current base position xt     base
                                       and the 2D goal position g. dgeo                              geo base
                                                                                t (g) is short for dt (xt      , g).
∆ang = dangt    − d ang
                    t−1 =    ∥θt −  θ ∗
                                        ∥ 1 − ∥θ t−1 − θ ∗
                                                           ∥ 1 , where θ t is  the current base orientation, and θ∗
is the target orientation. Note that the 2D goal on the floor is different from the 3D goal specification
for manipulation subtasks. I[dgeo ≤D̃] is an indicator of whether the agent is close enough to the
                                    t

2D goal, where D̃ is a threshold. I[dgeo
                                     t   ≤D∧dang
                                             t   ≤Θ] is an indicator of navigation success, where D
and Θ are thresholds for geodesic and angular distances. rslack is a slack penalty. λang , λsucc are
hyper-parameters.
This reward has several drawbacks: 1) A single 2D goal needs to be assigned, which should be
an initial base position of manipulation skills. It is usually sampled with rejection, as explained in
Sec 4.1. It ignores the existence of multiple reasonable goals, introduces ambiguity to the reward
(hindering training), and leads the skill to memorize (hurting generalization). 2) There is a hyper-
parameter D̃, which defines the region where the angular term ∆ang is considered. However, it can
lead the agent to learn the undesirable behavior of entering the region with a large angular distance,
e.g., backing onto the target.
Region-Goal Navigation Reward. To this end, we propose a region-goal navigation reward for
training the navigation skill. Inspired by object-goal navigation, we use the geodesic distance 3
between the robot and a region of 2D goals on the floor instead of a single goal. Thanks to the
flexibility of our mobile manipulation skills, we can simply reuse the candidates (Sec 4.1) for their
initial base positions as the navigation goals. However, these candidates are not all collision-free.
Thus, we add a collision penalty rcol = λcol Ct to the reward, where Ct is the current collision force
and λcol is a weight. Besides, we simply remove the angular term, and find that the success reward
is sufficient to encourage correct orientation. Our region-goal navigation reward is as follows:
                  rt (s, a) = −∆geo ({g}) + λsucc I[dgeo
                                                     t   ({g})≤D∧dang
                                                                  t   ≤Θ] − rcol − rslack                        (2)
    3
      The geodesic distance to a region can be approximated by the minimum of all the geodesic distances to
grid positions within the region.


                                                         6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


5     E XPERIMENTS
5.1   E XPERIMENTAL S ETUP
We use the ReplicaCAD dataset and the Habitat 2.0 simulator (Szot et al., 2021) for our experiments.
The ReplicaCAD dataset contains 5 macro variations, with 21 micro variations per macro variation 4 .
We hold out 1 macro variation to evaluate the generalization of unseen layouts. For the rest of the
4 macro variations, we split 84 scenes into 64 scenes for training and 20 scenes to evaluate the
generalization of unseen configurations (object and goal positions). For each task, we generate
6400 episodes (64 scenes) for training, 100 episodes (20 scenes) to evaluate cross-configuration
generalization, and another 100 episodes (the hold-out macro variation) to evaluate cross-layout
generalization. The robot is a Fetch (Robotics, 2022) mobile manipulator with a 7-DoF arm and a
parallel-jaw gripper. See Appendix B for more details about the setup and dataset generation.
Observation space: The observation space includes head and arm depth images (128 × 128), arm
joint positions (7-dim), end-effector position (3-dim) in the base frame, goal positions (3-dim) in
both base and end-effector frames, as well as a scalar to indicate whether an object is held. The goal
position, depending on subtasks, can be either the initial or desired position of the target object. We
assume a perfect GPS+Compass sensor and proprioceptive sensors as in Szot et al. (2021), which
are used to compute the relative goal positions. For the navigation skill, only the head depth image
and the goal position in the base frame are used.
Action space: The action space is a 10-dim continuous space, including 2-dim base action (linear
forwarding and angular velocities), 7-dim arm action, and 1-dim gripper action. Grasping is abstract
as in Batra et al. (2020); Szot et al. (2021); Ehsani et al. (2021). If the gripper action is positive, the
object closest to the end-effector within 15cm will be snapped to the gripper; if negative, the gripper
will release any object held. For the navigation skill, we use a discrete action space, including a
stop action, as in Yokoyama et al. (2021); Szot et al. (2021). A discrete action will be converted to
continuous velocities to move the robot, while arm and gripper actions are masked out.
Hyper-parameters: We train each skill by the PPO (Schulman et al., 2017) algorithm. The visual
observations are encoded by a 3-layer CNN as in Szot et al. (2021). The visual features are concate-
nated with state observations and previous action, followed by a 1-layer GRU and linear layers to
output action and value. Each skill is trained with 3 different seeds. See Appendix C.1 for details.
Metrics: Each HAB task consists of a sequence of subtasks to accomplish, as illustrated in Sec 3.3.
The completion of a subtask is conditioned on the completion of its preceding subtask. We report
progressive completion rates of subtasks, and the completion rate of the last subtask is thus the
success rate of the full task. For each evaluation episode, the robot is initialized at a random base
position and orientation without collision, and its arm is initialized at the resting position. The
completion rate is averaged over 9 different runs 5 .

5.2   BASELINES
We denote our method by M3, short for a multi-skill mobile manipulation pipeline where mobile
manipulation skills (M) are chained by the navigation skill trained with our region-goal navigation
reward (R). We compare our method with several RL baselines. All baselines follow the same
experimental setup in Sec 5.1 unless specified. We refer readers to Szot et al. (2021) for a sense-
plan-act baseline, which is shown to be inferior to the skill chaining pipeline emphasized in this
work. Stationary manipulation skills and point-goal navigation reward are denoted by S and P.
Monolithic RL (mono): This baseline is an end-to-end RL policy trained with a combination of
reward functions of individual skills. See Appendix D for more details.
Stationary manipulation skills + point-goal navigation reward (S+P): This baseline is TaskPlan-
ning+SkillsRL (TP+SRL) introduced in Szot et al. (2021), where stationary manipulation skills are
chained by the navigation skill trained with the point-goal navigation reward. Compared to the orig-
inal implementation, we make several improvements, including better reward functions and training
schemes. For reference, the original success rates of all HAB tasks are nearly zero. See Appendix A
for more details.
   4
     Each macro variation has a different, semantically plausible layout of large furniture (e.g., kitchen counter
and fridge) while each micro variation is generated through perturbing small furniture (e.g., chairs and tables).
   5
     3 seeds for RL training multiplied by 3 seeds for initial states


                                                        7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                                                  TidyHouse                                                                               PrepareGroceries                                                                       SetTable
                                     1.0                                                                                               1.0                                                                               1.0
Cross-configuration                  0.9                                                                                               0.9                                                                               0.9
                                     0.8                                                                                               0.8                                                                               0.8
                                     0.7                                                                                               0.7                                                                               0.7
                                     0.6                                                                                               0.6                                                                               0.6
                      Success rate


                                                                                                                        Success rate


                                                                                                                                                                                                          Success rate
                                     0.5                                                                                               0.5                                                                               0.5
                                     0.4                                                                                               0.4                                                                               0.4
                                     0.3                                                                                               0.3                                                                               0.3
                                                  mono                                                                                                mono                                                                           mono
                                     0.2          S+P                                                                                  0.2            S+P                                                                0.2         S+P
                                     0.1          M+P                                                                                  0.1            M+P                                                                0.1         M+P
                                                  M3(ours)                                                                                            M3(ours)                                                                       M3(ours)
                                     0.0                                                                                               0.0                                                                               0.0
                                           pick_0 place_0 pick_1 place_1 pick_2 place_2 pick_3 place_3 pick_4 place_4                        pick_0       place_0   pick_1   place_1   pick_2   place_2                        open_0 pick_0 place_0 close_0 open_1 pick_1 place_1 close_1


                                     1.0                                                                                               1.0                                                                               1.0
                                     0.9                                                                                               0.9                                                                               0.9
                                     0.8                                                                                               0.8                                                                               0.8
Cross-layout


                                     0.7                                                                                               0.7                                                                               0.7
                                     0.6                                                                                               0.6                                                                               0.6
                      Success rate


                                                                                                                        Success rate


                                                                                                                                                                                                          Success rate
                                     0.5                                                                                               0.5                                                                               0.5
                                     0.4                                                                                               0.4                                                                               0.4
                                     0.3                                                                                               0.3                                                                               0.3
                                                  mono                                                                                                mono                                                                           mono
                                     0.2          S+P                                                                                  0.2            S+P                                                                0.2         S+P
                                     0.1          M+P                                                                                  0.1            M+P                                                                0.1         M+P
                                                  M3(ours)                                                                                            M3(ours)                                                                       M3(ours)
                                     0.0                                                                                               0.0                                                                               0.0
                                           pick_0 place_0 pick_1 place_1 pick_2 place_2 pick_3 place_3 pick_4 place_4                        pick_0       place_0   pick_1   place_1   pick_2   place_2                        open_0 pick_0 place_0 close_0 open_1 pick_1 place_1 close_1



Figure 3: Progressive completion rates for HAB Szot et al. (2021) tasks. The x-axis represents
progressive subtasks. The y-axis represents the completion rate of each subtask. The mean and
standard error for 100 episodes over 9 seeds are reported. Best viewed zoomed.
Mobile manipulation skills + point-goal navigation reward (M+P): Compared to our M3, this
baseline does not use the region-goal navigation reward. It demonstrates the effectiveness of pro-
posed mobile manipulation skills. Note that the point-goal navigation reward is designed for the
start of stationary manipulation skills.

5.3                                        R ESULTS
Fig 3 shows the progressive completion rates of different methods on all tasks. Our method M3
achieves an average success rate of 71.2% in the cross-configuration setting, and 55.0% in the cross-
layout setting, over all 3 tasks. It outperforms all the baselines in both settings, namely mono
(1.8%/1.8%), S+P (57.4%/31.1%) and M+P (64.9%/36.2%). First, all the modular approaches show
much better performance than the monolithic baseline, which verifies the effectiveness of modular
approaches for long-horizon mobile manipulation tasks. Mobile manipulation skills are in general
superior to stationary ones (M+P vs.S+P). Fig 4 provides an example where mobile manipulation
skills can compensate for imperfect navigation. Furthermore, our region-goal navigation reward can
reduce the ambiguity of navigation goals to facilitate training (see training curves in Appendix C).
Since it does not require the policy to memorize ambiguous goals, the induced skill shows better
generalizability, especially in the cross-layout setting (55.0% for M3 vs.36.2% for M+P).

5.4                                        A BLATION S TUDIES
We conduct several ablation studies to show that mobile manipulation skills are more flexible to
formulate than stationary ones, and to understand the advantage of our navigation reward.
Can initial states be trivially enlarged? We conduct experiments to understand to what extent
we can enlarge the initial states of manipulation skills given the trade-off between achievability
and composability. In the S(L)+P experiment, we simply replace the initial states of stationary
manipulation skills with those of mobile ones. The success rates of stationary manipulation skills
on subtasks drop by a large margin, e.g., from 95% to 45% for Pick on TidyHouse. Fig 5 shows that
S(L)+P (37.7%/18.1%) is inferior to both S+P (57.4%/31.1%) and M+P (64.9%/36.2%). It indicates
that stationary manipulation skills have a much smaller set of feasible initial states compared to
mobile ones, and including infeasible initial states during training can hurt performance significantly.
We also study the impact of initial state distribution on mobile manipulation skills in Appendix F.
Is the collision penalty important for the navigation skill? Our region-goal navigation reward
benefits from unambiguous region goals and the collision penalty. We add the collision penalty to the
point-goal navigation reward (Eq 1) in S+P(C) and M+P(C) experiments. Fig 5 shows that the colli-
sion penalty significantly improves the success rate: S+P(C) (65.2%/44.6%) vs.S+P (57.4%/31.1%)


                                                                                                                                                                    8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                                                                                                        (a) Stationary Manipulation (S+P)


                                                                                                                         (b) Mobile Manipulation (M+P)

Figure 4: Qualitative comparison between stationary and mobile manipulation. In this example, the
point-goal navigation skill terminates between two drawers (1st image). Mobile manipulation man-
ages to open the correct drawer containing the bowl (last image in the bottom row) while stationary
manipulation gets confused and finally opens the wrong drawer (last image in the top row). More
qualitative results can be found in Appendix H and on our project website.
                                                                  TidyHouse                                                                               PrepareGroceries                                                                       SetTable
                                     1.0                                                                                               1.0                                                                               1.0
                                     0.9                                                                                               0.9                                                                               0.9
Cross-configuration


                                     0.8                                                                                               0.8                                                                               0.8
                                     0.7                                                                                               0.7                                                                               0.7
                                     0.6                                                                                               0.6                                                                               0.6
                      Success rate


                                                                                                                        Success rate


                                     0.5                                                                                               0.5                                                                Success rate   0.5
                                     0.4                                                                                               0.4                                                                               0.4
                                                  S+P                                                                                                 S+P                                                                            S+P
                                     0.3          M+P                                                                                  0.3            M+P                                                                0.3         M+P
                                                  M3(ours)                                                                                            M3(ours)                                                                       M3(ours)
                                     0.2          S(L)+P                                                                               0.2            S(L)+P                                                             0.2         S(L)+P
                                     0.1          S+P(C)                                                                               0.1            S+P(C)                                                             0.1         S+P(C)
                                                  M+P(C)                                                                                              M+P(C)                                                                         M+P(C)
                                     0.0                                                                                               0.0                                                                               0.0
                                           pick_0 place_0 pick_1 place_1 pick_2 place_2 pick_3 place_3 pick_4 place_4                        pick_0       place_0   pick_1   place_1   pick_2   place_2                        open_0 pick_0 place_0 close_0 open_1 pick_1 place_1 close_1


                                     1.0                                                                                               1.0                                                                               1.0
                                     0.9                                                                                               0.9                                                                               0.9
                                     0.8                                                                                               0.8                                                                               0.8
Cross-layout


                                     0.7                                                                                               0.7                                                                               0.7
                                     0.6                                                                                               0.6                                                                               0.6
                      Success rate


                                                                                                                        Success rate


                                                                                                                                                                                                          Success rate


                                     0.5                                                                                               0.5                                                                               0.5
                                     0.4                                                                                               0.4                                                                               0.4
                                                  S+P                                                                                                 S+P                                                                            S+P
                                     0.3          M+P                                                                                  0.3            M+P                                                                0.3         M+P
                                                  M3(ours)                                                                                            M3(ours)                                                                       M3(ours)
                                     0.2          S(L)+P                                                                               0.2            S(L)+P                                                             0.2         S(L)+P
                                     0.1          S+P(C)                                                                               0.1            S+P(C)                                                             0.1         S+P(C)
                                                  M+P(C)                                                                                              M+P(C)                                                                         M+P(C)
                                     0.0                                                                                               0.0                                                                               0.0
                                           pick_0 place_0 pick_1 place_1 pick_2 place_2 pick_3 place_3 pick_4 place_4                        pick_0       place_0   pick_1   place_1   pick_2   place_2                        open_0 pick_0 place_0 close_0 open_1 pick_1 place_1 close_1



Figure 5: Progressive completion rates for HAB tasks. The x-axis represents progressive subtasks.
The y-axis represents the completion rate of each subtask. Results of ablation experiments are
presented with solid lines. The mean and standard error for 100 episodes over 9 seeds are reported.

and M+P(C) (67.9%/49.2%) vs.M+P (64.9%/36.2%). A collision-aware navigation skill can avoid
disturbing the environment, e.g., accidentally closing the fridge before placing an object in it. Be-
sides, M+P(C) is still inferior to our M3 (71.2%/55.0%). It implies that reducing the ambiguity of
navigation goals helps learn more robust and generalizable navigation skills.

6                                    C ONCLUSION AND L IMITATIONS
In this work, we present a modular approach to tackle long-horizon mobile manipulation tasks in
the Home Assistant Benchmark (HAB), featuring mobile manipulation skills and the region-goal
navigation reward. Given the superior performance, our approach can serve as a strong baseline for
future study. Besides, the proposed principles (achievability, composability, reusability) can serve
as a guideline about how to formulate meaningful and reusable subtasks. However, our work is still
limited to abstract grasp and other potential simulation defects. We leave fully dynamic simulation
and real-world deployment to future work.


                                                                                                                                                                    9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


R EFERENCES
Peter Anderson, Angel Chang, Devendra Singh Chaplot, Alexey Dosovitskiy, Saurabh Gupta,
  Vladlen Koltun, Jana Kosecka, Jitendra Malik, Roozbeh Mottaghi, Manolis Savva, et al. On
  evaluation of embodied navigation agents. arXiv preprint arXiv:1807.06757, 2018.
Dhruv Batra, Angel X Chang, Sonia Chernova, Andrew J Davison, Jia Deng, Vladlen Koltun, Sergey
  Levine, Jitendra Malik, Igor Mordatch, Roozbeh Mottaghi, et al. Rearrangement: A challenge for
  embodied ai. arXiv preprint arXiv:2011.01975, 2020.
Berk Calli, Arjun Singh, Aaron Walsman, Siddhartha Srinivasa, Pieter Abbeel, and Aaron M Dollar.
  The ycb object and model set: Towards common benchmarks for manipulation research. In 2015
  international conference on advanced robotics (ICAR), pp. 510–517. IEEE, 2015.
Devendra Singh Chaplot, Dhiraj Gandhi, Saurabh Gupta, Abhinav Gupta, and Ruslan Salakhutdi-
  nov. Learning to explore using active neural slam. In International Conference on Learning
  Representations (ICLR), 2020.
Alexander Clegg, Wenhao Yu, Jie Tan, C Karen Liu, and Greg Turk. Learning to dress: Synthesizing
  human dressing motion via deep reinforcement learning. ACM Transactions on Graphics (TOG),
  37(6):1–10, 2018.
Kiana Ehsani, Winson Han, Alvaro Herrasti, Eli VanderBilt, Luca Weihs, Eric Kolve, Aniruddha
  Kembhavi, and Roozbeh Mottaghi. Manipulathor: A framework for visual object manipulation.
  2021 IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), pp. 4495–
  4504, 2021.
Richard E Fikes and Nils J Nilsson. Strips: A new approach to the application of theorem proving
  to problem solving. Artificial intelligence, 2(3-4):189–208, 1971.
Chuang Gan, Siyuan Zhou, Jeremy Schwartz, Seth Alter, Abhishek Bhandwaldar, Dan Gutfreund,
  Daniel LK Yamins, James J DiCarlo, Josh McDermott, Antonio Torralba, et al. The threedworld
  transport challenge: A visually guided task-and-motion planning benchmark for physically real-
  istic embodied ai. arXiv preprint arXiv:2103.14025, 2021.
Caelan Reed Garrett, Tomás Lozano-Pérez, and Leslie Pack Kaelbling. Pddlstream: Integrating
  symbolic planners and blackbox samplers via optimistic adaptive planning. In Proceedings of
  the International Conference on Automated Planning and Scheduling, volume 30, pp. 440–448,
  2020.
Caelan Reed Garrett, Rohan Chitnis, Rachel Holladay, Beomjoon Kim, Tom Silver, Leslie Pack
  Kaelbling, and Tomás Lozano-Pérez. Integrated task and motion planning. Annual review of
  control, robotics, and autonomous systems, 4:265–293, 2021.
Abhishek Kadian, Joanne Truong, Aaron Gokaslan, Alexander Clegg, Erik Wijmans, Stefan Lee,
  Manolis Savva, Sonia Chernova, and Dhruv Batra. Sim2real predictivity: Does evaluation in
  simulation predict real-world performance? IEEE Robotics and Automation Letters, 5(4):6670–
  6677, 2020.
Youngwoon Lee, Shao-Hua Sun, Sriram Somasundaram, Edward S Hu, and Joseph J Lim. Com-
  posing complex skills by learning transition policies. In International Conference on Learning
  Representations, 2018.
Youngwoon Lee, Jingyun Yang, and Joseph J Lim. Learning to coordinate manipulation skills via
  skill behavior diversification. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2019.
Youngwoon Lee, Joseph J. Lim, Anima Anandkumar, and Yuke Zhu. Adversarial skill chaining
  for long-horizon robot manipulation via terminal state regularization. In Conference on Robot
  Learning, 2021.
Tongzhou Mu, Zhan Ling, Fanbo Xiang, Derek Cathera Yang, Xuanlin Li, Stone Tao, Zhiao Huang,
  Zhiwei Jia, and Hao Su. Maniskill: Generalizable manipulation skill benchmark with large-scale
  demonstrations. In Thirty-fifth Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems Datasets
  and Benchmarks Track (Round 2), 2021.


                                               10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Tianwei Ni, Kiana Ehsani, Luca Weihs, and Jordi Salvador. Towards disturbance-free visual mobile
  manipulation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2112.12612, 2021.
IEEE  RAS.       Mobile    manipulation.         https://www.ieee-ras.org/
  mobile-manipulation, 2022. Accessed: 2022-05-18.
Fetch Robotics. Autonomous mobile robots that improve productivity.                     http://
  fetchrobotics.com/, 2022. Accessed: 2022-05-18.
Thushara Sandakalum and Marcelo H Ang Jr. Motion planning for mobile manipulators—a system-
  atic review. Machines, 10(2):97, 2022.
John Schulman, Filip Wolski, Prafulla Dhariwal, Alec Radford, and Oleg Klimov. Proximal policy
  optimization algorithms. arXiv preprint arXiv:1707.06347, 2017.
Martin Sereinig, Wolfgang Werth, and Lisa-Marie Faller. A review of the challenges in mobile ma-
 nipulation: systems design and robocup challenges. e & i Elektrotechnik und Informationstechnik,
 137(6):297–308, 2020.
Siddharth Srivastava, Eugene Fang, Lorenzo Riano, Rohan Chitnis, Stuart Russell, and Pieter
  Abbeel. Combined task and motion planning through an extensible planner-independent interface
  layer. In 2014 IEEE international conference on robotics and automation (ICRA), pp. 639–646.
  IEEE, 2014.
Charles Sun, Jedrzej Orbik, Coline Manon Devin, Brian H Yang, Abhishek Gupta, Glen Berseth,
  and Sergey Levine. Fully autonomous real-world reinforcement learning with applications to
  mobile manipulation. In Conference on Robot Learning, pp. 308–319. PMLR, 2022.
Andrew Szot, Alex Clegg, Eric Undersander, Erik Wijmans, Yili Zhao, John Turner, Noah Maestre,
  Mustafa Mukadam, Devendra Chaplot, Oleksandr Maksymets, Aaron Gokaslan, Vladimir Von-
  drus, Sameer Dharur, Franziska Meier, Wojciech Galuba, Angel Chang, Zsolt Kira, Vladlen
  Koltun, Jitendra Malik, Manolis Savva, and Dhruv Batra. Habitat 2.0: Training home assistants to
  rearrange their habitat. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS), 2021.
Yusuke Urakami, Alec Hodgkinson, Casey Carlin, Randall Leu, Luca Rigazio, and Pieter
  Abbeel. Doorgym: A scalable door opening environment and baseline agent. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:1908.01887, 2019.
Cong Wang, Qifeng Zhang, Qiyan Tian, Shuo Li, Xiaohui Wang, David Lane, Yvan Petillot, and
  Sen Wang. Learning mobile manipulation through deep reinforcement learning. Sensors, 20(3):
  939, 2020.
Luca Weihs, Matt Deitke, Aniruddha Kembhavi, and Roozbeh Mottaghi. Visual room rearrange-
  ment. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern recognition,
  pp. 5922–5931, 2021.
Erik Wijmans, Abhishek Kadian, Ari Morcos, Stefan Lee, Irfan Essa, Devi Parikh, Manolis Savva,
  and Dhruv Batra. Dd-ppo: Learning near-perfect pointgoal navigators from 2.5 billion frames. In
  International Conference on Learning Representations, 2019.
Fei Xia, William B Shen, Chengshu Li, Priya Kasimbeg, Micael Edmond Tchapmi, Alexander
  Toshev, Roberto Martı́n-Martı́n, and Silvio Savarese. Interactive gibson benchmark: A benchmark
  for interactive navigation in cluttered environments. IEEE Robotics and Automation Letters, 5(2):
  713–720, 2020.
Fei Xia, Chengshu Li, Roberto Martı́n-Martı́n, Or Litany, Alexander Toshev, and Silvio Savarese.
  Relmogen: Integrating motion generation in reinforcement learning for mobile manipulation. In
  2021 IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA), pp. 4583–4590. IEEE,
  2021.
Naoki Yokoyama, Sehoon Ha, and Dhruv Batra. Success weighted by completion time: A dynamics-
  aware evaluation criteria for embodied navigation. In 2021 IEEE/RSJ International Conference
  on Intelligent Robots and Systems (IROS), pp. 1562–1569. IEEE, 2021.


                                                11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Tianhe Yu, Deirdre Quillen, Zhanpeng He, Ryan Julian, Karol Hausman, Chelsea Finn, and Sergey
  Levine. Meta-world: A benchmark and evaluation for multi-task and meta reinforcement learning.
  In Conference on Robot Learning, pp. 1094–1100. PMLR, 2020.
Yuke Zhu, Josiah Wong, Ajay Mandlekar, and Roberto Martı́n-Martı́n. robosuite: A modular simu-
  lation framework and benchmark for robot learning. In arXiv preprint arXiv:2009.12293, 2020.


                                               12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


A       OVERVIEW
Compared to the original implementation (Szot et al., 2021), our implementation benefits from re-
paired assets (Sec B), improved reward functions and better training schemes (Sec C). Other differ-
ences include observation and action spaces. We introduce in observations the target positions in
the base frame in addition to those in the end-effector frame. The arm action is defined in the joint
configuration space (7-dim) rather than the end-effector Euclidean space (3-dim with no orientation).

B       DATASET AND E PISODES
Szot et al. (2021) keeps updating the ReplicaCAD dataset. The major fix is “minor furniture layout
modifications in order to better accommodate robot access to the full set of receptacles” 6 . The agent
radius is also decreased from 0.4m to 0.3m to generate navigation meshes with higher connectivity.
Besides, Szot et al. (2021) also improves the episode generator 7 to ensure stable initialization of
objects. Those improvements eliminate most unachievable episodes in the initial version. The
episodes used in our experiments are generated with the ReplicaCAD v1.4 and the latest habitat-
lab 8 .
Cross-configuration and cross-layout settings are the same except for scene layouts. In the cross-
configuration setting, test scene layouts (micro variations) are different but similar to training ones.
In the cross-layout setting, test scene layouts (macro variations) are significantly different from
training ones. Each macro variation has a different, semantically plausible layout of large furniture
(e.g., kitchen counter and fridge) while each micro variation is generated through perturbing small
furniture (e.g., chairs and tables). Thus, the cross-layout setting demands stronger generalization on
scene layouts.
For TidyHouse, each episode includes 20 clutter objects and 5 target objects along with their goal
positions, located at 7 different receptacles (chair, 2 tables, tv stand, two kitchen counters, sofa). For
PrepareGroceries, each episode includes 21 clutter objects located at 8 different receptacles (the
7 receptacles used in TidyHouse and the top shelf of the fridge) and 1 clutter object located at the
middle shelf of the fridge. 2 target objects are located at the middle shelf, and each of their goal
positions is located at one of two kitchen counters. The third target object is located at one of two
kitchen counters, and its goal position is at the middle shelf. SetTable generates episodes similar to
PrepareGroceries, except that two target objects, bowl and apple, are initialized at one of 3 drawers
and at the middle fridge shelf respectively. Each of their goal positions is located at one of two
tables.

C       S KILL L EARNING
Each skill is trained to accomplish a subtask and reset its end-effector at the resting position. The
robot arm is first initialized with predefined resting joint positions, such that the corresponding
resting position of the end-effector is (0.5, 1.0, 0.0) in the base frame 9 . The initial end-effector
position is then perturbed by a Gaussian noise N (0, 0.025) clipped at 0.05m. The base position is
perturbed by a Gaussian noise N (0, 0.1) truncated at 0.2m. The base orientation is perturbed by a
Gaussian noise N (0, 0.25) truncated at 0.5 radian. The maximum episode length is 200 steps for all
the manipulation skills, and 500 steps for the navigation skill. The episode terminates on success or
failure. We use the same reward function for both stationary and mobile manipulation skills, unless
specified.
For all skills, doee is the distance between the end-effector and the object, dree is the distance between
the end-effector and the resting position, dhee is the distance between the end-effector and a prede-
fined manipulation handle (a 3D position) of the articulated object, dga is the distance between the
joint position of the articulated object and the goal joint position. ∆ba = dba (t − 1) − dba (t) stands
for the (negative) change in distance between a and b. For example, ∆oee is the change in distance
    6
      https://github.com/facebookresearch/habitat-sim/pull/1694
    7
      https://github.com/facebookresearch/habitat-lab/pull/764
    8
      https://github.com/facebookresearch/habitat-lab/pull/837
    9
      The positive x and y axes point forward and upward in Habitat.


                                                   13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


between the end-effector and the object. Iholding indicates if the robot is holding an (correct) object
or handle. Isucc indicates the task success. Ct refers to the current collision force, and C1:t stands
for the accumulated collision force.
The 7-dim arm action stands for the delta joint positions added to the current target joint positions
of the PD controller. The input arm action is assumed to be normalized to [−1, 1], and will be
scaled by 0.025 (radian). The 2-dim base action stands for linear and angular velocities. The base
movement in the Habitat 2.0 is implemented by kinematically setting the robot’s base transforma-
tion. The collision between the robot base and navigation meshes is taken into consideration. The
input base action is assumed to be normalized to [−1, 1], and will be scaled by 3 (navigation skill)
or 1.5 (manipulation skills). For the navigation skill, we follow Szot et al. (2021) to use a discrete
action space and translate the discrete action into the continuous one. Concretely, the (normalized)
linear velocity from -0.5 to 1 is discretized into 4 choices ({−0.5, 0, 0.5, 1}), and the (normalized)
angular velocity from -1 to 1 is discretized into 5 choices (({−1, −0.5, 0, 0.5, 1}). The stop action
corresponds to the discrete action representing zero velocities.

Pick(s0 )

• Objective: pick the object initialized at s0
• Initial base position (noise is applied in addition):
     – Stationary: the closest navigable position to s0
     – Mobile: a randomly selected navigable position within 2m of s0
• Reward: Ipick indicates whether the correct object is picked and Iwrong indicates whether a wrong
  object is picked.
                                 rt = 4∆oee I!holding + Ipick + 4∆ree Iholding + 2.5Isucc
             − max(0.001Ct , 0.2) − I[C1:t >5000] − Iwrong − I[doee >0.09] Iholding − 0.002
• Success: The robot is holding the target object and the end-effector is within 5cm of the resting
  position. Isucc = Iholding ∧ dree ≤ 0.05
• Failure:
    – I[C1:t >5000] = 1: The accumulated collision force is larger than 5000N .
    – Iwrong = 1: A wrong object is picked.
    – I[doee >0.09] Iholding = 1: The held object slides off the gripper.
• Observation space:
    – Depth images from head and arm cameras.
    – The current arm joint positions.
    – The current end-effector position in the base frame.
    – Whether the gripper is holding anything.
    – The starting position s0 in both the base and end-effector frame.
• Action space: The gripper is disabled to release.

Place(s∗ )

• Objective: place the held object at s∗
• Initial base position (noise is applied in addition):
     – Stationary: the closest navigable position to s∗
     – Mobile: a randomly selected navigable position within 2m of s∗
• Reward: Iplace indicates whether the object is released within 15cm of the goal position, and Idrop
  indicates whether the object is released beyond 15cm.
                               rt = 4∆so∗ Iholding + Iplace + 4∆ree I!holding + 2.5Isucc
              − min(0.001Ct , 0.2) − I[C1:t >7500] − Idrop − I[doee >0.09] Iholding − 0.002
• Success: The object is within 15cm of the goal position and the end-effector is within 5cm of the
  resting position. Isucc = dso∗ ≤ 0.15 ∧ I!holding ∧ dree ≤ 0.05


                                                  14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


• Failure:
    – I[C1:t >7500] = 1: The accumulated collision force is larger than 7500N .
    – Idrop = 1: The object is released beyond 15cm of the goal position.
    – I[doee >0.09] Iholding = 1: The held object slides off the gripper.
• Observation space:
    – Depth images from head and arm cameras.
    – The current arm joint positions.
    – The current end-effector position in the base frame.
    – Whether the gripper is holding anything.
    – The goal position s∗ in both the base and end-effector frame.
• Action space: The gripper is disabled to grasp after releasing the object.

Open drawer(s)

• Objective: open the drawer containing the object initialized at s. The goal joint position of the
  drawer is g = 0.45m.
• Initial base position (noise is applied in addition):
    – Stationary: a navigable position randomly selected within a [0.80, −0.35] × [0.95, 0.35] re-
      gion in front of the drawer.
    – Mobile: a navigable position randomly selected within a [0.3, −0.6] × [1.5, 0.6] region in
      front of the drawer.
• Reward: Iopen = dga ≤ 0.05 indicates whether the drawer is open. Irelease indicates whether the
  handle is released when the drawer is open. Igrasp indicates whether the correct handle is grasped.
  abase is the (2-dim) base action.
             rt = 2∆hee I!open + Igrasp + 2∆ga Iholding + Irelease + 2∆ree Iopen + 2.5Isucc
                                     −Iwrong − I[dhee >0.2] Iholding − Iout − 0.004∥abase ∥1

• Success: The drawer is open, and the end-effector is within 15cm of the resting position. Isucc =
  Iopen ∧ I!holding ∧ dree ≤ 0.15
• Failure:
    – Iwrong = 1: The wrong object or handle is picked.
    – I[dhee >0.2] Iholding = 1: The grasped handle slides off the gripper.
    – Iout = 1: The robot moves out of a predefined region (a 2m × 3m region in front of the
      drawer).
    – II[open(t−1)∧!open(t)] = 1: The drawer is not open after being opened.
    – The gripper releases the handle when the drawer is not open (I!open = 1).
    – ∆ga >= 0.1: The drawer is opened too fast.
• Observation space:
    – Depth images from head and arm cameras.
    – The current arm joint positions.
    – The current end-effector position in the base frame.
    – Whether the gripper is holding anything.
    – The starting position s in both the base and end-effector frame.

Close drawer(s)

• Objective: close the drawer containing the object initialized at s. The goal joint position is g =
  0m.
• Initial joint position: qa ∈ [0.4, 0.5], where qa is the joint position of the target drawer. A random
  subset of other drawers are slightly open (qa′ ≤ 0.1).
• Initial base position (noise is applied in addition):


                                                  15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


    – Stationary: a navigable position randomly selected within a [0.3, −0.35]×[0.45, 0.35] region
       in front of the drawer.
    – Mobile: a navigable position randomly selected within a [0.3, −0.6] × [1.0, 0.6] region in
       front of the drawer.
• Reward: It is almost the same as Open drawer by replacing open with close. Iclose = dga ≤ 0.1.
• Success: The drawer is closed, and the end-effector is within 15cm of the resting position.
• Failure: It is almost the same as Open drawer by replacing open with close, except that the last
  constraint ∆ga >= 0.1 is not included.

Open fridge(s)

• Objective: open the fridge containing the object initialized at s. The goal joint position is g = π2 .
• Initial base position (noise is applied in addition): a navigable position randomly selected within
  a [0.933, −1.5] × [1.833, 1.5] region in front of the fridge.
• Reward: Iopen = g − qa > 0.15, where qa is the joint position (radian) of the fridge. To avoid
  the robot from penetrating the fridge due to simulation defects, we add a collision penalty but
  excludes collision between the end-effector and the fridge.
            rt = 2∆hee I!open + Igrasp + +2∆ga Iholding + Irelease + ∆ree Iopen + 2.5Isucc
                      −IC1:t >5000 − Iwrong − I[dhee >0.2] Iholding − Iout − 0.004∥abase ∥1
• Success: The fridge is open, and the end-effector is within 15cm of the resting position. Isucc =
  Iopen ∧ I!holding ∧ dree ≤ 0.15
• Failure:
     – Iwrong = 1: The wrong object or handle is picked.
     – I[dhee >0.2] Iholding = 1: The grasped handle slides off the gripper.
     – Iout = 1: The robot moves out of a predefined region (a 2m × 3.2m region in front of the
       fridge).
     – II[open(t−1)∧!open(t)] = 1: The fridge is not open after being opened.
     – The gripper releases the handle when the fridge is not open (I!open = 1).
• Observation space:
     – Depth images from head and arm cameras.
     – The current arm joint positions.
     – The current end-effector position in the base frame.
     – Whether the gripper is holding anything.
     – The starting position s in both the base and end-effector frame.

Close fridge(s)

• Objective: close the fridge containing the object initialized at s. The goal joint position is g = 0.
• Initial joint position: qa ∈ [ π2 − 0.15, 2.356], where qa is the joint position of the target fridge.
• Initial base position (noise is applied in addition): a navigable position randomly selected within
  a [0.933, −1.5] × [1.833, 1.5] region in front of the fridge.
• Reward: It is almost the same as Close fridge by replacing open with close. Iclose = dga ≤ 0.15.
• Success: The fridge is close, and the end-effector is within 15cm of the resting position.

Navigate(s) (point-goal)

• Objective: navigate to the start of other skills specified by s
• Reward: refer to Eq 1. rslack = 0.002, D̃ = 0.9, λang = 0.25, λsucc = 2.5
• Success: The robot is within 0.3 meter of the goal, 0.5 radian of the target orientation, and has
  called the stop action at the current time step.
• Observation space:
    – Depth images from the head camera.
    – The goal position s∗ in the base frame.


                                                  16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


               1.0                                                                          1.0                                                                           1.0                                                                         1.0

               0.8                                                                          0.8                                                                           0.8                                                                         0.8

Success rate   0.6                                                                          0.6                                                                           0.6


                                                                             Success rate


                                                                                                                                                           Success rate
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      0.6


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Success rate
               0.4                                                                          0.4                                                                           0.4                                                                         0.4

               0.2                                                                          0.2                                                                           0.2
                                                          TidyHouse                                                                     TidyHouse                                                                                                     0.2
                                                          PrepareGroceries                                                              PrepareGroceries                                                            TidyHouse                                                                      TidyHouse
               0.0                                        SetTable(drawer)                  0.0                                         SetTable(drawer)                  0.0                                       PrepareGroceries                                                               PrepareGroceries
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      0.0
                     0    20        40          60        80          100                         0     20        40          60        80          100                         0   20        40          60        80          100                         0      20        40          60        80          100
                               Environment steps (x106)                                                      Environment steps (x106)                                                    Environment steps (x106)                                                       Environment steps (x106)


                     (a) Pick(stationary)                                                             (b) Pick(mobile)                                                          (c) Place(stationary)                                                           (d) Place(mobile)
               1.0                                                                          1.0                                                                           1.0                                                                         1.0

               0.8                                                                          0.8                                                                           0.8                                                                         0.8

               0.6                                                                          0.6                                                                           0.6                                                                         0.6


                                                                             Success rate


                                                                                                                                                           Success rate


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Success rate
Success rate


               0.4                                                                          0.4                                                                           0.4                                                                         0.4


               0.2                                                                          0.2                                                                           0.2                                                                         0.2

                                                                  SetTable                  0.0                                                 SetTable                  0.0                                               SetTable                  0.0                                                  SetTable
               0.0
                     0    20        40          60        80          100                         0     20        40          60        80          100                         0   20        40          60        80          100                         0      20        40          60        80          100
                               Environment steps (x106)                                                      Environment steps (x106)                                                    Environment steps (x106)                                                       Environment steps (x106)


(e) Open drawer(stationary) (f) Open drawer(mobile) (g)                                                                                                                                                                  Close (h) Close drawer(mobile)
                                                    drawer(stationary)

               1.0                                                                          1.0                                                                           1.0                                                                         1.0

               0.8                                                                          0.8                                                                           0.8                                                                         0.8

               0.6                                                                          0.6                                                                           0.6                                                                         0.6
Success rate


                                                                             Success rate


                                                                                                                                                           Success rate


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Success rate
               0.4                                                                          0.4                                                                           0.4                                                                         0.4

               0.2                                                                          0.2                                                                           0.2                                                                         0.2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    TidyHouse                                                                      TidyHouse
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    PrepareGroceries                                                               PrepareGroceries
               0.0                                                SetTable                  0.0                                                 SetTable                  0.0                                       SetTable                          0.0                                          SetTable
                     0    20        40          60        80          100                         0     20        40          60        80          100                         0   20        40          60        80          100                         0      20        40          60        80          100
                               Environment steps (x106)                                                      Environment steps (x106)                                                    Environment steps (x106)                                                       Environment steps (x106)


                         (i) Open fridge                                                              (j) Close fridge                                     (k) Navigation (point-goal) (l) Navigation (region-goal)

Figure 6: Training curves for skills. The y-axis represents the success rate of the subtask (including
resetting the end-effector at its resting position). Best viewed zoomed.

Navigate(s) (region-goal)

• Objective: navigate to the start of other skills specified by s
• Reward: refer to Eq 2. rslack = 0.002, rcol = min(0.001Ct , 0.2), λsucc = 2.5
• Success: The robot is within 0.1 meter of any goal in the region, 0.25 radian of the target orienta-
  tion at the current position, and has called the stop action at the current time step.
• Observation space:
     – Depth images from the head camera.
     – The goal position s∗ in the base frame.

C.1                      PPO H YPER - PARAMETERS

Our PPO implementation is based on the habitat-lab. The visual encoder is a simple CNN 10 . The
coefficients of value and entropy losses are 0.5 and 0 respectively. We use 64 parallel environments
and collect 128 transitions per environment to update the networks. We use 2 mini-batches, 2 epochs
per update, and a clipping parameter of 0.2 for both policy and value. The gradient norm is clipped
at 0.5. We use the Adam optimizer with a learning rate of 0.0003. The linear learning rate decay
is enabled. The mean of the Gaussian action predicted by the policy network is activated by tanh.
The (log) standard deviation of the Gaussian action, which is an input-independent parameter, is
initialized as −1.0. Fig 6 shows training curves of skills.

C.2                      OTHER I MPLEMENTATION D ETAILS

The PPO algorithm implemented by the habitat-lab does not distinguish the termination of the en-
vironment (MDP) and the truncation due to time limit. We fix this issue in our implementation.
Furthermore, we separately train all the skills for each HAB task to avoid potential ambiguity. For
example, the starting position of an object in the drawer is computed when the drawer is closed at
  10
     https://github.com/facebookresearch/habitat-lab/blob/main/habitat_
baselines/rl/models/simple_cnn.py


                                                                                                                                                       17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


the beginning of an episode. However, the skill Pick needs to pick this object up when the drawer
is open and the actual position of the object is different from the starting position. It is inconsistent
with other cases when the object is in an open receptacle or the fridge. We observe such ambiguity
can hurt performance. See Fig 6 for all task-specific variants of skills.

D     M ONOLITHIC BASELINE
For the monolithic baseline, a monolithic RL policy is trained for each HAB task. During training,
the policy only handles one randomly selected target object, e.g., picking and placing one object
in TidyHouse. During inference, the policy is applied to each target object. We use the same ob-
servation space, action space and training scheme as those for our mobile manipulation skills. The
main challenge is how to formulate a reward function for those complicated long-horizon HAB tasks
that usually require multiple stages. We follow Szot et al. (2021) to composite reward functions for
individual skills, given the sequence of subtasks. Concretely, at each time step during training, we
infer the current subtask given perfect knowledge of the environment, and use the reward function
of the corresponding skill. To ease training, we remove the collision penalty and do not terminate
the episode due to collision. Besides, we use the region-goal navigation reward for the navigation
subtask. Thanks to our improved reward functions and better training scheme, our monolithic RL
baseline is much better than the original implementation in Szot et al. (2021). However, although
able to move the object to its goal position, the policy never learns to release the object to complete
the subtask Place during training. It might be due to exploration difficulty since Place is the last
subtask in a long sequence and previous subtasks all require the robot not to release. To boost its
performance, we force the gripper to release anything held at the end of execution during evaluation.

E     E VALUATION
E.1   S EQUENTIAL S KILL C HAINING

For evaluation, skills are sequentially executed in the order of their corresponding subtasks, as de-
scribed in Sec 3.3. The main challenge is how to terminate a skill without privileged information.
Basically, each skill will be terminated if its execution time exceeds its max episode length (200
steps for manipulation skills and 500 steps for the navigation skill). The termination condition of
Pick is that an object is held and the end-effector is within 15cm of the resting position, which can
be computed based on proprioception only. The gripper is disabled to release for Pick. The ter-
mination condition of Place is that the gripper holds nothing and the end-effector is within 15cm
of the resting position. The gripper is disabled to grasp for Place. Besides, anything held will be
released when Place terminates. For Open and Close, we use a heuristic from Szot et al. (2021):
the skill will terminate if the end-effector is within 15cm of the resting position and it has moved at
least 30cm away from the resting position during execution. Navigate terminates when it calls the
stop action. Furthermore, since the manipulation skills only learn to reset its end-effector, we apply
an additional operation to reset the whole arm after each skill. This reset operation is achieved by
setting predefined joint positions as the target of the robot’s PD controller.

E.2   P ROGRESSIVE C OMPLETION R ATE

In this section, we describe how progressive completion rates are computed. The evaluation protocol
is the same as Szot et al. (2021) (see its Appendix F), and here we phrase it in a way more friendly to
readers with little knowledge of task planning and Planning Domain Definition Language (PDDL).
To partially evaluate a HAB task, we divide a full task into a sequence of stages (subgoals). For
example, TidyHouse can be considered to consist of pick 0, place 0, pick 1, etc.Each stage can
correspond to multiple subtasks. For example, the stage pick i includes Navigate(si0 ) and Pick(si0 ).
Thus, to be precise, the completion rate is computed based on stages instead of subtasks. We define
a set of predicates to measure whether the goal of a stage is completed. A stage goal is completed if
all the predicates associated with it are satisfied. The predicates are listed as follows:
• holding(target_obj|i): The robot is holding the i-th object.
• at(target_obj_pos|i,target_goal_pos|i): The i-th object is within 15cm of its
  goal position.


                                                   18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                                                  TidyHouse                                                                               PrepareGroceries                                                                        SetTable
                                     1.0                                                                                               1.0                                                                                1.0
Cross-configuration                  0.9                                                                                               0.9                                                                                0.9
                                     0.8                                                                                               0.8                                                                                0.8
                                     0.7                                                                                               0.7                                                                                0.7
                                     0.6                                                                                               0.6                                                                                0.6
                      Success rate


                                                                                                                        Success rate


                                                                                                                                                                                                           Success rate
                                     0.5                                                                                               0.5                                                                                0.5
                                     0.4                                                                                               0.4                                                                                0.4
                                     0.3          M3(ours)                                                                             0.3            M3(ours)                                                            0.3         M3(ours)
                                                  M(S)+R                                                                                              M(S)+R                                                                          M(S)+R
                                     0.2          M(L1)+R                                                                              0.2            M(L1)+R                                                             0.2         M(L1)+R
                                     0.1          M(L2)+R                                                                              0.1            M(L2)+R                                                             0.1         M(L2)+R
                                                  M(L3)+R                                                                                             M(L3)+R                                                                         M(L3)+R
                                     0.0                                                                                               0.0                                                                                0.0
                                           pick_0 place_0 pick_1 place_1 pick_2 place_2 pick_3 place_3 pick_4 place_4                        pick_0       place_0    pick_1   place_1   pick_2   place_2                        open_0 pick_0 place_0 close_0 open_1 pick_1 place_1 close_1


                                     1.0                                                                                               1.0                                                                                1.0
                                     0.9                                                                                               0.9                                                                                0.9
                                     0.8                                                                                               0.8                                                                                0.8
Cross-layout


                                     0.7                                                                                               0.7                                                                                0.7
                                     0.6                                                                                               0.6                                                                                0.6
                      Success rate


                                                                                                                        Success rate


                                                                                                                                                                                                           Success rate
                                     0.5                                                                                               0.5                                                                                0.5
                                     0.4                                                                                               0.4                                                                                0.4
                                     0.3          M3(ours)                                                                             0.3            M3(ours)                                                            0.3         M3(ours)
                                                  M(S)+R                                                                                              M(S)+R                                                                          M(S)+R
                                     0.2          M(L1)+R                                                                              0.2            M(L1)+R                                                             0.2         M(L1)+R
                                     0.1          M(L2)+R                                                                              0.1            M(L2)+R                                                             0.1         M(L2)+R
                                                  M(L3)+R                                                                                             M(L3)+R                                                                         M(L3)+R
                                     0.0                                                                                               0.0                                                                                0.0
                                           pick_0 place_0 pick_1 place_1 pick_2 place_2 pick_3 place_3 pick_4 place_4                        pick_0       place_0    pick_1   place_1   pick_2   place_2                        open_0 pick_0 place_0 close_0 open_1 pick_1 place_1 close_1



Figure 7: Progressive completion rates for HAB (Szot et al., 2021) tasks. The x-axis represents
progressive subtasks. The y-axis represents the completion rate of each subtask. Results of ablation
experiments are presented with solid lines. The mean and standard error for 100 episodes over 9
seeds are reported.


• opened_drawer(target_marker|i): The target drawer is open (the joint position is
  larger than 0.4m).
• closed_drawer(target_marker|i): The target drawer is close (the joint position is
  smaller than 0.1m).
• opened_fridge(target_marker|i): The target fridge is open (the joint position is larger
  than π2 radian).
• closed_fridge(target_marker|i): The target fridge is close (the joint position is
  smaller than 0.15 radian).

During evaluation, we evaluate whether the current stage goal is completed at each time step. If
the current stage goal is completed, we progress to the next stage. Hence, the completion rate
monotonically decreases. Listings 1, 2, 3 present the stages defined for each HAB task and the
predicates associated with each stage. Note that the stage goal place i only indicates that the object
has been released at its goal position, but the placement can be unstable (e.g., the object falls down
the table), which can lead to the failure of the next stage. Besides, due to abstract grasp, it is difficult
to place the object stably since the pose of the grasped object can not be fully controlled. Therefore,
we modify the objective of SetTable to make the task achievable given abstract grasp. Concretely,
instead of placing the fruit in the bowl, the robot only needs to place the fruit picked from the fridge
at a goal position on the table.


F                                    M ORE A BLATION S TUDIES

In this section, we study the impact of different initial state distributions on mobile manipulation
skills. We study the impact of different initial state distributions on mobile manipulation skills.
We enlarge initial states by changing the distributions of the initial base position (the radius around
the target) and orientation. For reference, the maximum radius around the target is set to 2m in
the main experiments (Sec 5). Several experiments are conducted: M(S)+R, M(L1)+R, M(L2)+R,
M(L3)+R. M(S)+R, M(L1)+R and M(L2)+R stand for the experiments where the maximum radii
around the target are set to 1.5m, 2.5m and 4m respectively. M(L3)+R keeps the radius as 2m,
but samples the initial base orientation from [−π, π], instead of using the direction facing towards
the target. Fig 7 shows the quantitative results. Enlarging the initial states in general leads to per-
formance degradation. Compared to M3 (71.2%/55.0%), M(L1)+R (67.4%/49.7%) and M(L3)+R


                                                                                                                                                                    19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                                                  TidyHouse                                                                               PrepareGroceries                                                                         SetTable
                                     1.0                                                                                               1.0                                                                                 1.0
Cross-configuration                  0.9                                                                                               0.9                                                                                 0.9
                                     0.8                                                                                               0.8                                                                                 0.8
                                     0.7                                                                                               0.7                                                                                 0.7
                                     0.6                                                                                               0.6                                                                                 0.6
                      Success rate


                                                                                                                        Success rate


                                                                                                                                                                                                            Success rate
                                     0.5                                                                                               0.5                                                                                 0.5
                                     0.4                                                                                               0.4                                                                                 0.4
                                     0.3                                                                                               0.3                                                                                 0.3
                                     0.2          S+P                                                                                  0.2            S+P                                                                  0.2         S+P
                                     0.1          S(L)+P                                                                               0.1            S(L)+P                                                               0.1         S(L)+P
                                                  S(L+IK)+P                                                                                           S(L+IK)+P                                                                        S(L+IK)+P
                                     0.0                                                                                               0.0                                                                                 0.0
                                           pick_0 place_0 pick_1 place_1 pick_2 place_2 pick_3 place_3 pick_4 place_4                        pick_0       place_0    pick_1    place_1   pick_2   place_2                        open_0 pick_0 place_0 close_0 open_1 pick_1 place_1 close_1


                                     1.0                                                                                               1.0                                                                                 1.0
                                     0.9                                                                                               0.9                                                                                 0.9
                                     0.8                                                                                               0.8                                                                                 0.8
Cross-layout


                                     0.7                                                                                               0.7                                                                                 0.7
                                     0.6                                                                                               0.6                                                                                 0.6
                      Success rate


                                                                                                                        Success rate


                                                                                                                                                                                                            Success rate
                                     0.5                                                                                               0.5                                                                                 0.5
                                     0.4                                                                                               0.4                                                                                 0.4
                                     0.3                                                                                               0.3                                                                                 0.3
                                     0.2          S+P                                                                                  0.2            S+P                                                                  0.2         S+P
                                     0.1          S(L)+P                                                                               0.1            S(L)+P                                                               0.1         S(L)+P
                                                  S(L+IK)+P                                                                                           S(L+IK)+P                                                                        S(L+IK)+P
                                     0.0                                                                                               0.0                                                                                 0.0
                                           pick_0 place_0 pick_1 place_1 pick_2 place_2 pick_3 place_3 pick_4 place_4                        pick_0       place_0    pick_1    place_1   pick_2   place_2                        open_0 pick_0 place_0 close_0 open_1 pick_1 place_1 close_1



Figure 8: Progressive completion rates for HAB (Szot et al., 2021) tasks. The x-axis represents
progressive subtasks. The y-axis represents the completion rate of each subtask. Results of ablation
experiments are presented with solid lines. The mean and standard error for 100 episodes over 9
seeds are reported.


(67.5%/46.4%) show moderate performance drop. M(L2)+R (55.2%/38.9%) shows the largest per-
formance drop, which indicates that mobile manipulation skills are not able to handle long-range
navigation yet. Moreover, M(S)+R (69.5%/52.1%) performs on par with M3. It implies that there
usually exists a “sweet spot” of the initial state distribution for mobile manipulation skills as a trade-
off between achievability and composability.
Besides, we extend the S(L)+P experiment described in Sec 5.4, where we simply replace the initial
states of stationary manipulation skills with those of mobile ones. We reject the initial states that
the target is not reachable due to the kinematic constraint. The constraint is checked via inverse
kinematics (IK). The extended experiment is denoted by S(L+IK)+P. Fig 8 shows the quantitative
results. The overall success rate of S(L+IK)+P is 44.7%/21.1% in the cross-configuration/cross-
layout setting. It indicates that increasing the feasible initial states help stationary manipulation
skills compared to S(L)+P (37.7%/18.1%), but still has a large performance drop compared to S+P
(57.4%/31.1%). One possible reason is that although the target might be IK-reachable, it can be hard
to achieve with stationary manipulation skills due to collision with other objects. However, mobile
manipulation skills can first navigate to better locations with fewer obstacles in the front.

G                                     M ORE Q UANTITATIVE M ETRICS
In this section, we present more quantitative metrics in addition to progressive completion rates for
the main experiments on 3 HAB tasks. We report the number of successfully placed objects and
the average distance between objects and goals in Table 1 and 2. These metrics are analogous to
%FIXEDSTRICT and %E in Weihs et al. (2021).

                                                                       Method                          TidyHouse (5)                                              PrepareGroceries (3)                                     SetTable (2)
                                                                      S+P                                     4.58/4.56                                                       2.33/1.54                                          1.45/1.03
                                                                     M+P                                      4.45/4.54                                                       2.45/1.79                                          1.71/1.08
                                                                    M3 (ours)                                 4.64/4.60                                                       2.56/2.44                                          1.71/1.22

Table 1: The number of successfully placed objects for HAB tasks. The metrics in the cross-
configuration/cross-layout setting are reported. The number of objects to place is shown along with
the name of each task.


                                                                                                                                                                    20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                     Method        TidyHouse      PrepareGroceries        SetTable
                      S+P         0.245/0.256        0.338/0.982        3.506/6.481
                     M+P          1.296/0.821        0.302/0.689        4.165/4.641
                    M3 (ours)     0.198/0.174        0.239/0.337        5.208/6.345

Table 2: Average distance between objects and goals for HAB tasks. The metrics in the cross-
configuration/cross-layout setting are reported. Note that the average distance is sensitive to outliers.


                         (a) Stationary manipulation and point-goal navigation (S+P)


                          (b) Mobile manipulation and point-goal navigation (M+P)


                          (c) Mobile manipulation and region-goal navigation (M3)

Figure 9: Qualitative comparison in TidyHouse. In this example, the point-goal navigation skill
terminates behind the TV (1st image). The arm is blocked by the TV in stationary manipulation (last
image in the top row). The robot manages to move backward and avoid being blocked in mobile
manipulation (last image in the middle row). The region-goal navigation skill instead terminates in
front of the TV (1st image in the bottom row).

H    M ORE Q UALITATIVE R ESULTS
Fig 9, 10, 11 show more qualitative comparison of different methods. Their animated versions can
be found on our project website.


                                                   21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                        (a) Point-goal navigation


                                       (b) Region-goal navigation

Figure 10: Qualitative comparison in PrepareGroceries. In this example, the point-goal navigation
skill accidentally close the fridge (top row). The region-goal navigation skill is able to avoid dis-
turbing the environment due to the collision penalty (bottom row).


                                      (a) Stationary manipulation


                                        (b) Mobile manipulation

Figure 11: Qualitative comparison in SetTable. In this example, the navigation skill terminates at
the position where the robot can not reach the target object in the fridge in stationary manipulation.
(top row). The robot can move closer to the object and then pick it, to compensate for the navigation
skill in mobile manipulation (bottom row).



                                                 22
     Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


 1   pick_0:
 2   - "holding(target_obj|0)"
 3   place_0:
 4   - "not_holding()"
 5   - "at(target_obj_pos|0,target_goal_pos|0)"
 6   pick_1:
 7   - "holding(target_obj|1)"
 8   - "at(target_obj_pos|0,target_goal_pos|0)"
 9   place_1:
10   - "not_holding()"
11   - "at(target_obj_pos|0,target_goal_pos|0)"
12   - "at(target_obj_pos|1,target_goal_pos|1)"
13   pick_2:
14   - "holding(target_obj|2)"
15   - "at(target_obj_pos|0,target_goal_pos|0)"
16   - "at(target_obj_pos|1,target_goal_pos|1)"
17   place_2:
18   - "not_holding()"
19   - "at(target_obj_pos|0,target_goal_pos|0)"
20   - "at(target_obj_pos|1,target_goal_pos|1)"
21   - "at(target_obj_pos|2,target_goal_pos|2)"
22   pick_3:
23   - "holding(target_obj|3)"
24   - "at(target_obj_pos|0,target_goal_pos|0)"
25   - "at(target_obj_pos|1,target_goal_pos|1)"
26   - "at(target_obj_pos|2,target_goal_pos|2)"
27   place_3:
28   - "not_holding()"
29   - "at(target_obj_pos|0,target_goal_pos|0)"
30   - "at(target_obj_pos|1,target_goal_pos|1)"
31   - "at(target_obj_pos|2,target_goal_pos|2)"
32   - "at(target_obj_pos|3,target_goal_pos|3)"
33   pick_4:
34   - "holding(target_obj|4)"
35   - "at(target_obj_pos|0,target_goal_pos|0)"
36   - "at(target_obj_pos|1,target_goal_pos|1)"
37   - "at(target_obj_pos|2,target_goal_pos|2)"
38   - "at(target_obj_pos|3,target_goal_pos|3)"
39   place_4:
40   - "not_holding()"
41   - "at(target_obj_pos|0,target_goal_pos|0)"
42   - "at(target_obj_pos|1,target_goal_pos|1)"
43   - "at(target_obj_pos|2,target_goal_pos|2)"
44   - "at(target_obj_pos|3,target_goal_pos|3)"
45   - "at(target_obj_pos|4,target_goal_pos|4)"


     Listing 1: Stage goals and their associated predicates defined for TidyHouse. The stages are listed
     in the order for progressive evaluation.


                                                     23
     Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


 1   pick_0:
 2   - "holding(target_obj|0)"
 3   place_0:
 4   - "not_holding()"
 5   - "at(target_obj_pos|0,target_goal_pos|0)"
 6   pick_1:
 7   - "holding(target_obj|1)"
 8   - "at(target_obj_pos|0,target_goal_pos|0)"
 9   place_1:
10   - "not_holding()"
11   - "at(target_obj_pos|0,target_goal_pos|0)"
12   - "at(target_obj_pos|1,target_goal_pos|1)"
13   pick_2:
14   - "holding(target_obj|2)"
15   - "at(target_obj_pos|0,target_goal_pos|0)"
16   - "at(target_obj_pos|1,target_goal_pos|1)"
17   place_2:
18   - "not_holding()"
19   - "at(target_obj_pos|0,target_goal_pos|0)"
20   - "at(target_obj_pos|1,target_goal_pos|1)"
21   - "at(target_obj_pos|2,target_goal_pos|2)"


     Listing 2: Stage goals and their associated predicates defined for PrepareGroceries. The stages are
     listed in the order for progressive evaluation.


                                                     24
     Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


 1   open_0:
 2   - "opened_drawer(target_marker|0)"
 3   pick_0:
 4   - "holding(target_obj|0)"
 5   place_0:
 6   - "not_holding()"
 7   - "at(target_obj_pos|0,target_goal_pos|0)"
 8   close_0:
 9   - "closed_drawer(target_marker|0)"
10   - "at(target_obj_pos|0,target_goal_pos|0)"
11   open_1:
12   - "closed_drawer(target_marker|0)"
13   - "at(target_obj_pos|0,target_goal_pos|0)"
14   - "opened_fridge(target_marker|1)"
15   pick_1:
16   - "closed_drawer(target_marker|0)"
17   - "at(target_obj_pos|0,target_goal_pos|0)"
18   - "opened_fridge(target_marker|1)"
19   - "holding(target_obj|1)"
20   place_1:
21   - "closed_drawer(target_marker|0)"
22   - "at(target_obj_pos|0,target_goal_pos|0)"
23   - "not_holding()"
24   - "at(target_obj_pos|1,target_goal_pos|1)"
25   close_1:
26   - "closed_drawer(target_marker|0)"
27   - "at(target_obj_pos|0,target_goal_pos|0)"
28   - "closed_fridge(target_marker|1)"
29   - "at(target_obj_pos|1,target_goal_pos|1)"


     Listing 3: Stage goals and their associated predicates defined for SetTable. The stages are listed in
     the order for progressive evaluation.


                                                      25
