Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


I NTERPRETING D ISTRIBUTIONAL R EINFORCEMENT
L EARNING : A R EGULARIZATION P ERSPECTIVE
 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                             A BSTRACT

         Distributional reinforcement learning (RL) is a class of state-of-the-art algorithms
         that estimate the entire distribution of the total return rather than its expected
         value alone. The theoretical advantages of distributional RL over expectation-
         based RL remain elusive, despite the remarkable performance of distributional
         RL. Our work attributes the potential superiority of distributional RL to its reg-
         ularization effect stemming from the value distribution information regardless of
         only its expectation. We decompose the value distribution into its expectation and
         the remaining distribution part using a variant of the gross error model in robust
         statistics. Hence, distributional RL has an additional benefit over expectation-
         based RL thanks to the impact of a risk-sensitive entropy regularization within the
         Neural Fitted Z-Iteration framework. Meanwhile, we investigate the role of the
         resulting regularization in actor-critic algorithms by bridging the risk-sensitive
         entropy regularization of distributional RL and the vanilla entropy in maximum
         entropy RL. It reveals that distributional RL induces an augmented reward func-
         tion, which promotes a risk-sensitive exploration against the intrinsic uncertainty
         of the environment. Finally, extensive experiments verify the importance of the
         regularization effect in distributional RL, as well as the mutual impacts of different
         entropy regularizations. Our study paves the way towards a better understanding
         of distributional RL, especially when looked at through a regularization lens.


1   I NTRODUCTION

The intrinsic characteristics of classical reinforcement learning (RL) algorithms, such as temporal-
difference (TD) learning (Sutton & Barto, 2018) and Q-learning (Watkins & Dayan, 1992), are based
on the expectation of discounted cumulative rewards that an agent observes while interacting with
the environment. In stark contrast to the classical expectation-based RL, a new branch of algorithms
called distributional RL estimates the full distribution of total returns and has demonstrated the state-
of-the-art performance in a wide range of environments (Bellemare et al., 2017a; Dabney et al.,
2018b;a; Yang et al., 2019; Zhou et al., 2020; Nguyen et al., 2020; Sun et al., 2022). Meanwhile,
distributional RL also inherits other benefits in risk-sensitive control (Dabney et al., 2018a), policy
exploration settings (Mavrin et al., 2019; Rowland et al., 2019) and robustness (Sun et al., 2021).
Despite the existence of numerous algorithmic variants of distributional RL with remarkable em-
pirical success, we still have a poor understanding of what the effectiveness of distributional RL is
stemming from and theoretical studies on advantages of distributional RL over expectation-based
RL are still less established. Distributional RL problems was also mapped to a Wasserstein gradient
flow problem (Martin et al., 2020), treating the distributional Bellman residual as a potential energy
functional. Offline distributional RL (Ma et al., 2021) has also been proposed to investigate the effi-
cacy of distributional RL in both risk-neutral and risk-averse domains. (Lyle et al., 2019) proved in
many realizations of tabular and linear approximation settings, distributional RL behaves the same
as expectation-based RL under the coupling updates method, but diverges in non-linear approxima-
tion. Although the explanation from these works is not sufficient yet, the trend is encouraging for
recent works towards closing the gap between theory and practice in distributional RL.
In this paper, we illuminate the behavior difference of distributional RL over expectation-based RL
through the lens of regularization to explain its empirical outperformance in most practical envi-
ronments. Specifically, we simplify distributional RL into a Neural Fitted Z-Iteration framework,


                                                   1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


within which we establish an equivalence of objective functions between distributional RL and a
risk-sensitive entropy regularized Neural Fitted Q-Iteration from the perspective of statistics. This
result is based on two analytical components, i.e., action-value density function decomposition by
leveraging of a variant of gross error model in robust statistics, as well as Kullback-Leibler (KL)
divergence to measure the distribution distance between the current and target value distribution
in each Bellman update. Then we establish a connection between the impact of risk-sensitive en-
tropy regularization of distributional RL and vanilla entropy in maximum entropy RL, yielding a
Distribution-Entropy-Regularized Actor Critic algorithm. Empirical results demonstrate the crucial
role of risk-sensitive entropy regularization effect from distributional RL in the potential superiority
over expectation-based RL on both Atari games and MuJoCo environments. We also reveal mutual
impacts of both risk-sensitive entropy in distributional RL and vanilla entropy in maximum entropy
RL, providing more potential research directions in the future.

2     P RELIMINARY K NOWLEDGE

In classical RL, an agent interacts with an environment via a Markov decision process (MDP),
a 5-tuple (S, A, R, P, γ), where S and A are the state and action spaces, respectively. P is the
environment transition dynamics, R is the reward function and γ ∈ (0, 1) is the discount factor.
Action-value Function vs Action-value Distribution.  P∞       Given a policy π, the discounted sum of
future rewards is a random variable Z π (s, a) = t=0 γ t R(st , at ), where s0 = s, a0 = a, st+1 ∼
P (·|st , at ), and at ∼ π(·|st ). In the control setting, expectation-based RL focuses on the action-
value function Qπ (s, a), the expectation of Z π (s, a), i.e., Qπ (s, a) = E [Z π (s, a)]. Distributional
RL, on the other hand, focuses on the action-value distribution, the full distribution of Z π (s, a). The
density function if exists of action-value distribution is called action-value density function.
Bellman Operators vs Distributional Bellman Operators. For the policy evaluation in
expectation-based RL, the value function is updated via the Bellman operator T π Q(s, a) =
E[R(s, a)] + γEs0 ∼p,a0 ∼π [Q (s0 , a0 )]. We also define Bellman Optimality Operator T opt Q(s, a) =
E[R(s, a)] + γ maxa0 Es0 ∼p [Q (s0 , a0 )]. In distributional RL, the action-value distribution of
                                                                                          D
Z π (s, a) is updated via the distributional Bellman operator Tπ , i.e., Tπ Z(s, a) = R(s, a) +
γZ (s0 , a0 ), where s0 ∼ P (·|s, a) and a0 ∼ π (·|s0 ). The equality implies that random variables
of both sides are equal in distribution. This random-variable definition of distributional Bellman
operator is appealing and easily understood due to its concise form, although its value-distribution
definition is more mathematically rigorous (Rowland et al., 2018; Bellemare et al., 2022).
Categorical Distributional RL. Categorical Distributional RL (Bellemare et al., 2017a) can be
viewed as the first successful distributional RL algorithm family that approximates the value dis-
                                                       PN
tribution η by a discrete categorical distribution η̂ = i=1 pi δzi , where z1 ≤ z2 ≤ ... ≤ zN is a
set of fixed supports and {pi }N
                               i=1 are learnable probabilities. The leverage of a heuristic projection
operator ΠC (see Appendix A for more details) as well as the KL divergence allows the theoretical
convergence of categorical distribution RL under Cramér distance (Rowland et al., 2018).

3     R EGULARIZATION E FFECT OF D ISTRIBUTIONAL RL

3.1   D ISTRIBUTIONAL RL: N EURAL F ITTED Z-I TERATION (N EURAL FZI)

Expectation-based RL: Neural Fitted Q-Iteration (Neural FQI). Neural FQI (Fan et al., 2020;
Riedmiller, 2005) offers a statistical explanation of DQN (Mnih et al., 2015), capturing its key
features, including experience replay and the target network Qθ∗ . In Neural FQI, we update param-
eterized Qθ (s, a) in each iteration k in a regression problem:
                                                  n
                                               1 X                       2
                             Qk+1
                              θ   = argmin           yi − Qkθ (si , ai ) ,                           (1)
                                         Qθ    n i=1

where the target yi = r(si , ai ) + γ maxa∈A Qkθ∗ (s0i , a) is fixed within every Ttarget steps to up-
date target network Qθ∗ by letting θ∗ = θ. The experience buffer induces independent samples
{(si , ai , ri , s0i )}i∈[n] . In an ideal case when we neglect the non-convexity and TD approximation


                                                   2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


errors, we have Qk+1θ     = T opt Qkθ∗ , which is exactly the updating rule under Bellman optimality
operator (Fan et al., 2020). In the viewpoint of statistics, the optimization problem in Eq. 1 in each
iteration is a standard supervised and neural network parameterized regression regarding Qθ .
Distributional RL: Neural Fitted Z-Iteration (Neural FZI). We interpret distributional RL as a
Neural Fitted Z-Iteration owing to the fact that this iteration is by far closest to the practical algo-
rithms and more interpretable. Analogous to Neural FQI, we can simplify value-based distributional
RL algorithms parameterized by Zθ into a Neural Fitted Z-Iteration (Neural FZI) as
                                                    n
                                                1X
                              Zθk+1 = argmin          dp (Yi , Zθk (si , ai )),                       (2)
                                          Zθ    n i=1

where the target Yi =  R(si , ai ) +  γZθk∗ (s0i , πZ (s0i )) with the policy πZ following the greedy rule
πZ (s0i ) = argmaxa0 E Zθk∗ (s0i , a0 ) is fixed within every Ttarget steps to update target network Zθ∗ .
dp is a divergence between two distributions. Notably, choices of representation for Zθ and the
metric dp are pivotal for the empirical success of distributional RL algorithms (Sun et al., 2022).

3.2   D ISTRIBUTIONAL RL: E NTROPY- REGULARIZED N EURAL FQI

Action-Value Density Function Decomposition. To separate the impact of additional distribution
information from the expectation of Z π , we leverage a variant of gross error model from robust
statistics (Huber, 2004), which was also similarly used to analyze Label Smoothing (Müller et al.,
2019) and Knowledge Distillation (Hinton et al., 2015). Particularly, we utilize a histgram pbs,a (x)
with N bins to approximate an arbitrary continuous action-value density function ps,a (x) given a
state s and action a as the histogram is probably the simplest approach for the density function
estimate in the literature of non-parametric statistics. Given a fixed set of supports z0 ≤ z1 ≤ ... ≤
zN with the equal bin size as ∆, ∆i = [zi−1 , zi ), i = 1, ..., N − 1 with ∆N = [zN −1 , zN ], the
                                                              PN
continuous histogram density function is pbs,a (x) =            i=1 pi 1(x ∈ ∆i )/∆. Denote ∆E as the
interval that E [Z π (s, a)] falls into, i.e., E [Z π (s, a)] ∈ ∆E . We conduct an action-value density
function decomposition over pbs,a (x) as follows:
                                                      N
                                                      X
                      s,a
                     pb (x) = (1 −  )1(x ∈ ∆E )/∆ +     pµi 1(x ∈ ∆i )/∆,                             (3)
                                                               i=1
                                                PN
where pbs,a induces a new histogram µ  b(x) = i=1 pµi 1(x ∈ ∆i )/∆ that is used to approximate a
continuous density function µ(x). µ  b(x) or µ(x) aims at characterizing the impact of action-value
distribution regardless of its expectation E [Z π (s, a)] on the performance of distributional RL algo-
rithms.   controls the proportion between a single-bin histogram 1(x ∈ ∆E )/∆ and µ        b(x), where
we will later show that this single-bin histogram function is linked to Neural FQI. Before diving
deeper, we begin by showing that µ  b(x) is a valid density function under certain   in Proposition 1.
Proposition 1. Denote pbs,a (x ∈ ∆E ) = pE /∆. Following the density function decomposition in
                PN
       b(x) = i=1 pµi 1(x ∈ ∆i )/∆ is a valid probability density function ⇐⇒   ≥ 1 − pE .
Eq. 3, µ

Proof is provided in Appendix B. We next show that the histogram density estimator pbs,a (x) enjoys
a uniform convergence rate to approximate an arbitrary continuous action-value density function
ps,a (x) under the mild condition in Theorem 1. Proof is provided in Appendix C.
Theorem 1. (Approximation Analysis of pbs,a ) Suppose ps,a (x) is Lipschitz continuous and the sup-
port of a random variable is partitioned by N bins with bin size ∆. Then
                                                                 r        !
                             s,a       s,a                          log N
                       sup |b
                            p (x) − p (x)| = O (∆) + OP                      .                  (4)
                         x                                           n∆2

Intermediate Role of Histogram Density Estimator. Categorical and Quantile-based distribu-
tional RL are the two main families that estimate the true action-value density by the discrete cate-
gorical distribution and quantile function, respectively. We analyze that histogram density estimate
plays an intermediate role within these two branches. (1) Connection to Categorical Distributional
RL. Although the continuous histogram density estimator is in contrast to the discrete categorical
distribution, in Proposition 2 (proof in Appendix D) we reveal that minimizing the KL divergence


                                                    3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


between the target density function and the histogram density estimate is equivalent to the param-
eterized categorical distribution . (2) Connection to Quantile-based Distributional RL. Histogram
and quantile functions are “two sides of a coin”. The histogram estimates the density function by
giving each bin an equal amount of information, while the quantile function gives each fraction of
data the same amount of information. Based on this insight, we thus argue that our analysis based
on the histogram density estimate is largely general and representative in distributional RL families.
Proposition 2. (Equivalence to Categorical Distribution) Suppose the target categorical distribu-
          PN                                                      PN
tion c = i=1 pi δzi and the target histogram function h(x) = i=1 pi 1(x ∈ ∆i )/∆, updating
the parameterized categorical distribution cθ under KL divergence is equivalent to updating the
parameterized histogram function hθ .

Distributional RL: Entropy-regularized Neural FQI. We apply the decomposition on the tar-
get action-value histogram density function and choose KL divergence as dp in Neural FZI. Let
H(P,
   R Q) be the cross entropy between two probability measures P and Q, i.e., H(P, Q) =
− x∈X P (x) log Q(x) dx. The target histogram density function pbs,a is decomposed as pbs,a (x) =
(1 −  )1(x ∈ ∆E )/∆ +  b   µ(x). We can derive the following entropy-regularized form for distribu-
tional RL in Proposition 3.
Proposition 3. Denote qθs,a (x) as the histogram density function of Zθk (s, a) in Neural FZI. Based
on the decomposition in Eq. 3 and KL divergence as dp , Neural FZI in Eq. 2 is simplified as
                                  n
                               1 Xh                                0       0
                                                                                           i
              Zθk+1 = argmin          − log qθsi ,ai (∆iE ) + αH(b
                                                                 µsi ,πZ (si ) , qθsi ,ai ) ,    (5)
                          qθ  n i=1

where α = ε/(1 − ε) > 0 and ∆iE represents the interval that E [Z π (s0i , πZ (s0i ))] falls into, i.e.,
                                    0       0
E [Z π (s0i , πZ (s0i ))] ∈ ∆iE . µ
                                  bsi ,πZ (si ) is the resulting histogram density function in the next state
                 0        0
action pair (si , πZ (si )). Proof is given in Appendix F. In Proposition 4 with proof in Appendix G,
we further show that minimizing the first term in Eq. 5 is “almost” equivalent to minimizing Neural
FQI . For the uniformity of notation, we still use s, a in the following analysis instead of si , ai .
Proposition 4. (Connection between Neural FZI and FQI via Decomposition) In Eq. 5 of Neural
FZI, if the function class {Zθ : θ ∈ Θ} is sufficiently large such that it contains the target {Yi }ni=1 ,
where Yi = R(si , ai ) + γZθk∗ (s0i , πZ (s0i )). Minimizing the first term in Eq. 5, as ∆ → 0 implies
                                   P (Zθk+1 (s, a) = T opt Qkθ∗ (s, a)) = 1.                                 (6)

Interpretation of Proposition 4. Given the fact that Qk+1 θ   = T opt Qkθ∗ ideally in Neural FQI (Fan
et al., 2020), we have Zθk+1 = T opt Qkθ∗ with probability one under the assumption in Proposition 4.
This indicates Zθk+1 may take other values instead of its expectation part as E Zθk+1 = T opt Qkθ∗ ,

but the probability when these events for other values happen is 0. This result establishes a theoreti-
cal link between Neural FZI regarding the first term in Eq. 5 with Neural FQI.
Interpretation of Proposition 3. Based on the equivalence between the first term of Neural FZI and
FQI, we therefore interpret the distributional RL form in Eq. 5 as entropy-regularized Neural FQI.
                                               0      0
Thus, the second regularization term H(b    µsi ,πZ (si ) , qθsi ,ai ) aims at explaining the behavior difference
between distributional RL and expectation-based RL. It pushes qθs,a for the current state-action pair
                  0      0
               bsi ,πZ (si ) for the next state-action pair, which “deducts” the expectation effect from
to approximate µ
the whole action-value distribution by leveraging of the density function decomposition technique
proposed in Eq. 3. In summary, we interpret impacts of these two terms in Eq. 5 on the distributional
RL optimization as expectation effect and distributional regularization effect, respectively.
Risk-Sensitive Entropy Regularization. We attribute the behavior difference of distributional RL,
especially the ability to significantly reduce intrinsic uncertainty of the environment (Mavrin et al.,
2019), into the regularization term in Eq. 5. According to the literature of risks in RL (Dabney et al.,
2018a), where “risk” refers to the uncertainty over possible outcomes and “risk-sensitive policies”
are those which depend upon more than the mean of the outcomes, we hereby call the novel cross
entropy regularization for the second term in Eq. 5 as risk-sensitive entropy regularization. This
risk-sensitive entropy regularization derived within distributional RL expands the class of policies
using information provided by the distribution over returns (i.e. to the class of risk-sensitive poli-
cies). It should also be noted that our risk-sensitive entropy regularization is indeed “risk-neutral”


                                                       4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


in the sense of convexity or concaveness of utility functions, where our policy is still applying a
linear utility function U , defined as π(·|s) = arg maxa EZ(s,a) [U (z)]. Correspondingly, We can
additionally vary different distortion risk measures to explicitly lead the policy to being risk-averse
or risk-seeking (Dabney et al., 2018a).
Remark on KL divergence. As stated in categorical distributional RL in Section 2, when the cat-
egorical distribution is applied after the projection operator ΠC , distributional Bellman operator Tπ
has the contraction guarantee under Cramér distance (Rowland et al., 2018), albeit the use of a non-
expansive KL divergence (Morimura et al., 2012). Similarly, our histogram density function with
the projection ΠC equipped with KL divergence also enjoys a contraction property due to the equiva-
lence between optimizing histogram function and categorical distribution analyzed in Proposition 2.
We also summarize favorable properties of KL divergence in distributional RL in Appendix E.
                                           0     0
Remark on the Attainability of µ   bs ,πZ (s ) . In practical distributional RL algorithms, we typically
                                                                                          0      0
                                                                                        bs ,πZ (s ) based
use the bootstrap, e.g., TD learning, to attain the target probability density estimate µ
                                                                                                   0    0
on Eq. 3 as long as E [Z(s, a)] exists and   ≥ 1 − pE in Proposition 1. The leverage of µ      bs ,πZ (s )
and the regularization effect revealed in Eq. 5 of distributional RL de facto establishes a bridge with
maximum entropy RL (Williams & Peng, 1991), on which we have a deeper analysis in Section 3.3.

3.3   C ONNECTION WITH M AXIMUM E NTROPY RL

Vanilla Entropy Regularization in Maximum Entropy RL. Maximum entropy RL (Williams &
Peng, 1991), including Soft Q-Learning (Haarnoja et al., 2017), explicitly optimizes for policies that
aim to reach states where they will have high entropy in the future:
                                    T
                                    X
                          J(π) =           E(st ,at )∼ρπ [r (st , at ) + βH(π(·|st ))] ,                   (7)
                                     t=0
                          P
where H (πθ (·|st )) = − a πθ (a|st ) log πθ (a|st ) and ρπ is the generated distribution following
π. The temperature parameter β determines the relative importance of the entropy term against the
cumulative rewards, and thus controls the action diversity of the optimal policy learned via Eq. 7.
This maximum entropy regularization has various conceptual and practical advantages. Firstly, the
learned policy is encouraged to visit states with high entropy in the future, thus promoting the
exploration over diverse states (Han & Sung, 2021). Secondly, it considerably improves the learn-
ing speed (Mei et al., 2020) and therefore is widely used in state-of-the-art algorithms, e.g., Soft
Actor-Critic (SAC) (Haarnoja et al., 2018). Similar empirical benefits of both distributional RL and
maximum entropy RL also encourage us to probe their underlying connection.
Risk-Sensitive Entropy Regularization in Distributional RL. To make a direct comparison with
maximum entropy RL, we need to specifically analyze the impact of the regularization term in Eq. 5,
and thus we incorporate the risk-sensitive entropy regularization of distributional RL into the policy
gradient framework akin to maximum entropy RL. Concretely, we conduct our analysis by showing
the convergence of Distribution-Entropy-Regularized Policy Iteration (DERPI), which is the coun-
terpart for Soft Policy Iteration (Haarnoja et al., 2018), i.e., the underpinning of SAC algorithm. In
principle, Distribution-Entropy-Regularized Policy Iteration replaces the vanilla entropy regulariza-
tion in Soft Policy Iteration with our risk-sensitive entropy regularization in Eq. 5 from distributional
RL. In the policy evaluation step of distribution-entropy-regularized policy iteration, a new soft Q-
value, i.e., the expectation of Z π (s, a), can be computed iteratively by applying a modified Bellman
operator Tdπ , which we call Distribution-Entropy-Regularized Bellman Operator defined as
                   Tdπ Q (st , at ) , r (st , at ) + γEst+1 ∼P (·|st ,at ) [V (st+1 |st , at )] ,          (8)
where a new soft value function V (st+1 |st , at ) conditioned on st , at is defined by
                 V (st+1 |st , at ) = Eat+1 ∼π [Q (st+1 , at+1 )] + f (H (µst ,at , qθst ,at )),           (9)
and f is a continuous increasing function over the cross entropy H. Note that in this specific tabular
setting regarding st and at , we particularly use qθst ,at (x) to approximate the true density function
of Z(st , at ), and µst ,at to represent the true target value distribution regardless of its expectation,
which can normally be obtained via bootstrap estimate µ       bst+1 ,πZ (st+1 ) similar in Eq. 5. The f trans-
formation over the cross entropy H between µ       st ,at
                                                          and qθst ,at (x) serves as our risk-sensitive entropy


                                                         5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


regularization. As opposed to the vanilla entropy regularization in maximum entropy RL that en-
courages the policy to explore, our risk-sensitive entropy regularization in distributional RL plays a
role of the reward correction or augmented reward, and therefore augments the action-value func-
tion Q(st , at ) in the value-based RL and the objective function in policy gradient RL by additionally
incorporating the value distribution knowledge. As we have discussed Neural FZI above in Sec-
tion 3.2, which is established on the value-based RL, we now shift our attention to the properties of
our risk-sensitive entropy regularization in the framework of policy gradient. In Lemma 1, we firstly
show that our Distribution-Entropy-Regularized Bellman operator Tdπ still inherits the convergence
property in the policy evaluation phase.
Lemma 1. (Distribution-Entropy-Regularized Policy Evaluation) Consider the distribution-
entropy-regularized Bellman operator Tdπ in Eq. 8 and the behavior of expectation of Z π (s, a),
i.e., Q(s, a). Assume H(µst ,at , qθst ,at ) ≤ M for all (st , at ) ∈ S × A, where M is a constant. Define
Qk+1 = Tdπ Qk , then Qk+1 will converge to a corrected Q-value of π as k → ∞ with the new
objective function defined as
                                T
                                X
                    J 0 (π) =         E(st ,at )∼ρπ [r (st , at ) + γf (H (µst ,at , qθst ,at ))] .    (10)
                                t=0

In Lemma 1, we reveal that the new objective function for distributional RL can be interpreted as an
augmented reward function. Secondly, in the policy improvement for distributional RL, we keep the
vanilla policy improvement updating rules according to
                            πnew = arg max Eat ∼π0 [Qπold (st , at )] .                         (11)
                                              π 0 ∈Π
Next we can immediately derive a new policy iteration algorithm, called Distribution-Entropy-
Regularized Policy Iteration (DERPI) that alternates between distribution-entropy-regularized pol-
icy evaluation in Eq. 8 and the policy improvement in Eq. 11. It will provably converge to the policy
with the optimal risk-sensitive entropy among all policies in Π as shown in Theorem 2.
Theorem 2. (Distribution-Entropy-Regularized Policy Iteration) Assume H(µst ,at , qθst ,at ) ≤ M for
all (st , at ) ∈ S × A, where M is a constant. Repeatedly applying distribution-entropy-regularized
policy evaluation in Eq. 8 and the policy improvement in Eq. 11, the policy converges to an optimal
                         ∗
policy π ∗ such that Qπ (st , at ) ≥ Qπ (st , at ) for all π ∈ Π.
Please refer to Appendix H for the proof of Lemma 1 and Theorem 2. According to Theorem 2,
it turns out that if we incorporate the risk-sensitive entropy regularization into the policy gradient
framework in Eq. 10, we are able to design a variant of “soft policy iteration” that can guarantee
the convergence to an optimal policy. As such, we provide a comprehensive comparison between
vanilla entropy in maximum entropy RL and risk-sensitive entropy in distributional RL as follows.
Vanilla Entropy Regularization vs Risk-Sensitive
Entropy Regularization. (1) Objective function. By
comparing two objective function J(π) in Eq. 7 for
maximum entropy RL and J 0 (π) in Eq. 10 for distribu-
tional RL, distributional RL tries to maximize the risk-
sensitive entropy regularization w.r.t. π. This indicates
that the learned policy in distributional RL is encour-
aged to visit state and action pairs in the future whose
action-value distributions have a higher degree of dis-                       s,a
persion, e.g., variance, in spite of its expectation, thus Figure 1: qθ is encouraged to disperse
promoting the risk-sensitive exploration to reduce the under the risk-sensitive entropy regular-
intrinsic uncertainty of the environment. An intuitive ization of distributional RL.
illustration is provided in Figure 1. (2) State-action dependent regularization. The vanilla en-
tropy H(π(·|st )) in maximum entropy RL is state-wise, while our risk-sensitive regularization
H(µst ,at , qθst ,at ) is state-action-wise, implying that it is a more fine-grained regularization to char-
acterize the action-value distribution of Z(st , at ) in the future.

3.4   A LGORITHM : D ISTRIBUTION -E NTROPY-R EGULARIZED ACTOR -C RITIC (DERAC)

In practice, large continuous domains require us to derive a practical approximation to DERPI.
We thus extend DERPI from the tabular setting to the function approximation case, yielding the


                                                           6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Distribution-Entropy-Regularized Actor-Critic (DERAC) algorithm by using function approxima-
tors for both the value distribution qθ (st , at ) and the policy πφ (at |st ). The key characteristics of
DERAC algorithm is that we use function approximator to represent the whole value distribution qθ
rather than only the value function, and conduct the optimization mainly based on the value function
Qθ (st , at ) = E [qθ (st , at )].
Optimize the parameterized value distribution qθ . The new value function is originally trained
to minimize the squared residual error of Eq. 8. Here for a desirable interpretation, we impose the
zero expectation assumption over the residual, i.e., T π Qθ (s, a) = Qθ (s, a) + b with E [b] = 0. The
resulting simplified objective function Jˆq (θ) can be well interpreted as an interpolation between the
expectation effect and distributional regularization effect:
                        h                                i
                                                       2
          Jˆq (θ) = Es,a (Tdπ Qθ∗ (s, a) − Qθ (s, a))
                                                                                                    (12)
                                                                      2
                  ∝ (1 − λ)Es,a [(T π E [qθ∗ (s, a)]] − E [qθ (s, a)]) + λEs,a [H(µs,a , qθs,a )] ,
                                                                                                  1
where the results is simplified by using a particular increasing function f (H) = (λH) 2 /γ and
λ ∈ [0, 1] is the hyperparameter that controls the risk-sensitive regularization effect. Interestingly,
when we leverage the whole target density function pbs,a to approximate the true µs,a , the objective
function in Eq. 12 can be viewed as an exact interpolation of loss functions between expectation-
based RL (the first term) and categorical distributional RL loss (the second term), e.g., C51. Note
that for the target T π E [qθ∗ (s, a)], we use the target value distribution neural network qθ∗ to stabilize
the training, which is consistent with the Neural FZI framework analyzed in Section 3.1.
Optimize the policy πφ . We optimize πφ in Eq. 11 based on the Q(s, a) and thus the new objec-
tive function Jˆπ (φ) can be expressed as Jˆπ (φ) = Es,a∼πφ [E [qθ (s, a)]]. The complete DERAC
algorithm is described in Algorithm 1 of Appendix J.

4     E XPERIMENTS
In the experiment, we firstly verify the regularization effect of distributional RL analyzed in Sec-
tion 3.2 by decomposing the action-value histogram density function via Eq. 5 on both Atari games
and MuJoCo environments. Next, we demonstrate the convergence and favorable performance of
DERAC algorithm on continual control environments. Finally, an empirical extension to Implicit
Quantile Networks (IQN) is provided to reveal mutual impacts of different entropy regularizations.
Environments. To demonstrate the value distribution decomposition, we mainly present results on
three Atari games, including Breakout, Seaquest, Hero, over 3 seeds and three continuous control
MuJoCo environments in OpenAI Gym, including ant, swimmer and bipedalwalkerhardcore, over 5
seeds. For the extension to IQN, we perform experiments on eight MuJoCo environments.
Baselines. To evaluate the risk-sensitive entropy regularization effect of distributional RL, we
conduct an ablation study on C51 (Bellemare et al., 2017a) on Atari games and distributional
SAC (DSAC) (Ma et al., 2020) on MuJoCo environments. The implementation of DERAC algo-
rithm is based on distributional SAC (Haarnoja et al., 2018; Ma et al., 2020). More implementation
details are provided in Appendix I.

4.1   D ISTRIBUTION R EGULARIZATION E FFECT OF D ISTRIBUTIONAL RL

We demonstrate the rationale of action-value density function decomposition in Eq. 3 and the distri-
bution regularization effect analyzed in Eq. 5 based on C51 algorithm equipped with KL divergence.
Firstly, it is a fact that the value distribution decomposition is based on the equivalence between KL
divergence and cross entropy owing to the leverage of target network. Hence, we demonstrate that
C51 algorithm can still achieve similar results under the cross entropy loss across four Atari games
in Figure 5 of Appendix K. In both the value-based C51 loss and the critic loss in DSAC with C51,
we replace the whole target categorical distribution pbs,a (x) in C51 with the derived µ   bs,a (x) under
different ε in the cross entropy loss, allowing to investigate the risk-sensitive regularization effect of
distributional RL. Concretely, we define ε as the proportion of probability of the bin that contains
the expectation with the mass to transport to other bins. We use ε to replace   for convenience as the
leverage of ε can always guarantee the valid density function µ     b analyzed in Proposition 1. A large
proportion probability ε that transports less mass to other bins, corresponds to a large   in Eq. 3.


                                                     7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                                            %UHDNRXW                                                                                                   6HDTXHVW                                                                                                       +HUR
                                                '41                                                                                                            '41                                                                                                           '41
                                             &                                                                                                                  &                                                                                                        &

   $YHUDJH 5HWXUQ


                                                                                                                  $YHUDJH 5HWXUQ


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                $YHUDJH 5HWXUQ
                                                 ( , q )( = 0.1)                                                                                                  ( , q )( = 0.1)                                                                                                ( , q )( = 0.1)
                                                    ( , q )( = 0.5)                                                                                                      ( , q )( = 0.5)                                                                                                    ( , q )( = 0.5)
                                                 ( , q )( = 0.8)                                                                                                  ( , q )( = 0.8)                                                                                                ( , q )( = 0.8)


                                                    7LPH 6WHSV   H                                                                                       7LPH 6WHSV   H                                                                                    7LPH 6WHSV   H

                                                                         DQW
                                                                                                                                                                               VZLPPHU                                                                             ELSHGDOZDONHUKDUGFRUH
                                                                                                                                                                    6$&
                                                                                                                                                                '6$&

 $YHUDJH 5HWXUQ


                                                                                                                    $YHUDJH 5HWXUQ


                                                                                                                                                                                                                               $YHUDJH 5HWXUQ
                                                                                                                                                                    ( , q )( = 0.1)
                                                                                                                                                                  ( , q )( = 0.5)
                                                                                                                                                                        ( , q )( = 0.8)
                                                                            6$&                                                                                                                                                                                                                      6$&
                                                                                '6$&                                                                                                                                                                                                                     '6$&
                                                                                ( , q )( = 0.1)                                                                                                                                                                                                              ( , q )( = 0.1)

                                                                                   ( , q )( = 0.5)                                                                                                                                                                                                              ( , q )( = 0.5)
                                                                                ( , q )( = 0.8)                                                                                                                                                                                                         ( , q )( = 0.8)

                                                         7LPH 6WHSV   H                                                                                  7LPH 6WHSV   H                                                                                7LPH 6WHSV   H

Figure 2: (First Row) Learning curves of C51 with value distribution decomposition H(µ, qθ ) under
different ε on three Atari games over 3 seeds. (Second Row) Learning curves of C51 with value
distribution decomposition H(µ, qθ ) under different ε on three MuJoCo environments over 5 seeds.


As shown in Figure 2, when ε gradually decreases from 0.8 to 0.1, the learning curves of C51
H(µ, qθ ) tend to degrade from vanilla C51 to DQN across both Atari and MuJoCo, although their
sensitivity in terms of ε may depend on the environment, e.g., bipedalwalkerhardcore. This em-
pirical observation corroborates the theoretical results we derive in Section 3.2, suggesting that
risk-sensitive entropy regularization is pivotal to the success of distributional RL algorithms.


                                                                           DQW
                                                                                                                                                                               VZLPPHU                                                                             ELSHGDOZDONHUKDUGFRUH
                                                                                                                                                                     6$&
                                                                                                                                                              $&
                                                                                                                       $YHUDJH 5HWXUQ


                                                                                                                                                                                                                           $YHUDJH 5HWXUQ
   $YHUDJH 5HWXUQ


                                                                                                                                                                 '6$& &
                                                                                                                                                                   '(5$&  = 0.9,       = 0.5                                                                                             6$&

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                $&
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 '6$& &

                                                                6$&                                                                                                                                                                                                                         '(5$&  = 0.9,      = 0.5
                                                                    $&

                                                                    '6$& &
                                                                '(5$&  = 0.9,        = 0.5


                                                         7LPH 6WHSV   H                                                                                  7LPH 6WHSV   H                                                                               7LPH 6WHSV   H

              Figure 3: Learning curves of DERAC algorithms on three MuJoCo environments over 5 seeds.


4.2                                        C ONVERGENCE OF DERAC A LGORITHM

We further demonstrate the convergence of DERAC algorithm. Figure 3 showcases that DE-
RAC converges and achieves desirable performance on MuJoCo environments compared with
AC (SAC without vanilla entropy) in the blue line. More importantly, Distribution-Entropy-
Regularization (DER) in the red line could be remarkably beneficial for learning on the complex
Bipedalwalkerhardcore, where a risk-sensitive exploration significantly improves the performance.
It is worthwhile to know that our goal to introduce DERAC algorithm is not to pursue the empiri-
cal superiority of performance, but to corroborate the theoretical convergence of DERAC algorithm
and DERPI in Theorem 2. In addition, as we choose ε = 0.9 in DERAC algorithm, there exists a
distribution information loss, resulting in the learning performance degradation, e.g., on Swimmer.
In practice, we can directly deploy distributional SAC to seek for a better performance. We also
provide a sensitivity analysis of DERAC regarding λ in Figure 6 of Appendix K.

4.3                                        E XTENSION TO Q UANTILE - BASED D ISTRIBUTIONAL RL

Finally, due to the fact that our aforementioned theoretical analysis is closely connected to cate-
gorical distributional RL algorithms, e.g., C51, in order to make a comprehensive conclusion in


                                                                                                                                                                                          8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                                                     DQW                                                   KXPDQRLG                                                         ZDONHU G                                        ELSHGDOZDONHUKDUGFRUH
                                                        $&                                                             $&                                                                 $&                                                                     $&
                                                    $& 9(                                                           $& 9(
                                                                                                                                                                                              $& 9(                                                                  $& 9(


          $YHUDJH 5HWXUQ
                                                        $& 5(                                                           $& 5(                                                           $& 5(                                                                  $& 5(
                                                    $& 5( 9(                                                     $& 5( 9(                                                 $& 5( 9(                                                            $& 5( 9(


                                                             7LPH 6WHSV   H                                       7LPH 6WHSV   H                                       7LPH 6WHSV   H                                              7LPH 6WHSV   H
                                                       KDOIFKHHWDK
                                                                                                                                    UHDFKHU                                                     VZLPPHU
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       KXPDQRLGVWDQGXS



    $YHUDJH 5HWXUQ


                                                                                  $&                                                                 $&                                                                 $&                                                                        $&
                                                                              $& 9(                                                        $& 9(                                                         $& 9(                                                             $& 9(
                                                                                  $& 5(                                                           $& 5(                                                           $& 5(                                                             $& 5(
                                                                                 $& 5( 9(
                                                                                                                                                    $& 5( 9(                                                    $& 5( 9(                                                            $& 5( 9(


                                                             7LPH 6WHSV   H                                       7LPH 6WHSV   H                                       7LPH 6WHSV   H                                              7LPH 6WHSV   H


Figure 4: Learning curves of AC, AC+VE, AC+RE and AC+RE+VE over 5 seeds with smooth size
5 across eight MuJoCo environments where distributional RL part is based on IQN.


broader distributional RL branches, we thus heuristically extend our results in quantile-based dis-
tributional RL. This investigation is also based on the intermediate role of histogram function we
analyzed in Section 3.2. Specifically, a careful ablation study is conducted to control the effects of
vanilla entropy (VE), risk-sensitive entropy (RE) and their mutual impact. We denote SAC with and
without vanilla entropy as AC and AC+VE, and distributional SAC with and without vanilla entropy
as AC+RE+VE and AC+RE, where VE and RE are short for Vanilla Entropy and Risk-sensitive
Entropy. For the implementation, we leverage the quantiles generation strategy in IQN (Dabney
et al., 2018a) in distributional SAC (Ma et al., 2020). Hyper-parameters are listed in Appendix I. As
suggested in Figure 4, although both vanilla entropy and risk-sensitive entropy effects may vary for
different environments, we make the following conclusions:
(1) Vanilla entropy effect can enhance the performance as it is easily observed that AC+VE (blue
line) outperforms AC (red lines) across most environments except on the humanoid and swimmer.
The risk-sensitive entropy effect (RE) from distributional RL is also able to benefit the learning
due to the fact that AC+RE (black lines) is more likely to bypass AC (red lines) especially on the
complex BipealWalkerHardcore environment (hard for exploration).
(2) The use of both risk-sensitive entropy and vanilla entropy may interfere with each other, e.g.,
on BipealWalkerHardcore and Swimmer games, where AC+RE+VE (orange lines) is significantly
inferior to AC+RE (black lines). This may results from the different exploration preference of
two regularization effects. SAC encourages the policy to visit states with high entropy to pursue
the diversity of states to optimize, while distributional RL promotes the risk-sensitive exploration
to visit state and action pairs whose action-value distribution has larger degree of dispersion. We
hypothesize that mixing two different exploration directions may lead to sub-optimal solutions in
certain environments, thus interfering with each other eventually.


5                         D ISCUSSIONS AND C ONCLUSION

Our regularization interpretation is based on histogram function equipped the KL divergence,
strongly connected with categorical distributional RL. Although the histogram is linked with quan-
tile function as well, a direct analysis based on quantile function is also promising in the future.
In this paper, we illuminate the behavior difference of distributional RL over expectation-based
RL from the perspective of regularization. A risk-sensitive entropy regularization is derived for
distributional RL within Neural FZI to explain the potential advantage of distributional RL. We
also establish a connection between distributional RL with maximum entropy RL. Our research
contributes to a deeper understanding of the potential superiority of distributional RL algorithms.


                                                                                                                                                                            9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Ethics Statement. As our study is related to reveal the regularization effect of distributional RL
algorithms, it is not involved with any ethics issue in our opinion.

Reproducibility Statement. Our results is based on the public implementation released in (Ma
et al., 2020) with necessary implementation details given in Appendix I. We also provide the detailed
proof in Appendix.

R EFERENCES
Martin Arjovsky and Léon Bottou. Towards principled methods for training generative adversarial
 networks. International Conference on Learning Representations, 2017, 2017.

Martin Arjovsky, Soumith Chintala, and Léon Bottou. Wasserstein generative adversarial networks.
 In International conference on machine learning, pp. 214–223. PMLR, 2017.

Marc G Bellemare, Will Dabney, and Rémi Munos. A distributional perspective on reinforcement
 learning. International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML), 2017a.

Marc G Bellemare, Ivo Danihelka, Will Dabney, Shakir Mohamed, Balaji Lakshminarayanan,
 Stephan Hoyer, and Rémi Munos. The cramer distance as a solution to biased wasserstein gradi-
 ents. arXiv preprint arXiv:1705.10743, 2017b.

Marc G. Bellemare, Will Dabney, and Mark Rowland. Distributional Reinforcement Learning. MIT
 Press, 2022. http://www.distributional-rl.org.

Will Dabney, Georg Ostrovski, David Silver, and Rémi Munos. Implicit quantile networks for
 distributional reinforcement learning. International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML),
 2018a.

Will Dabney, Mark Rowland, Marc G Bellemare, and Rémi Munos. Distributional reinforcement
 learning with quantile regression. Association for the Advancement of Artificial Intelligence
 (AAAI), 2018b.

Jianqing Fan, Zhaoran Wang, Yuchen Xie, and Zhuoran Yang. A theoretical analysis of deep q-
   learning. In Learning for Dynamics and Control, pp. 486–489. PMLR, 2020.

Tuomas Haarnoja, Haoran Tang, Pieter Abbeel, and Sergey Levine. Reinforcement learning with
  deep energy-based policies. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 1352–1361.
  PMLR, 2017.

Tuomas Haarnoja, Aurick Zhou, Kristian Hartikainen, George Tucker, Sehoon Ha, Jie Tan, Vikash
  Kumar, Henry Zhu, Abhishek Gupta, Pieter Abbeel, et al. Soft actor-critic algorithms and appli-
  cations. arXiv preprint arXiv:1812.05905, 2018.

Seungyul Han and Youngchul Sung. A max-min entropy framework for reinforcement learning.
  Advances in neural information processing systems (NeurIPS), 2021.

Geoffrey Hinton, Oriol Vinyals, and Jeff Dean. Distilling the knowledge in a neural network. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:1503.02531, 2015.

Peter J Huber. Robust Statistics, volume 523. John Wiley & Sons, 2004.

Clare Lyle, Marc G Bellemare, and Pablo Samuel Castro. A comparative analysis of expected
  and distributional reinforcement learning. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial
  Intelligence, volume 33, pp. 4504–4511, 2019.

Xiaoteng Ma, Li Xia, Zhengyuan Zhou, Jun Yang, and Qianchuan Zhao. Dsac: Distributional soft
  actor critic for risk-sensitive reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2004.14547, 2020.

Yecheng Jason Ma, Dinesh Jayaraman, and Osbert Bastani. Conservative offline distributional rein-
  forcement learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2107.06106, 2021.


                                                 10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


John Martin, Michal Lyskawinski, Xiaohu Li, and Brendan Englot. Stochastically dominant distribu-
  tional reinforcement learning. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 6745–6754.
  PMLR, 2020.
Borislav Mavrin, Shangtong Zhang, Hengshuai Yao, Linglong Kong, Kaiwen Wu, and Yaoliang
  Yu. Distributional reinforcement learning for efficient exploration. International Conference on
  Machine Learning (ICML), 2019.
Jincheng Mei, Chenjun Xiao, Csaba Szepesvari, and Dale Schuurmans. On the global convergence
   rates of softmax policy gradient methods. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp.
   6820–6829. PMLR, 2020.
Volodymyr Mnih, Koray Kavukcuoglu, David Silver, Andrei A Rusu, Joel Veness, Marc G Belle-
  mare, Alex Graves, Martin Riedmiller, Andreas K Fidjeland, Georg Ostrovski, et al. Human-level
  control through deep reinforcement learning. nature, 518(7540):529–533, 2015.
Tetsuro Morimura, Masashi Sugiyama, Hisashi Kashima, Hirotaka Hachiya, and Toshiyuki Tanaka.
  Parametric return density estimation for reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:1203.3497,
  2012.
Rafael Müller, Simon Kornblith, and Geoffrey Hinton. When does label smoothing help? arXiv
  preprint arXiv:1906.02629, 2019.
Thanh Tang Nguyen, Sunil Gupta, and Svetha Venkatesh. Distributional reinforcement learning with
  maximum mean discrepancy. Association for the Advancement of Artificial Intelligence (AAAI),
  2020.
Martin Riedmiller. Neural fitted q iteration–first experiences with a data efficient neural reinforce-
 ment learning method. In European conference on machine learning, pp. 317–328. Springer,
 2005.
Mark Rowland, Marc Bellemare, Will Dabney, Rémi Munos, and Yee Whye Teh. An analysis
 of categorical distributional reinforcement learning. In International Conference on Artificial
 Intelligence and Statistics, pp. 29–37. PMLR, 2018.
Mark Rowland, Robert Dadashi, Saurabh Kumar, Rémi Munos, Marc G Bellemare, and Will Dab-
 ney. Statistics and samples in distributional reinforcement learning. International Conference on
 Machine Learning (ICML), 2019.
Ke Sun, Yi Liu, Yingnan Zhao, Hengshuai Yao, Shangling Jui, and Linglong Kong. Exploring
  the robustness of distributional reinforcement learning against noisy state observations. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2109.08776, 2021.
Ke Sun, Yingnan Zhao, Yi Liu, Bei Jiang, and Linglong Kong. Distributional reinforcement learning
  via sinkhorn iterations. arXiv preprint arXiv:2202.00769, 2022.
Richard S Sutton and Andrew G Barto. Reinforcement learning: An Introduction. MIT press, 2018.
Larry Wasserman. All of nonparametric statistics. Springer Science & Business Media, 2006.
Christopher JCH Watkins and Peter Dayan. Q-learning. Machine learning, 8(3-4):279–292, 1992.
Ronald J Williams and Jing Peng. Function optimization using connectionist reinforcement learning
  algorithms. Connection Science, 3(3):241–268, 1991.
Derek Yang, Li Zhao, Zichuan Lin, Tao Qin, Jiang Bian, and Tie-Yan Liu. Fully parameterized quan-
  tile function for distributional reinforcement learning. Advances in neural information processing
  systems, 32:6193–6202, 2019.
Fan Zhou, Jianing Wang, and Xingdong Feng. Non-crossing quantile regression for distributional
  reinforcement learning. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 33, 2020.


                                                 11
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


A    C ONVERGENCE G UARANTEE OF C ATEGORICAL D ISTRIBUTIONAL RL

Categorical Distributional RL (Bellemare et al., 2017a) uses the heuristic projection operator ΠC
that was defined as
                               
                                δz1                          y ≤ z1
                                  zi+1 −y        y−zi
                    ΠC (δy ) =            δz +        δz      zi < y ≤ zi+1 ,                 (13)
                                zi+1 −zi i zi+1 −zi i+1
                                 δzK                          y > zK

and extended affinely to  finite mixtures    ofPDirac measures, so that for a mixture of Diracs
PN                            PN                  N
   i=1 pi δyi , we have ΠC      i=1 pi δyi  =     i=1 pi ΠC (δyi ). The Cramér distance was recently
studied as an alternative to the Wasserstein distances in the context of generative models (Bellemare
et al., 2017b). Recall the definition of Cramér distance.
Definition 1. (Definition 3 (Rowland et al., 2018)) The Cramér distance `2 between two distribu-
tions ν1 , ν2 ∈ P(R), with cumulative distribution functions Fν1 , Fν2 respectively, is defined by:
                                            Z                             1/2
                                                                 2
                         `2 (ν1 , ν2 ) =        (Fν1 (x) − Fν2 (x)) dx          .
                                            R

Further, the supremum-Cramér metric `¯2 is defined between two distribution functions η, µ ∈
P(R)X ×A by

                         `¯2 (η, µ) =   sup     `2 η (x,a) , µ(x,a) .
                                           (x,a)∈X ×A


Thus, the contraction of categorical distributional RL can be guaranteed under Cramér distance:
                                                                                 √
Proposition 5. (Proposition 2 (Rowland et al., 2018)) The operator ΠC T π is a γ-contraction in
`¯2 .

An insight behind this conclusion is that Cramér distance endows a particular subset with a no-
tion of orthogonal projection, and the orthogonal projection onto the subset is exactly the heuristic
projection ΠC (Proposition 1 in (Rowland et al., 2018)).


B    P ROOF OF P ROPOSITION 1

Proposition 1. Denote pbs,a (x ∈ ∆E ) = pE /∆. Following the density function decomposition in
              PN
       b(x) = i=1 pµi 1(x ∈ ∆i )/∆ is a valid probability density function ⇐⇒   ≥ 1 − pE .
Eq. 3, µ


Proof. Recap a valid probability density function requires non-negative and one-bounded probabil-
ity in each bin and all probabilities should sum to 1.
Necessity. (1) When x ∈ ∆E , Eq. 3 can simplified as pE /∆ = (1 −  )/∆ +  pµE /∆, where pµE =
b(x ∈ ∆E ). Thus, pµE = p E − 1−
µ                                                                    µ   pE    1−    1   1−
                                     ≥ 0 if   ≥ 1 − pE . Obviously, pE =   −   ≤   −   = 1
                                s,a                                       µ
guaranteed by the validity of pbE . (2) When x ∈/ ∆E , we have pi /∆ =  pi /∆, i.e.,When x ∈
                                                                                           / ∆E ,
                       µ     pi     1−pE                               µ    pi
We immediately have pi =   ≤   ≤ 1 when   ≥ 1 − pE . Also, pi =   ≥ 0.
Sufficiency. (1) When x ∈ ∆E , let pµE = p E − 1−                                 µ  pE    1−
                                                      ≥ 0, we have   ≥ 1 − pE . pE =   −   ≤ 1
                                  µ    pi                       µ   pi
in nature. (2) When x ∈  / ∆E , pi =   ≥ 0 in nature. Let pi =   ≤ 1, we have pi ≤  . We need
to take the intersection set of (1) and (2), we find that   ≥ 1 − pE ⇒   ≥ 1 − pE ≥ pi that satisfies
condition in (2). Thus, the intersection set of (1) and (2) would be   ≥ 1 − pE .
In summary, as   ≥ 1 − pE is both the necessary and sufficient condition, we have the conclusion
     b(x) is a valid probability density function ⇐⇒   ≥ 1 − pE .
that µ



                                                    12
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


C    P ROOF OF T HEOREM 1
Theorem 1. Suppose ps,a (x) is Lipschitz continuous and the support of X is partitioned by N bins
with bin size ∆. Then
                                                              r        !
                                                                 log N
                           ps,a (x) − ps,a (x)| = O (∆) + OP
                      sup |b                                             .                   (14)
                       x                                          n∆2

Proof. Our proof mainly refers to (Wasserman, 2006). In particular, the difference of pbs,a (x) −
ps,a (x) can be written as
                 pbs,a (x) − ps,a (x) = E (b
                                           ps,a (x)) − p(x) + pbs,a (x) − E (b
                                                                             ps,a (x)) .
                                        |        {z       } |            {z          }        (15)
                                              bias               stochastic variation

(1) The first bias term. Without loss of generality, we consider x ∈ ∆k , we have
                                         P (X ∈ ∆k )
                          ps,a (x)) =
                       E (b
                                               ∆
                                         R z0 +k∆
                                          z +(k−1)∆
                                                      p(y)dy
                                     = 0
                                                   ∆                                        (16)
                                         F (z0 + (k − 1)∆) − F (z0 + (k − 1)∆)
                                     =
                                                z0 + k∆ − (z0 + (k − 1)∆)
                                          s,a 0
                                     = p (x ),
where the last equality is based on the mean value theorem. According the L-Lipschitz continuity
property, we have
                            |E (bps,a (x)) − ps,a (x)| = |ps,a (x0 ) − ps,a (x)|
                                                        ≤ L|x0 − x|                         (17)
                                                        ≤ L∆
                                                                                     Pn
(2) The second stochastic variation term. If we let x ∈ ∆k , then pbs,a = pk = n1 i=1 1(Xi ∈
∆k ), we thus have

                P sup |b  ps,a (x) − E (b  ps,a (x))| >
                      x
                                         n
                                                                                   !
                                    1X
                 =P        max               1 (Xi ∈ ∆j ) /∆ − P (Xi ∈ ∆j ) /∆ >
                        j=1,··· ,N n
                                        i=1
                                         n
                                                                                 !
                                    1X                                                      (18)
                 =P        max               1 (Xi ∈ ∆j ) − P (Xi ∈ ∆j ) > ∆
                        j=1,··· ,N n
                                        i=1
                     N            n
                                                                              !
                    X          1 X
                 ≤      P              1 (Xi ∈ ∆j ) − P (Xi ∈ ∆j ) > ∆
                    j=1
                              n i=1
                 ≤ N · exp −2n∆2  2

                                                (by Hoeffding’s inequality),
where in the last inequality we know that the indicator function is bounded in [0, 1]. We then let the
last term be a constant independent of N, n, ∆, thus,
                                                                r        !
                                                                   log N
                                ps,a (x) − E (b
                           sup |b             ps,a (x))| = OP                                    (19)
                            x                                       n∆2

In summary, as the above inequality holds for each x, we thus have the uniform convergence rate of
a histogram density estimator
           ps,a (x) − ps,a (x)| ≤ sup |E (b
      sup |b                              ps,a (x)) − ps,a (x)| + sup |b
                                                                       ps,a (x) − E (b
                                                                                     ps,a (x))|
       x                           x                               x
                                                            !
                                                                                                (20)
                                                  r
                                                     log N
                                = O (∆) + OP             2
                                                              .
                                                      n∆


                                                 13
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


D    P ROOF OF P ROPOSITION 2
                                                              PN
Proposition 2. Suppose the target categorical distribution c = i=1 pi δzi and the target histogram
                 PN
function h(x) =    i=1 pi 1(x ∈ ∆i )/∆, updating the parameterized categorical distribution cθ
under KL divergence is equivalent to updating the parameterized histogram function hθ .

Proof. For the histogram density estimator hθ and the true target density function p(x), we can
simplify the KL divergence as follows.
                               N Z zi            pi (x)
                              X        pi (x)
             DKL (h, hθ ) =                   log h∆i dx
                              i=1 zi−1
                                         ∆           θ
                                                           ∆
                             N Z zi                          N Z zi
                            X        pi (x)     pi (x)      X        pi (x)    hi
                          =                 log        dx −                 log θ dx
                            i=1 zi−1
                                       ∆          ∆         i=1 zi−1
                                                                       ∆       ∆
                                                                                                   (21)
                               N
                              X zi pi (x)          hi
                                 Z
                          ∝−                  log θ dx
                              i=1 zi−1
                                          ∆         ∆
                                N                          N
                                X                  hiθ    X
                          =−          pi (x) log       ∝−     pi (x) log hiθ
                                i=1
                                                   ∆      i=1

where hiθ is determined by i and θ and is independent of x. For categorical distribution estimator cθ
with the probability pi in for each atom zi , we also have its target categorical distribution p(x) with
each probability pi , we have:
                                                N
                                                X              pi
                              DKL (c, cθ ) =          pi log
                                                i=1
                                                               ciθ
                                                N
                                                X                      N
                                                                       X
                                            =         pi log pi −            pi log ciθ            (22)
                                                i=1                    i=1
                                                   N
                                                   X
                                            ∝−            pi log ciθ
                                                    i=1


In categorical distributional RL we only use a discrete categorical distribution with probabilities
centered on the fixed atoms {zi }N i=1 , while the histogram density estimator in our analysis is a
continuous function defined on [z0 , zN ]. We reveal that minimizing the KL divergence regarding the
parameterized categorical distribution in Eq. 22 is equivalent to minimizing the cross entropy loss
regarding the parameterized histogram function in Eq. 21.

E    P ROPERTIES OF KL DIVERGENCE IN D ISTRIBUTIONAL RL
Proposition 6. Given two probability measures µ and ν, we define the supreme DKL as a functional
P(X )S×A × P(X )S×A → R, i.e., DKL        ∞
                                            (µ, ν) = sup(x,a)∈S×A DKL (µ(x, a), ν(x, a)). we have:
     π                                                                ∞           ∞
(1) T is a non-expansive distributional Bellman operator under DKL       , i.e., DKL (Tπ Z1 , Tπ Z2 ) ≤
  ∞                   ∞
DKL (Z1 , Z2 ), (2) DKL (Zn , Z) → 0 implies the Wasserstein distance Wp (Zn , Z) → 0, (3) the ex-
                                                ∞
pectation of Z π is still γ-contractive under DKL , i.e., kETπ Z1 − ETπ Z2 k∞ ≤ γ kEZ1 − EZ2 k∞ .

Proof. We firstly assume Zθ is absolutely continuous and the supports of two distributions in KL
divergence have a negligible intersection (Arjovsky & Bottou, 2017), under which the KL divergence
is well-defined.


                                                       14
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                                                               ∞
(1) Please refer to (Morimura et al., 2012) for the proof. Therefore, we have DKL (Tπ Z1 , Tπ Z2 ) ≤
  ∞                                                                   ∞
DKL  (Z1 , Z2 ), implying that Tπ is a non-expansive operator under DKL .
                          ∞
(2) By the definition of DKL , we have sups,a DKL (Zn (s, a), Z(s, a)) → 0 implies DKL (Zn , Z) →
0. DKL (Zn , Z) → 0 implies the total variation distance δ(Zn , Z) → 0 according to a straightfor-
ward application of Pinsker’s inequality

                                                        r
                                                        1
                                         δ (Zn , Z) ≤     DKL (Zn , Z) → 0
                                                        2
                                                      r                                                    (23)
                                                        1
                                         δ (Z, Zn ) ≤     DKL (Z, Zn ) → 0
                                                        2

Based on Theorem 2 in WGAN (Arjovsky et al., 2017), δ(Zn , Z) → 0 implies Wp (Zn , Z) → 0.
This is trivial by recalling the fact that δ and W give the strong an weak topologies on the dual of
(C(X ), k · k∞ ) when restricted to Prob(X ).
(3) The conclusion holds because the Tπ degenerates to T π regardless of the metric dp (Bellemare
et al., 2017a). Specifically, due to the linearity of expectation, we obtain that

              kETπ Z1 − ETπ Z2 k∞ = kT π EZ1 − T π EZ2 k∞ ≤ γkEZ1 − EZ2 k∞ .                               (24)

This implies that the expectation of Z under DKL exponentially converges to the expectation of Z ∗ ,
i.e., γ-contraction.



F    P ROOF OF P ROPOSITION 3

Proposition 3 Denote qθs,a (x) as the histogram density function of Zθk (s, a) in Neural FZI. Based
on the decomposition in Eq. 3 and KL divergence as dp , Neural FZI in Eq. 2 is simplified as

                                        n
                                     1 Xh                               0       0
                                                                                                i
              Zθk+1 = argmin               − log qθsi ,ai (∆iE ) + αH(b
                                                                      µsi ,πZ (si ) , qθsi ,ai ) ,         (25)
                             qθ      n i=1


Proof. Firstly, given a fixed p(x) we know that minimizing DKL (p, qθ ) is equivalent to minimizing
H(p, q) by following

                     N Z zi
                     X                           pi (x)/∆
    DKL (p, qθ ) =                pi (x)/∆ log            dx
                     i=1   zi−1                   qθi /∆
                       N Z zi                                     N Z zi
                                                                                                           (26)
                       X                                          X
                =−                  pi (x)/∆ log qθi /∆ dx − (                 pi (x)/∆ log pi (x)/∆ dx)
                       i=1   zi−1                                 i=1   zi−1

                = H(p, qθ ) − H(p)
                ∝ H(p, qθ )

                                     0       0
Based on H(p, qθ ), we use psi ,πZ (si ) (x) to denote the target probability density function of the
random variable R(si , ai ) + γZθk∗ (s0i , πZ (s0i )). Then, we can derive the objective function within


                                                            15
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


each Neural FZI as
   n
1X         0      0
      H(psi ,πZ (si ) (x), qθsi ,ai )
n i=1
     n
  1 X                                                     0      0

=        (1 −  )H(1(x ∈ ∆iE )/∆, qθsi ,ai /∆) +  H(b   µsi ,πZ (si ) /∆, qθsi ,ai /∆)
  n i=1
                                                                                                                                 
     n              N Z zj                                                     N Z zj
  1 X             X                               s  ,a
                                                                             X              0       0                s  ,a
=         −(1 −  )              1(x ∈ ∆iE )/∆ log qθ i i (∆j )/∆dx −                      bsi ,πZ (si ) (∆j )/∆ log qθ i i (∆j )/∆
                                                                                          µ
  n i=1            j=1   z j−1                                                j=1   z j−1
                                                                                          
     n                                        N
  1 X                   si ,ai
                                             X 0            0              s  ,a
=         (1 −  )(− log qθ (∆iE )/∆) −           bsi ,πZ (si ) (∆j ) log qθ i i (∆j )/∆
                                                 µ
  n i=1                                      j=1
     n
  1 X                                         0       0

∝       (1 −  )(− log qθsi ,ai (∆iE )) +  H(b
                                            µsi ,πZ (si ) , qθsi ,ai )
  n i=1
       n
    1 X                                0       0

∝         − log qθsi ,ai (∆iE ) + αH(b
                                     µsi ,πZ (si ) , qθsi ,ai ) , where α =     >0
    n i=1                                                                   1−
                                                                                                              (27)
                               0      0
where the cross entropy H(b µsi ,πZ (si ) , qθsi ,ai ) is based on the discrete distribution when i = 1, ..., N .
∆iE represent the interval that E [Z π (s0i , πZ (s0i ))] falls into, i.e., E [Z π (s0i , πZ (s0i ))] ∈ ∆iE .

G     P ROOF OF P ROPOSITION 4
Proposition 4 In Eq. 2 of Neural FZI, if the function class {Zθ : θ ∈ Θ} is sufficiently large such
that it contains {Yi }ni=1 , as ∆ → 0 (N → +∞), we have
                                        P (Zθk+1 (s, a) = T opt Qkθ∗ (s, a)) = 1,                            (28)
where T opt Qkθ∗ (s, a) is the target in Eq. 1 of Neural FQI.

Proof. Firstly, we define the distributional Bellman optimality operator Topt as follows:

                                                D
                                Topt Z(s, a) = R(s, a) + γZ (S 0 , a∗ )
                                                                                                             (29)
                                S 0 ∼ P (· | s, a),     a∗ = argmaxE [Z (S 0 , a0 )]
                                                                  a0

If {Zθ : θ ∈ Θ} is sufficiently large enough such that it contains Topt Zθ∗ , then optimizing Neural
FZI in Eq. 2 leads to Zθk+1 = Topt Zθ∗ .
We apply the action-value density function decomposition on the target histogram function pbs,a (x).
Consider the parameterized histogram density function hθ and denote hEθ /∆ as the bin height in the
bin ∆E , under the KL divergence between the first histogram function 1(x ∈ ∆E ) with hθ (x), the
objective function is simplified as
                                                                      hE
                                                        Z
                                                               1
                       DKL (1(x ∈ ∆E )/∆, hθ (x)) ∝ −             log θ dx
                                                         x∈∆E ∆        ∆                       (30)
                                                            E
                                                   ∝ − log hθ
Since {Zθ : θ ∈ Θ} is sufficiently large enough, the KL minimizer would be b          hθ = 1(x ∈ ∆E )/∆
in expectation. Then, arg minhθ lim∆→0 DKL (1(x ∈ ∆E )/∆, hθ (x)) = δE[Z target (s,a)] , where
δE[Z target (s,a)] is a Dirac Delta function centered at E [Z target (s, a)] and can be viewed as a gener-
alized probability density function. The limit behavior from a histogram function pb to a continuous
one for Z target is guaranteed by Theorem 1, and this also applies from hθ to Zθ . In Neural FZI, we
have Z target = Topt Zθ∗ . According to the definition of Dirac function, as ∆ → 0, we attain
                                   P (Zθk+1 (s, a) = E Topt Zθk∗ (s, a) ) = 1

                                                                                                      (31)


                                                           16
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Due to the linearity of expectation analyzed in Lemma 4 of (Bellemare et al., 2017a), we have
                               E Topt Zθk∗ (s, a) = Topt E Zθk∗ (s, a)

                                                                                                                   (32)
                                                              = T opt Qkθ∗ (s, a)
Finally, we obtain:
                               P (Zθk+1 (s, a) = T opt Qkθ∗ (s, a)) = 1           as ∆ → 0                         (33)



H     P ROOF OF C ONVERGENCE OF S OFT D ISTRIBUTIONAL P OLICY I TERATION
      IN T HEOREM 2

H.1    P ROOF OF S OFT D ISTRIBUTIONAL P OLICY E VALUATION IN L EMMA 1

Lemma 1(Distribution-Entropy-Regularized Policy Evaluation) Consider the distribution-entropy-
regularized Bellman operator Tdπ in Eq. 8 and the behavior of expectation of Z π (s, a), i.e., Q(s, a).
Assume H(µst ,at , qθst ,at ) ≤ M for all (st , at ) ∈ S × A, where M is a constant. Define Qk+1 =
Tdπ Qk , then Qk+1 will converge to a corrected Q-value of π as k → ∞ with the new objective
function defined as
                                    T
                                    X
                        J 0 (π) =         E(st ,at )∼ρπ [r (st , at ) + γf (H (µst ,at , qθst ,at ))] .            (34)
                                    t=0


Proof. Firstly, we plug in V (st+1 ) into RHS of the iteration in Eq. 8, then we obtain
              Tdπ Q (st , at )
               = r (st , at ) + γEst+1 ∼P (·|st ,at ) [V (st+1 )]
                                                                                                                   (35)
              = r (st , at ) + γf (H (µst ,at , qθst ,at )) + γE(st+1 ,at+1 )∼ρπ [Q (st+1 , at+1 )]
              , rπ (st , at ) + γE(st+1 ,at+1 )∼ρπ [Q (st+1 , at+1 )] ,

where rπ (st , at ) , r (st , at ) + γf (H (µst ,at , qθst ,at )) is the entropy augmented reward we redefine.
Applying the standard convergence results for policy evaluation (Sutton & Barto, 2018), we can
attain that this Bellman updating under Tdπ is convergent under the assumption of |A| < ∞ and
bounded entropy augmented rewards rπ .


H.2    P OLICY I MPROVEMENT WITH P ROOF

Lemma 2. (Distribution-Entropy-Regularized Policy Improvement) Let π ∈ Π and a new policy
πnew be updated via the policy improvement step in Eq. 11. Then Qπnew (st , at ) ≥ Qπold (st , at ) for
all (st , at ) ∈ S × A with |A| ≤ ∞.

Proof. The policy improvement in Lemma 2 implies that Eat ∼πnew [Qπold (st , at )] ≥
Eat ∼πold [Qπold (st , at )], we consider the Bellman equation via the distribution-entropy-regularized
                        π
Bellman operator Tsd       :
 Qπold (st , at ) , r (st , at ) + γEst+1 ∼ρ [V πold (st+1 )]
                    = r (st , at ) + γf (H (µst ,at , qθst ,at )) + γE(st+1 ,at+1 )∼ρπold [Qπold (st+1 , at+1 )]
                    ≤ r (st , at ) + γf (H (µst ,at , qθst ,at )) + γE(st+1 ,at+1 )∼ρπnew [Qπold (st+1 , at+1 )]
                                                                                                                   (36)
                    = rπnew (st , at ) + γE(st+1 ,at+1 )∼ρπnew [Qπold (st+1 , at+1 )]
               ..
                .
                    ≤ Qπnew (st+1 , at+1 ) ,
where we have repeated expanded Qπold on the RHS by applying the distribution-entropy-regularized
distributional Bellman operator. Convergence to Qπnew follows from Lemma 1.


                                                              17
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


H.3    P ROOF OF S OFT D ISTRIBUTIONAL P OLICY I TERATION IN T HEOREM 2

Theorem 2 (Distribution-Entropy-Regularized Policy Iteration) Assume H(µst ,at , qθst ,at ) ≤ M for
all (st , at ) ∈ S × A, where M is a constant. Repeatedly applying distribution-entropy-regularized
policy evaluation in Eq. 8 and the policy improvement in Eq. 11, the policy converges to an optimal
                         ∗
policy π ∗ such that Qπ (st , at ) ≥ Qπ (st , at ) for all π ∈ Π.

Proof. The proof is similar to soft policy iteration (Haarnoja et al., 2018). For the completeness, we
provide the proof here. By Lemma 2, as the number of iteration increases, the sequence Qπi at i-th
iteration is monotonically increasing. Since we assume the risk-sensitive entropy is bounded by M ,
the Qπ is thus bounded as the rewards are bounded. Hence, the sequence will converge to some π ∗ .
Further, we prove that π ∗ is in fact optimal. At the convergence point, for all π ∈ Π, it must be case
that:
                           Eat ∼π∗ [Qπold (st , at )] ≥ Eat ∼π [Qπold (st , at )] .
                                                         ∗
According to the proof in Lemma 2, we can attain Qπ (st , at ) > Qπ (st , at ) for (st , at ). That is
to say, the “corrected” value function of any other policy in Π is lower than the converged policy,
indicating that π ∗ is optimal.

I     I MPLEMENTATION D ETAILS
Our implementation is directly adapted from the source code in (Ma et al., 2020).
For Distributional SAC with C51, we use 51 atoms similar to the C51 (Bellemare et al., 2017a).
For distributional SAC with quantile regression, instead of using fixed quantiles in QR-DQN, we

                                  Table 1: Hyper-parameters Sheet.

                         Hyperparameter                                Value
                         Shared
                           Policy network learning rate                3e-4
                           (Quantile) Value network learning rate      3e-4
                           Optimization                                Adam
                           Discount factor                             0.99
                           Target smoothing                            5e-3
                           Batch size                                   256
                           Replay buffer size                           1e6
                           Minimum steps before training                1e4
                         DSAC with C51
                           Number of Atoms (N )                          51
                         DSAC with IQN
                           Number of quantile fractions (N )             32
                           Quantile fraction embedding size              64
                           Huber regression threshold                     1

          Hyperparameter                  Temperature Parameter β      Max episode lenght
          Walker2d-v2                               0.2                      1000
          Swimmer-v2                                0.2                      1000
          Reacher-v2                                0.2                      1000
          Ant-v2                                    0.2                      1000
          HalfCheetah-v2                            0.2                      1000
          Humanoid-v2                              0.05                      1000
          HumanoidStandup-v2                       0.05                      1000
          BipedalWalkerHardcore-v2                0.002                      2000


                                                  18
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


leverage the quantile fraction generation based on IQN (Dabney et al., 2018a) that uniformly samples
quantile fractions in order to approximate the full quantile function. In particular, we fix the number
of quantile fractions as N and keep them in an ascending order. Besides, we adapt the sampling as
                  PN −1
τ0 = 0, τi =  i / i=0 , where  i ∈ U [0, 1], i = 1, ..., N .

I.1                                          H YPER - PARAMETERS AND N ETWORK STRUCTURE .

We adopt the same hyper-parameters, which is listed in Table 1 and network structure as in the
original distributional SAC paper (Ma et al., 2020).

J                                     DERAC A LGORITHM

Algorithm 1 Distribution-Entropy-Regularized Actor Critic (DERAC) Algorithm
 1: Initialize two value networks qθ , qθ∗ , and policy network πφ .
 2: for each iteration do
 3:    for each environment step do
 4:       at ∼ πφ (at |st ).
 5:       st+1 ∼ p(st+1 |st , at ).
 6:       D ← D ∪ {(st , at , r (st , at ) , st+1 )}
 7:    end for
 8:    for each gradient step do
 9:       θ ← θ − λq ∇θ Jˆq (θ)
10:       φ ← φ + λπ ∇φ Jˆπ (φ).
11:       θ∗ ← τ θ + (1 − τ )θ∗
12:    end for
13: end for



K                                           E XPERIMENTS
Figure 5 suggests that C51 with cross entropy loss behaves similarly to the vanilla C51 equipped
with KL divergence.

                                                                  %UHDNRXW                                                                                             6HDTXHVW                                                                                                               +HUR

                                                           '41                                                                                                         '41                                                                                                                   '41

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    $YHUDJH 5HWXUQ
           $YHUDJH 5HWXUQ


                                                                                                                      $YHUDJH 5HWXUQ


                                                        &

                                                                                                                                                                          &                                                                                                                     &
                                                           &  B&(

                                                                                                                                                                          &  B&(                                                                                                         &  B&(


                                                           7LPH 6WHSV   H                                                                                 7LPH 6WHSV   H                                                                                       7LPH 6WHSV   H


                                                                              DQW
                                                                                                                                                                                VZLPPHU                                                                                       ELSHGDOZDONHUKDUGFRUH
                                                         6$&                                                                                                      6$&                                                                                                            6$&
                                                     '6$&                                                                                                    '6$&                                                                                                             '6$&
 $YHUDJH 5HWXUQ


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    $YHUDJH 5HWXUQ


                                                                                                                      $YHUDJH 5HWXUQ


                                                     '6$&B&(                                                                                              '6$&B&(                                                                                                    '6$&B&(


                                                                   7LPH 6WHSV   H                                                                              7LPH 6WHSV   H                                                                                          7LPH 6WHSV   H


Figure 5: (First row) Learning curves of C51 under cross entropy loss on Atari games over 3
seeds. (Second row) Learning curves of DSAC with C51 under cross entropy loss on MuJoCo
environments over 5 seeds.

Figure 6 shows that DERAC with different λ in Eq. 12 may behave differently on the different
environment. Learning curves of DERAC with an increasing λ will tend to DSAC (C51), e.g.,


                                                                                                                                                                                        19
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Bipedalwalkerhardcore, where DERAC with λ = 1 in the green line tends to DSAC (C51) in the
blue line. However, DERAC with a small λ is likely to outperform DSAC (C51) by only leverage
the expectation effect of value distribution, e.g., on Bipedalwalkerhardcore, where DERAC with
λ = 0, 0.5 bypass DERAC with λ = 1.0.


                                                           DQW
                                                                                                                                                     VZLPPHU                                                                      ELSHGDOZDONHUKDUGFRUH
                                                                                                                                            6$&
                                                                                                                                        '6$& &
 $YHUDJH 5HWXUQ


                                                                                                    $YHUDJH 5HWXUQ


                                                                                                                                                                                                 $YHUDJH 5HWXUQ

                                                                                                                                        '(5$&  = 1.0,     = 1.0
                                                                                                                                      '(5$&  = 1.0,     = 0.5
                                                                                                                                            '(5$&  = 1.0,     = 0.0
                                                    6$&                                                                                                                                                                                              6$&
                                                        '6$& &                                                                                                                                                                                     '6$& &

                                                        '(5$&  = 1.0,      = 1.0                                                                                                                                                                     '(5$&  = 1.0,       = 1.0
                                                       '(5$&  = 1.0,      = 0.5                                                                                                                                                                     '(5$&  = 1.0,       = 0.5
                                                    '(5$&  = 1.0,      = 0.0                                                                                                                                                                  '(5$&  = 1.0,       = 0.0

                                              7LPH 6WHSV   H                                                                    7LPH 6WHSV   H                                                                     7LPH 6WHSV   H

Figure 6: Learning curves of DERAC algorithms across different λ on three MuJoCo environments
over 5 seeds.


                                                                                                                                                           20
