Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


D EEP G ENERATIVE WASSERSTEIN G RADIENT F LOWS
 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                           A BSTRACT

         Deep generative modeling is a rapidly-advancing field with a wealth of modeling
         choices developed in the past decade. Amongst them, Wasserstein gradient flows
         (WGF) are a powerful and theoretically rich class of methods. However, their
         applications to high-dimensional distributions remain relatively underexplored.
         In this paper, we present Deep Generative Wasserstein Gradient Flows (DGGF),
         which constructs a WGF minimizing the entropy-regularized f -divergence be-
         tween two distributions. We demonstrate how to train a deep density ratio estima-
         tor that is required for the WGF and apply it to the task of generative modeling.
         Experiments demonstrate that DGGF is able to synthesize high-fidelity images of
         resolutions up to 128 × 128, directly in data space. We demonstrate that DGGF
         has an interpretable diagnostic of sample quality by naturally estimating the KL
         divergence throughout the gradient flow. Finally, we show DGGF’s modularity
         by composition with external density ratio estimators for conditional generation,
         as well as for unpaired image-to-image translation without modifications to the
         underlying framework.


1   I NTRODUCTION
Gradient flow methods are a powerful and general class of techniques with diverse applications rang-
ing from physics (Carrillo et al., 2019; Adams et al., 2011) and sampling (Bernton, 2018) to neural
network optimization (Chizat & Bach, 2018) and reinforcement learning (Richemond & Maginnis,
2017; Zhang et al., 2018). In particular, Wasserstein gradient flow (WGF) methods are a popular
specialization that model the gradient dynamics on the space of probability measures with respect
to the Wasserstein metric; these methods aim to construct the optimal path between two probabil-
ity measures — a source distribution q(x) and a target distribution p(x) — where the notion of
optimality refers to the path of steepest descent in Wasserstein space.
The freedom in choosing q(x) and p(x) when constructing the WGF makes the framework a natural
fit for a variety of generative modeling tasks. For data synthesis, we choose q(x) to be a simple
distribution easy to draw samples from (e.g., Gaussian), and p(x) to be a complex distribution
which we would like to learn (e.g., the distribution of natural images). The WGF then constructs
the optimal path from the simple distribution to synthesize data resembling that from the complex
distribution. Furthermore, we could choose both p(x) and q(x) to be distributions from different
domains of the same modality (e.g., images from separate domains). The WGF then naturally
performs domain translation.
However, despite this fit and the wealth of theoretical work established over the past decades (Am-
brosio et al., 2005; Santambrogio, 2017), applications of WGFs to generative modeling of high-
dimensional distributions remain under-explored and limited. A key difficulty is that the 2-
Wasserstein distance and divergence functionals are generally intractable. Existing works rely on
complex optimization schemes with constraints that contribute to model complexity, such as approx-
imations of the 2-Wasserstein distance with input convex neural networks (Mokrov et al., 2021), dual
variational optimization schemes with the Fenchel conjugate (Fan et al., 2021) or adopting a particle
simulation approach, but amortizing sample generation to auxiliary generators (Gao et al., 2019;
2022).
In this work, we take a step towards resolving the shortcomings of WGF methods for deep generative
modeling. We propose Deep Generative Wasserstein Gradient Flows (DGGF), which is formulated
using the gradient flow of entropy-regularized f -divergences (Fig. 1). As this formulation involves


                                                 1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                                        Unconditional
                                                          Image
                                                         Generation

                                                                           Automobile         Frog            Horse
                                                        Density Ratio
                                                         Composition
                                                      (Class-conditional
                                                         Generation)
                                                          Unpaired
                                                       Image-to-image
                                                         Translation
                                                          (Cat2dog)


                                                            Sample
                                                           Diagnostic                   Gradient flow steps
                                                         (KL Estimate)



Figure 1: Left: illustration of the generative gradient flow process using DGGF. The evolution of the
gradient flow is governed by the SDE shown in the figure. We visualize intermediate samples of the
LSUN Church dataset. Right: visualization of application domains of DGGF. At its core, DGGF is
able to perform high-fidelity unconditional image generation. The unconditional model can be used
for class-conditional generation via density ratio composition with external pretrained classifiers.
Additionally, DGGF is able to perform unpaired image-to-image translation with no modifications
needed to the framework. Finally, DGGF possesses an innate sample diagnostic by estimating the
KL divergence over the flow, which decreases as sample quality is improved over the flow.


density ratio estimation, we introduce a novel algorithm for training deep density ratio estimators
and show experimentally for the first time that gradient flow methods can scale to image dimensions
as high as 128 × 128. Our gradient flow is formulated entirely in the data space, with no need for
additional generator networks. The density ratio formulation allows DGGF to be composed with ex-
ternal density ratio estimators, which we show allows us to utilize pretrained external classifiers for
class-conditional generation. In addition, we demonstrate that DGGF can be viewed as estimating
the KL divergence of samples over the flow, providing it with an innate diagnostic to evaluate sam-
ple quality that also enhances model interpretability. We also show a simple technique of leveraging
data-dependent priors to boost generative performance. Finally, by leveraging the freedom of choos-
ing the source and target distributions, we show DGGF can be applied to unpaired image-to-image
translation with no modifications to the framework.


2   BACKGROUND

In the following, we give a brief overview of gradient flows and density ratio estimation. For a more
comprehensive introduction to gradient flows, please refer to Santambrogio (2017). A thorough
overview of density ratio estimation can be found in Sugiyama et al. (2012a).

Wasserstein Gradient Flows. To motivate the concept of gradient flows, we consider Euclidean
space equipped with the familiar L2 distance metric (X , ∥ · ∥2 ). Given a function F : X → R, the
curve {x(t)}t∈R+ that follows the direction of steepest descent is called the gradient flow of F :
                                        x′ (t) = −∇F (x(t)).                                                          (1)
In generative modeling, we are interested in sampling from the probability distribution of a given
dataset. Hence, instead of Euclidean space, we consider the space of probability measures with
finite second moments equipped with the 2-Wasserstein metric (P2 (Ω), W2 ). Given a functional
F : P2 (Ω) → R in the 2-Wasserstein space, the gradient flow of F is the steepest descent curve of
F. We call such curves Wasserstein gradient flows (WGF).

Density Ratio Estimation via Bregman Divergence. Let q(x) and p(x) be two distributions over
X ∈ Rd where we have access to i.i.d samples xq ∼ q(x) and xp ∼ p(x). The goal of density ratio
                                                                q(x)
estimation (DRE) is to estimate the true density ratio r∗ (x) = p(x) based on samples xq and xp .


                                                  2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


We will focus on density ratio fitting under the Bregman divergence (BD), which is a framework
that unifies many existing DRE techniques (Sugiyama et al., 2012a;b). Let g : R+ → R be a twice
continuously differentiable convex function with a bounded derivative. The BD seeks to quantify
the discrepancy between the estimated density ratio rθ and the true density ratio r∗ :
       BDg (r∗ ||rθ ) = Ep(x) [g(r∗ (x)) − g(rθ (x)) + ∂g(rθ (x))rθ (x)] − Eq(x) [∂g(rθ (x))].      (2)
As we only have access to samples, we estimate the expectations in Eq. 2 using Monte Carlo
estimates:
                         N                                           N
                      1 X                                         1 X
        BDg (rθ ) =        [∂g(rθ (x(n)      (n)          (n)
                                    p ))rθ (xp ) − g(rθ (xp ))] −      [∂g(rθ (x(n)
                                                                                q ))],              (3)
                      N n=1                                       N n=1

where we drop the term Ep [g(r∗ (x))] as it does not depend on the model rθ during optimization.
The minimizer of Eq. 3, which we denote θ∗ , satifies rθ∗ (x) = r∗ (x) = q(x)/p(x). For ease of
notation, we will use the hatted symbol E
                                        b p to refer to Monte Carlo estimates.


3   G ENERATIVE M ODELING WITH WASSERSTEIN G RADIENT F LOWS
This section describes our key contribution: Deep Generative Wasserstein Gradient Flows (DGGF),
in which we show how to train a deep density ratio estimator for high-fidelity generative modeling.
Let q(x) and p(x) be two distributions over X ∈ Rd . Assume that p(x) is the target distribution
that we wish to learn. We choose q(x) to be a known distribution that we can sample from, such
as a uniform or Gaussian distribution. Our goal is to construct a WGF starting from q(x), such
that trajectories along the flow decrease some notion of distance between q(x) and p(x). This will
allow us to flow samples from q(x) to p(x); in our case, when q(x) is a simple prior and p(x) is the
distribution of natural images, we can perform generative modeling of images.
Formally, the functional F : P2 (Ω) → R encodes the aforementioned notion of distance between
q(x) and p(x). Following Ansari et al. (2021), we choose F to be from the family of entropy-
regularized f -divergences defined as
                              Z                         Z
                       f
                     Fp (q) = p(x)f (q(x)/p(x))dx + γ q(x) log q(x)dx,                    (4)

where f : R+ → R is a twice-differentiable convex function with f (1) = 0. We can understand
the first term, the f -divergence, as measuring the discrepancy between q(x) and p(x). Popular
f -divergences include the Kullback-Leibler (KL), Pearson-χ2 divergence and Jensen-Shannon (JS)
divergence. The first term of Eq. 4 thus ensures that the “distance” between q(x) and p(x) decreases
along the gradient flow, while the second (differential entropy) term improves expressiveness and
prevents the collapse of the gradient flow onto the data points (Ansari et al., 2021).

From Distributions to Particles. In this study, we are interested in functional optimization of
the form minq∈P(Ω) Fpf (q). One way to formulate this optimization is to construct a gradient flow
in Wasserstein space. The gradient flow of the functional Fqf (p) in Wasserstein space is the curve
of measures {qt }t∈R+ which solves the following Fokker-Planck equation (FPE) (Ambrosio et al.,
2005; Villani, 2009):
                       ∂t qt (x) = div(qt (x)∇x f ′ (qt (x)/p(x)) + γ∇2x qt (x),                    (5)
where div and ∇2x denote the divergence and Lapacian operators respectively, and f ′ denotes the
first derivative of f . Eq. 5 is a non-linear partial differential equation, which makes solving for the
distribution qt challenging. Instead of attempting to obtain the WGF at the population density level
by solving for qt , we can utilize the connection of FPEs with stochastic differential equations (SDE)
and simulate the equivalent particle system described by the following SDE:
                              dxt = −∇x f ′ (qt (xt )/p(xt ))dt + 2γdwt ,
                                                                    p
                                                                                                     (6)
where dwt denotes the standard Wiener process. Eq. 6 describes the stochastic evolution of a
particle xt ; in image modeling terms, xt represents an image sample as it is evolved through the
SDE. Eq. 6 and Eq. 5 are equivalent in the sense that the marginal distribution qt of particles that


                                                   3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


evolve under Eq. 6 satisfies the FPE of Eq. 5. In other words, we are able to obtain samples from qt
along the gradient flow of Fpf (q) by first drawing samples x0 ∼ q0 and then simulating the SDE in
Eq. 6. Empirically, we simulate the discretized version of Eq. 6 using the Euler-Maruyama method

                         xk+1 = xk − η∇x f ′ (qk (xk )/p(xk )) + 2γηξk ,
                                                                  p
                                                                                                 (7)
where ξk ∼ N (0, I), η is the step size and the time interval [0, K] is discretized into equal intervals.

3.1   G RADIENT F LOW VIA D ENSITY R ATIO E STIMATION

Simulating the gradient flow in Eq. 7 requires an estimate of the density ratio qt (x)/p(x), which is
unavailable to us. We would like to leverage the Bregman divergence to train an estimator rθ (x),
such that we can simulate the gradient flow numerically as
                                xk+1 = xk − η∇x f ′ (rθ (xk )) + νξk ,                               (8)
where we combine the constants of the Gaussian noise term into a single hyperparameter ν. How-
ever, training such an estimator requires access to samples xt ∼ qt (x). Unlike diffusion models (Ho
et al., 2020; Song et al., 2020), where the time-dependent ground truths xt ∼ q(xt |x0 ) can be ob-
tained analytically, we do not have access to the ground truth samples along the gradient flow. In
early experiments, we attempted to draw samples xk along every step of the flow when simulating
Eq. 8 during training. However, this resulted in poor performance that regularly diverges as the
x1:K drawn changes at every iteration as parameters θ are updated, resulting in the lack of a stable
learning signal that fixed ground truths would provide.
Instead of training the model on x1:K , we propose to only draw samples xK by simulating Eq. 8 for
the full K steps. Consider a density ratio estimator with parameters θt at training iteration t. The
xK are drawn from the distribution q˜t (xK ) given by
                                            Z
                                 q̃t (xK ) = q0 (x)Mθt (xK |x)dx                                  (9)

where Mθ (xK |x) is the transition kernel of simulating Eq. 8 using rθt (x). We optimize rθt (x) for
the t training iteration using the Bregman divergence

                    L(θt ) = E
                             b p [∂g(rθ (x))r(x) − g(rθ (x))] − E
                                       t               t
                                                                b q̃ [∂g(rθ (x))]
                                                                    t      t
                                                                                                    (10)
where expectation over p(x) can be estimated using samples drawn from the dataset. Similar
to Ansari et al. (2021), we are effectively approximating the time-dependent density ratio with a
stale estimate rθ (x) = q̃(x)/p(x). As training progresses, the samples xK ∼ q̃t (xK ) improve
correspondingly with rθt (x). We hypothesize that training rθ (x) on samples of improving qual-
ity allows it to learn the density ratio across the gradient flow without the need for explicit time-
dependence. We validate our hypothesis experimentally in Sec. 5.2, where we show that despite a
potentially time-independent formulation, our model does not collapse to a single density ratio es-
timate and has implicitly learned the density ratio over the flow. We find this result noteworthy and
motivates further investigations into the necessity of explicit time embedding in relevant frameworks
such as diffusion models.
Our training scheme bears resemblance to Short-Run EBM (Nijkamp et al., 2019), where the model
draws samples from an approximation of the true Langevin dynamics. At each training step, DGGF
learns to refine its estimate of the density ratio rθ (x) by looking at positive samples from the data
distribution and negative samples drawn from its implicit distribution. However, despite the sim-
ilarity, DGGF is fundamentally distinct from EBMs: DGGF is formulated as the path of steepest
descent in Wasserstein space, while EBMs are derived from maximum likelihood. We further elab-
orate on the salient distinctions from EBMs and other models in Sec. 4. Once DGGF is trained,
sampling at test time is simply a matter of running Eq. 8 directly in data space. We provide training
and sampling pseudocode in Algorithms 1 and 2 respectively.

Choices for f -divergences and Bregman divergence. DGGF allows for flexibility in the choice
of f -divergence in the gradient flow, as well as the choice of g in the Bregman divergence objective.
We consolidate a list of common f -divergences and their first derivatives that we study in this paper
in Table 2 in the appendix.


                                                   4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Certain forms for g pair naturally with specific f -divergences for the gradient flow, as they simplify
the calculations needed. In our experiments, we utilize two forms of g: the first is when g(t) =
1        2
2 (t − 1) , which corresponds to the Least-Squares Importance Fitting (LSIF) objective:
                                            1b
                                 LLSIF (θ) =  Ep [rθ (x)]2 − E
                                                             b q [rθ (x)],
                                                                t
                                                                                               (11)
                                            2
and the second is g(t) = t log t − (1 + t) log(1 + t), which corresponds to the Logistic Regression
(LR) objective:
                                               1           b q log rθ (x)
                    LLR (θ) = −E  b p log                −E   t
                                                                                   .           (12)
                                           1 + rθ (x)                 1 + rθ (x)
Due to numerical compatibility issues that we discuss in Appendix B, we pair the LSIF objective
with the Pearson-χ2 divergence and the LR objective with the KL, JS and logD divergences. We
abbreviate them as LSIF-χ2 , LR-KL, LR-JS and LR-logD respectively and study these pairings in
our experiments in Sec. 5.

3.2    D ENSITY C HASM AND DATA -D EPENDENT P RIORS

In principle, the gradient flow formulation does not place any restrictions on the prior distribution
q0 (x). In the t → ∞ limit, the gradient flow is guaranteed to converge to p(x) (see Appendix D for
a proof). However, empirically, we observe that when implementing the flow with a finite number
of steps, the choice of prior distribution can significantly affect model performance.
This observation may be attributed to the density chasm problem (Rhodes et al., 2020). Consider two
densities q(x) and p(x) which differ greatly, for example as measured by their KL divergence. A
binary classifier that is trained on distinguishing the two distributions, which is equivalent to density
ratio estimation using the “density ratio trick”, can obtain near perfect accuracy while learning a
relatively poor estimate of the density ratio (Ansari et al., 2021). A simple example would be two
narrow Gaussians with means that are far apart. A classifier can learn a trivial boundary with near
perfect accuracy, such as a straight line between the two modes, without having to estimate the
density ratio between the two distributions accurately.
We found that using common priors for q0 (x) such as a uniform distribution led to poorer sample
quality due to the large chasm between the simple distribution and the complex multimodal data
distribution. Inspired by generation from seed distributions with robust classifiers (Santurkar et al.,
2019), we leverage a data-dependent prior by fitting a simple multivariate Gaussian to the training
dataset, and sampling x0 from the data-dependent prior
          q0 (x) = N (µD , ΣD ), where µD = ED [x], ΣD = ED [(x − µD ]T (x − µD )]                  (13)
where D represents the training dataset. Samples from this prior are poor but this approach is
sufficient to cross the density chasm; we visualize some samples from the prior in Fig. 8, and
experimental results support this approach (Sec. 5.2).


Algorithm 1 Training
  repeat
   Sample xp ∼ p(x), x0 ∼ q0 (x)                               Algorithm 2 Sampling
   for j ← 1, K do                                               Sample x0 ∼ q0 (x)
    Obtain xK from x0 by simulating Eq. 8.                       for j ← 1, K do
   end for                                                        Obtain xK from x0 by simulating Eq. 8.
   Update θ according to                                         end for
    ∇θ [g ′ (rθ (xp ))r(xp ) − g(rθ (xp )) − g ′ (rθ (xK ))]     return xK

    until converged


4     R ELATED W ORKS
Gradient flows are a general framework for constructing the steepest descent curve of a given func-
tional, and consequently have been used in optimizing a variety of distance metrics, ranging from


                                                        5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


the f -divergence (Gao et al., 2019; 2022; Ansari et al., 2021; Fan et al., 2021), maximum mean dis-
crepancy (Arbel et al., 2019; Mroueh & Nguyen, 2021), Sobolev distance (Mroueh et al., 2019) and
related forms of the Wasserstein distance (Liutkus et al., 2019). Recent works have also explored
the interpretation of the FPE as a continuous normalizing flow for generative modeling (Xu et al.,
2022). A well-known method to simulate WGFs at the population density level is using the Jordan,
Kinderlehrer, and Otto (JKO) scheme (Jordan et al., 1998), which approximates the dynamics of the
FPE through an iterative time-discretization update. The JKO scheme requires computation of the
2-Wasserstein distance and a free energy functional, which are generally intractable. Several works
have been proposed to circumvent this problem: Mokrov et al. (2021) leverages Brenier’s theorem
and convex neural networks to approximately estimate W2 , while Fan et al. (2021) leverages the
Fenchel conjugate to evaluate the free energy as f -divergences. Our work avoids the JKO scheme
entirely by adopting a particle-based approach, where we use the Euler-Maruyama method to simu-
late the gradient flow, parameterized by neural networks. In this way, we avoid the need to estimate
W2 , as well as the dual optimization needed in the variational formulation of Fan et al. (2021).
More closely related to DGGF are other particle-based approaches. Liutkus et al. (2019) uses a non-
parametric approach to optimize the Sliced Wasserstein distance, where the marginal distribution of
the particles is computed empirically to approximate qt (x). DGf low proposes to leverage pretrained
GAN discriminators as density ratio estimators for sample refinement. DGGF can be seen as a gen-
eral case of DGf low, where we recover DGf low if we fix the prior q0 to be the implicit distribution
defined by the GAN generator. When q0 is chosen as a simple prior, DGGF can perform genera-
tion from scratch, as opposed to purely refinement. Similar to DGGF, VGrow and EPT train deep
density ratio estimators using the Bregman divergence and apply them to the task of unconditional
image generation. However, there are several key differences that distinguish DGGF from VGrow
and EPT. As VGrow is a specific instance of EPT with the logistic regression objective, we focus
on EPT while noting that our discussion applies to both methods. EPT utilizes a formalism that
performs generation on a predetermined batch of particles during the training process. This causes
the estimator to converge to a single density ratio estimate after training, preventing further sam-
pling at test time due to zero gradients. In the same vein, EPT also has poor generative performance
when formulated in the data space1 . It was necessary to amortize sample generation to an auxiliary
generator and formulate the WGF in latent space z. By flowing z and matching Gθ (z) = x, the
generator can be sampled at test time. We show from our results in Sec. 5 that generation can be
done entirely in the data space, without the complexity of training an additional generator.
Our model also shares similarities with EBMs (LeCun et al., 2006), which model the data likeli-
hood using a Boltzmann distribution. The model can be sampled efficiently with Langevin dynam-
ics (Welling & Teh, 2011), which requires an infinitely long chain for proper mixing. Similar to
DGGF, Nijkamp et al. (2019) reinitializes the chain at every training iteration, effectively sampling
from an approximation of the true Langevin dynamics. Fundamentally, the key difference is DGGF
is formulated by finding the steepest descent curve in Wasserstein space, while EBMs are derived
from maximum likelihood estimation. As shown in prior works (Jordan et al., 1998; Liu et al.,
2019), Langevin dynamics can be derived from WGFs when f is chosen as the KL divergence,
which we reproduce in Appendix E. The density ratio formulation of DGGF allows us the flexibility
of composition with other density ratio estimators, as well as choosing the source and target distri-
butions of the flow, which permits applications such as composition with pretrained classifiers (Sec.
5.3) and image-to-image translation (Sec. 5.4). These are not directly applicable with EBMs, and
adaptations to such domains require significant theoretical and experimental modifications to the
generative framework (Zhao & Chen, 2021; Sasaki et al., 2021).


5    E XPERIMENTS

In this section, we present empirical results of the generative performance of DGGF on various com-
mon image datasets across different resolutions. Our goal is to demonstrate that DGGF is able to
generate diverse, high-quality images across various f -divergences and Bregman divergence objec-
tives, as well as generalizes to other tasks such as class-conditional generation and image-to-image
  1
    Based on experiments of EPT in Sec. 5 and on unpublished scores cited by the authors; please see https:
//openreview.net/forum?id=awMgJJ9H-0q.
  1
    Score as reported in Gao et al. (2020).


                                                    6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Figure 2: Samples from DGGF-DDP on CIFAR10 322 , CelebA 642 and LSUN Church 1282 using
LSIF-χ2 . More results using various BD objectives and f -divergences can be found in Appendix.


translation. We will use DGGF-DDP to abbreviate experiments with the data-dependent prior and
DGGF-UP for ablation experiments with the uniform prior.

5.1   S ETUP

We test DGGF with unconditional genera-                  Table 1: CIFAR10 and CelebA scores.
tion on CIFAR10, CelebA and LSUN Church
datasets, class-conditional generation on CI-         Model                                    FID ↓
FAR10 and image-to-image translation on the           CIFAR10 32 × 32
Cat2dog dataset. All pixel values are normal-         EPT (no outer loop) (Gao et al., 2022)   46.63
ized to the range [-1, 1]. For CIFAR10, we keep       JKO-Flow (Fan et al., 2021)               23.7
the resolution of the images at 32×32, while for      IGEBM (Du & Mordatch, 2019)              40.58
CelebA and LSUN Church we resize them to              SNGAN (Miyato et al., 2018)               21.7
64×64 and 128×128, respectively. We use mod-          PixelCNN (Van Oord et al., 2016)         65.93
ified ResNet architectures for all experiments in     NVAE (Vahdat & Kautz, 2020)              51.67
this study. See Appendix G for more details.          NCSN (Song & Ermon, 2019)                25.32
                                                      DGGF-DDP (LSIF-χ2 )                      28.12
5.2   I MAGE G ENERATION                              DGGF-DDP (LR-KL)                         28.80
                                                      DGGF-DDP (LR-JS)                         29.92
In Fig. 2, we show uncurated samples of DGGF-
DDP on different combinations of g and f -            DGGF-DDP (LR-logD)                       30.72
divergences. Visually, our model is able to pro-      DGGF-UP (LSIF-χ2 )                       35.11
duce high-quality samples on a variety of datasets    DGGF-UP (LR-KL)                          39.90
up to resolutions of 128 × 128, surpassing exist-     CelebA 64 × 64
ing gradient flow techniques (Gao et al., 2019;       NCSN (Song & Ermon, 2019)             26.89
2022). More samples with other f -divergences         NVAE (Vahdat & Kautz, 2020)           14.74
can be found in Appendix I. In Table 1, we show       EBM-SR (Nijkamp et al., 2019)         23.022
the FID scores of DGGF-DDP in comparison with         DGGF-DDP (LSIF-χ2 )                   22.42
relevant baselines utilizing different generative ap-
                                                      DGGF-DDP (LR-KL)                      22.88
proaches. On CIFAR10, our model performs com-
parably with SNGAN and the score-based NCSN, while outperforming the baseline EBM, autore-
gressive method PixelCNN. Our method strongly outperforms EPT without an auxiliary generator
(no outer loop), which is the gradient flow baseline utilizing a density ratio method.In comparison
to the WGF baselines, DGGF strongly outperforms EPT without an auxiliary generator (no outer
loop), while performing comparably with JKO-Flow. For CelebA, our model is outperformed by the
state-of-the-art variational autoencoder NVAE, but outperforms NCSN and Short-Run EBM.
To provide intuition for the gradient flow process, we provide intermediate samples for the LSUN
Church dataset in Fig. 5 of the appendix, which visualizes how samples drawn from the data-
dependent prior is evolved to a high quality sample. In this scenario, the prior contains low level
features such as the color of the sky and rough silhouette of the building. The gradient flow retains
these coarse features, but generates the higher frequency details necessary to create a realistic im-


                                                 7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


age. This matches the intuition that the gradient flow is the steepest descent curve, as the shortest
path would mean changing as little of the image as possible to reach the target distribution. We also
visualize samples obtained by interpolating in the prior space for CelebA in Fig. 6 of the appendix.
Despite the use of a relatively complex prior, the model is able to smoothly interpolate in the latent
space, indicating the model has learnt a semantically relevant latent representation that is charac-
teristic of a valid generative model. Finally, to verify that our model has not merely memorized
the dataset, particularly due to concerns that the prior is fitted from data, we show nearest neighbor
samples of the generated images in the training set in Appendix H. We can clearly see that samples
produced by DGGF-DDP are distinct from the closest samples in the training set, which tells us that
DGGF-DDP is capable of generating new and diverse samples beyond the data it was trained on.

Model Estimate of KL over Flow. As our model outputs the                   1.5                         DDP
density ratio rθ (xk ) = q(xk )/p(xk ) throughout the gradient                                         UP
                                                                           1.0
flow, our model can be interpreted   R as estimating the KL di-
vergence DKL (q(xk )||p(xk ) = q(xk ) log(q/p)(xk )dxk =                   0.5
Exk [log rθ (xk )] where the expectation is taken over the batch
                                                                           0.0


                                                                     DKL
of samples being evolved. We denote this estimate as D      b KL .
We show that this estimate is valid in Fig. 3, which plots D b KL          6.0
over the gradient flow for both DDP and UP (the UP results
serve as ablations in the next paragraph). Focusing on the DDP             3.0
results, we observe that D   b KL decreases monotonically over
the flow, which agrees with the notion that q(xk ) approaches              0.0
p(xk ), as seen in Fig. 5. This validates our hypothesis that de-                0           50          100
spite the use of a stale estimate, the model did not collapse to a                   Gradient flow steps K
single density ratio and has learnt a valid density ratio over the
flow. As evident from Fig. 5, the sample quality improves pro-       Figure 3: KL estimate D b KL of
gressively over the flow as D  b KL decreases. As such, this pro-    the gradient flow for CIFAR10
vides DGGF with an interpretable diagnostic of its own sample        generation for both DDP and UP
quality that comes innately with the density ratio formulation.      for LSIF-χ2 (upper) and LR-KL
                                                                     (lower).
Ablations with Uniform Prior. We motivate the use of the
data-dependent prior by conducting ablation experiments with q0 being a uniform prior, x0 ∼
U [−1, 1]. All hyperparameters are kept identical to DDP experiments to isolate the effects of the
choice of prior distribution. We include qualitative samples of DGGF-UP in Fig. 18 in the appendix.
The quantitative results can be seen from the FID scores in Table 1. Visually, DGGF-UP produces
diverse and appealing samples even with a uniform prior. However, when comparing quantitative
scores we observe that the use of DDP improves results significantly. Support for the density chasm
hypothesis can be found by comparing the D   b KL of DDP and UP in Fig. 3. For both LSIF-χ2 and
LR-KL, DGGF-UP has a significantly larger D     b KL at the start of the flow as compared to DGGF-
DDP. This corresponds to our intuition, as the uniform prior is ‘farther’ from the data distribution as
compared to the data-dependent prior. As a result, the model has to push the particles over a larger
density chasm, leading to poorer performance given a fixed computational budget.

5.3   C ONDITIONAL G ENERATION WITH ROBUST C LASSIFIERS

The density ratio framework allows us to compose different density ratio estimators together, there-
fore allowing us to construct WGFs between distributions different from those in training. To illus-
trate this, consider a multiclass classifier which predicts the probability that a given image belongs
to any one of N classes. We show in Appendix F that we can express such classifiers as a density
ratio p(y = n|x) = N −1 p(x|y = n)/p(x). We can thus obtain a conditional density ratio estimator
rθ (xt |y = n) = qt (xt )/p(xt |y = n) by composing our unconditional estimator rθ (xt ) with the
classifier output (see Appendix F):
                                                 1
                              rθ (xt |y = n) = rθ (xt )p(y = n|xt )−1 .                           (14)
                                                N
When rθ (xt |y = n) is used in simulating the WGF in Eq. 8, we obtain a class-conditional generative
model. This is conceptually similar to the idea proposed in Song et al. (2020), where an uncondi-
tional score model ∇x log pt (x(t)) is composed with a time-dependent classifier ∇x log pt (y|x(t))


                                                    8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                           (a)                                                 (b)

Figure 4: (a) Class-conditional samples from composition with a robust classifier. (b) Image-to-
image translation process from cat to dog images using DGGF.


to form a class-conditional model. However, whereas Song et al. (2020) requires the separate train-
ing of a time-dependent classifier, our formulation allows us to use off-the-shelf pretrained classifiers
with no further retraining. Inspired by earlier work on image synthesis with robust classifiers (San-
turkar et al., 2019), we found that using a pretrained adversarially-robust classifier was necessary in
obtaining useful gradients for the gradient flow. We show our results in Fig. 4a, where each row
represents conditional samples of each class in the CIFAR10 dataset.


5.4   U NPAIRED I MAGE - TO - IMAGE T RANSLATION

Our framework can also be directly applied to unpaired image-to-image-translation (I2I). We simply
fix the prior distribution q0 (x) to a source domain and p(x) to a target domain. We then train the
model in exactly the same manner as unconditional generation (see Algorithm 1).
We test our I2I model on the Cat2dog dataset (Lee et al., 2018). From Fig. 4b, DGGF is able to
smoothly translate images of cats to dogs while maintaining relevant semantic features of the image.
For example, the background colors of the image and the pose of the cat are unchanged—a cat that
is facing a certain direction is translated to a dog that faces the same direction. We also observe
that the facial tones of the cat is preserved—a cat with light fur is translated to a dog with light
fur. CycleGAN (Zhu et al., 2017) achieves better FID scores than DGGF (Table 4 in the appendix)
but like many I2I methods (Lee et al., 2018; Choi et al., 2020; Zhao & Chen, 2021; Nie et al.,
2021), CycleGAN incorporates specific inductive biases, such as dual generators and discriminators
together with the cycle-consistency loss. Incorporating such inductive biases into the gradient flow
process can improve the translation and would make for interesting future work.


6     C ONCLUSION

In this paper, we proposed DGGF, a method to simulate the Wasserstein gradient flow between
two distributions that minimizes the entropy-regularized f -divergence. As constructing such a flow
requires an estimate of the density ratio, we showed how to leverage the Bregman divergence to train
a deep density ratio estimator that is able to synthesize diverse images of high quality. We showed
that the modularity of DGGF allows for composition with external density ratio estimators, as well
as direct application to tasks such as unpaired image-to-image translation. Given the flexibility
of choosing the source and target distribution, future work can investigate different choices of the
two distributions that could correspond to entirely new applications. Another possible avenue is
investigating how we can incorporate task-specific inductive biases into the gradient flow process,
which should allow the WGF to perform better on the problem at hand.


                                                   9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


R EFERENCES
Stefan Adams, Nicolas Dirr, Mark A Peletier, and Johannes Zimmer. From a large-deviations prin-
  ciple to the wasserstein gradient flow: a new micro-macro passage. Communications in Mathe-
  matical Physics, 307(3):791–815, 2011.
Luigi Ambrosio, Nicola Gigli, and Giuseppe Savaré. Gradient flows: in metric spaces and in the
  space of probability measures. Springer Science & Business Media, 2005.
Abdul Fatir Ansari, Ming Liang Ang, and Harold Soh. Refining deep generative models via dis-
  criminator gradient flow. In ICLR, 2021.
Michael Arbel, Anna Korba, Adil Salim, and Arthur Gretton. Maximum mean discrepancy gradient
 flow. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 32, 2019.
Espen Bernton. Langevin monte carlo and jko splitting. In Conference On Learning Theory, pp.
  1777–1798. PMLR, 2018.
José Antonio Carrillo, Katy Craig, and Francesco S Patacchini. A blob method for diffusion. Cal-
  culus of Variations and Partial Differential Equations, 58(2):1–53, 2019.
Lenaic Chizat and Francis Bach. On the global convergence of gradient descent for over-
  parameterized models using optimal transport. Advances in neural information processing sys-
  tems, 31, 2018.
Yunjey Choi, Youngjung Uh, Jaejun Yoo, and Jung-Woo Ha. Stargan v2: Diverse image synthesis
  for multiple domains. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern
  recognition, pp. 8188–8197, 2020.
Yilun Du and Igor Mordatch. Implicit generation and generalization in energy-based models. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:1903.08689, 2019.
Logan Engstrom, Andrew Ilyas, Shibani Santurkar, and Dimitris Tsipras. Robustness (python li-
  brary), 2019. URL https://github.com/MadryLab/robustness.
Jiaojiao Fan, Amirhossein Taghvaei, and Yongxin Chen. Variational wasserstein gradient flow. arXiv
   preprint arXiv:2112.02424, 2021.
Ruiqi Gao, Yang Song, Ben Poole, Ying Nian Wu, and Diederik P Kingma. Learning energy-based
  models by diffusion recovery likelihood. arXiv preprint arXiv:2012.08125, 2020.
Yuan Gao, Yuling Jiao, Yang Wang, Yao Wang, Can Yang, and Shunkang Zhang. Deep generative
  learning via variational gradient flow. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp.
  2093–2101. PMLR, 2019.
Yuan Gao, Jian Huang, Yuling Jiao, Jin Liu, Xiliang Lu, and Zhijian Yang. Deep generative learning
  via euler particle transport. In Mathematical and Scientific Machine Learning, pp. 336–368.
  PMLR, 2022.
Jonathan Ho, Ajay Jain, and Pieter Abbeel. Denoising diffusion probabilistic models. Advances in
  Neural Information Processing Systems, 33:6840–6851, 2020.
Richard Jordan, David Kinderlehrer, and Felix Otto. The variational formulation of the fokker–
  planck equation. SIAM journal on mathematical analysis, 29(1):1–17, 1998.
Yann LeCun, Sumit Chopra, Raia Hadsell, M Ranzato, and F Huang. A tutorial on energy-based
  learning. Predicting structured data, 1(0), 2006.
Hsin-Ying Lee, Hung-Yu Tseng, Jia-Bin Huang, Maneesh Singh, and Ming-Hsuan Yang. Diverse
  image-to-image translation via disentangled representations. In Proceedings of the European
  conference on computer vision (ECCV), pp. 35–51, 2018.
Chang Liu, Jingwei Zhuo, and Jun Zhu. Understanding mcmc dynamics as flows on the wasserstein
  space. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 4093–4103. PMLR, 2019.


                                               10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Antoine Liutkus, Umut Simsekli, Szymon Majewski, Alain Durmus, and Fabian-Robert Stöter.
  Sliced-wasserstein flows: Nonparametric generative modeling via optimal transport and diffu-
  sions. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 4104–4113. PMLR, 2019.
Takeru Miyato, Toshiki Kataoka, Masanori Koyama, and Yuichi Yoshida. Spectral normalization
  for generative adversarial networks. arXiv preprint arXiv:1802.05957, 2018.
Petr Mokrov, Alexander Korotin, Lingxiao Li, Aude Genevay, Justin M Solomon, and Evgeny Bur-
  naev. Large-scale wasserstein gradient flows. Advances in Neural Information Processing Sys-
  tems, 34:15243–15256, 2021.
Youssef Mroueh and Truyen Nguyen. On the convergence of gradient descent in gans: Mmd gan
  as a gradient flow. In International Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Statistics, pp. 1720–
  1728. PMLR, 2021.
Youssef Mroueh, Tom Sercu, and Anant Raj. Sobolev descent. In The 22nd International Conference
  on Artificial Intelligence and Statistics, pp. 2976–2985. PMLR, 2019.
Weili Nie, Arash Vahdat, and Anima Anandkumar. Controllable and compositional generation
 with latent-space energy-based models. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems,
 34:13497–13510, 2021.
Erik Nijkamp, Mitch Hill, Song-Chun Zhu, and Ying Nian Wu. Learning non-convergent non-
  persistent short-run mcmc toward energy-based model. Advances in Neural Information Process-
  ing Systems, 32, 2019.
Benjamin Rhodes, Kai Xu, and Michael U Gutmann. Telescoping density-ratio estimation. Ad-
  vances in neural information processing systems, 33:4905–4916, 2020.
Pierre H Richemond and Brendan Maginnis. On wasserstein reinforcement learning and the fokker-
  planck equation. arXiv preprint arXiv:1712.07185, 2017.
Filippo Santambrogio. {Euclidean, metric, and Wasserstein} gradient flows: an overview. Bulletin
   of Mathematical Sciences, 7(1):87–154, 2017.
Shibani Santurkar, Andrew Ilyas, Dimitris Tsipras, Logan Engstrom, Brandon Tran, and Aleksander
  Madry. Image synthesis with a single (robust) classifier. Advances in Neural Information Pro-
  cessing Systems, 32, 2019.
Hiroshi Sasaki, Chris G Willcocks, and Toby P Breckon. Unit-ddpm: Unpaired image translation
  with denoising diffusion probabilistic models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2104.05358, 2021.
Yang Song and Stefano Ermon. Generative modeling by estimating gradients of the data distribution.
  Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 32, 2019.
Yang Song and Stefano Ermon. Improved techniques for training score-based generative models.
  Advances in neural information processing systems, 33:12438–12448, 2020.
Yang Song, Jascha Sohl-Dickstein, Diederik P Kingma, Abhishek Kumar, Stefano Ermon, and Ben
  Poole. Score-based generative modeling through stochastic differential equations. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2011.13456, 2020.
Masashi Sugiyama, Taiji Suzuki, and Takafumi Kanamori. Density ratio estimation in machine
 learning. Cambridge University Press, 2012a.
Masashi Sugiyama, Taiji Suzuki, and Takafumi Kanamori. Density-ratio matching under the breg-
 man divergence: a unified framework of density-ratio estimation. Annals of the Institute of Sta-
 tistical Mathematics, 64(5):1009–1044, 2012b.
Arash Vahdat and Jan Kautz. Nvae: A deep hierarchical variational autoencoder. Advances in Neural
  Information Processing Systems, 33:19667–19679, 2020.
Aaron Van Oord, Nal Kalchbrenner, and Koray Kavukcuoglu. Pixel recurrent neural networks. In
  International conference on machine learning, pp. 1747–1756. PMLR, 2016.


                                                 11
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Cédric Villani. Optimal transport: old and new, volume 338. Springer, 2009.
Max Welling and Yee W Teh. Bayesian learning via stochastic gradient langevin dynamics. In
 Proceedings of the 28th international conference on machine learning (ICML-11), pp. 681–688.
 Citeseer, 2011.
Yilun Xu, Ziming Liu, Max Tegmark, and Tommi Jaakkola. Poisson flow generative models. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2209.11178, 2022.
Ruiyi Zhang, Changyou Chen, Chunyuan Li, and Lawrence Carin. Policy optimization as wasser-
  stein gradient flows. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 5737–5746. PMLR,
  2018.
Yang Zhao and Changyou Chen. Unpaired image-to-image translation via latent energy transport.
  In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern recognition, pp.
  16418–16427, 2021.
Jun-Yan Zhu, Taesung Park, Phillip Isola, and Alexei A Efros. Unpaired image-to-image translation
  using cycle-consistent adversarial networks. In Proceedings of the IEEE international conference
  on computer vision, pp. 2223–2232, 2017.


                                               12
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Figure 5: Illustration of the gradient flow process for LSUN Church, starting from a sample from
the data-dependent prior on the leftmost column.


       Figure 6: Interpolation results between leftmost and rightmost samples with CelebA.


A    T OY DATASETS


Figure 7: Comparison of different DGGF pairings of Bregman and f -divergences on the 2DSwiss-
roll dataset.

To affirm that samples generated by DGGF indeed converge to the target distribution p(x), we
train DGGF on the synthetic 2DSwissroll dataset. The density ratio estimator is parameterized by
a simple feedforward multilayer perceptron. We train the model to flow samples from the prior
q0 (x) = N (0, I) to the target distribution, which we sample from the make swiss roll function
in scikit-learn. We plot the results in Fig. 7, from which we can see that the model indeed
converges to p(x) successfully for all combinations of f and g.


B    B REGMAN D IVERGENCE AND f - DIVERGENCE PAIRING

When computing the LR objective Eq. 12, we find that we run into numerical stability issues when
letting rθ (x) be the output of an unconstrained neural network and subsequently taking the required
logarithms in Eq. 12. To circumvent this issue, we let rθ (x) be expressed as the exponential of
the neural network’s output, i.e., the output of the neural network is log rθ (x). This formulation
naturally lends itself to the gradient flow of the KL, JS and logD divergences, whose first derivatives
f ′ that is required in Eq. 8 are also logarithmic functions of rθ (x), as seen from Table. 2. We can
thus utilize numerically stable routines in existing deep learning frameworks, avoiding the need for
potentially unstable operations like exponentiations (see Appendix C for details). As such, we pair
LR with the aforementioned divergences and abbreviate the combinations as LR-KL, LR-JS, LR-
logD. We did not run into such stability issues for the LSIF objective (Eq. 11) as the model learns to
automatically output a non-negative scalar over the course of training, hence for LSIF we allow the
neural network to estimate rθ (x) directly and pair it with the Pearson-χ2 divergence. We abbreviate
this pairing as LSIF-χ2 .


                                                  13
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


C    S TABLE C OMPUTATION OF LR AND f - DIVERGENCES
As mentioned in Sec. B, computing the logarithm of unconstrained neural networks leads to in-
stabilities in the training process. This is a problem when computing the LR objective in Eq. 12
and the various first derivatives of f -divergences. We can circumvent this problem by letting rθ (x)
be expressed as the exponential of the neural network and use existing stable numerical routines to
avoid intermediate computations that lead to the instabilities (for example, computing logarithms
and exponentials directly). Let us express the neural network output as N Nθ (x) ≜ log rθ (x). The
LR objective can then be rewritten as


                                1         b q log rθ (x)
          LLR (θ) = −E
                     b p log             −E  t                                                  (15)
                            1 + rθ (x)           1 + rθ (x)
                  = −Ep [logsigmoid(−N Nθ (x))] − E
                     b                              b q [logsigmoid(N Nθ (x))]
                                                                 t
                                                                                                (16)
                              1
where logsigmoid(x) = log 1+exp(−x) , which has stable implementations in modern deep learn-
ing libraries.
Similarly for the f -divergences whose first derivatives involve logarithms, we can calculate them
stably as
                  ′
                fKL   (r(x)) = log r(x) + 1 = N Nθ (x) + 1                                      (17)
                    ′                2r(x)
                 fJS  (r(x)) = log          = log 2 + logsigmoid(N Nθ (x))                      (18)
                                   1 + r(x)
                ′
               flogD  (r(x)) = log(r + 1) + 1 = −logsigmoid(−N Nθ (x)) + 1.                     (19)

D    P ROOF OF CONVERGENCE OF GRADIENT FLOW
We provide a simple proof of the convergence of the Wasserstein gradient flow in the t → ∞ limit.
Theorem 1. Let the functional Fpf (q t ) be defined as
                           Z                           Z
                Fp (q ) = p(x)f (q (x)/p(x))dx + γ q t (x) log q t (x)dx.
                  f t                     t
                                                                                                (20)

Fpf (q t ) is non-increasing as a function of time and converges to the global minimum in the t → ∞
limit.

Proof.
                                  ∂Fpf (q t )                    ∂q t
                                              = ⟨∇W2 Fpf (q t ),      ⟩                         (21)
                                    ∂t                           ∂t
                                              = −||∇W2 Fpf (q t )||2 .                          (22)
where in the first line we apply the chain rule, and in the second line we use the definition of the
                                            t
gradient flow in the Wasserstein space, ∂q                 f t
                                          ∂t = −∇W2 Fp (q ) (analogous to the gradient flow in
Euclidean space of Eq. 1).

E    C ONNECTIONS WITH L ANGEVIN DYNAMICS
In this section we demonstrate the connection between WGFs and Langevin dynamics, which have
also been studied in prior works such as Jordan et al. (1998); Liu et al. (2019). Langevin dynamics
is a MCMC method that is able to produce samples from a probability density p(x) using only the
score function ∇x log p(x). Let ϵ be the step size and x0 ∼ π(x) be an initial sample drawn from a
prior distribution, Langevin dynamics iteratively updates xk as
                                              ϵ                 √
                               xk+1 = xk + ∇x log p(xk ) + ϵξk ,                               (23)
                                              2

                                                  14
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                         Table 2: f -divergences and their first derivatives f ′ .
                   f -divergence                     f                        f′
                   Pearson-χ2        (r − 1)2                          2(r − 1)
                   KL                r log r                           log r + 1
                   JS                r log r − (r + 1) log r+1
                                                            2
                                                                            2r
                                                                       log r+1
                   log D             (r + 1) log(r + 1) − 2 log 2      log(r + 1) + 1


where ξk ∼ N (0, I). As shown by Welling & Teh (2011), as k → ∞ and η → 0, then xk ∼ p(x)
under certain regularity conditions. Langevin dynamics are most notably utilized as a method to
sample from EBMs, which model p(x) as a Boltzmann distribution pθ (x) = exp(−Eθ (x))/Z(θ).
We show the connection to WGFs by considering the discretized SDE Eq. 7 with f ′ = log r + 1
corresponding to the KL divergence:
                                                              p
                       xk+1 = xk − η∇x log(qk (xk )/p(xk )) + 2γηξk .                    (24)
Upon decomposing the logarithm term, we immediately see that the WGF gives us
                                                                  p
                   xk+1 = xk − η∇x log qk (xk ) + η∇x log p(xk ) + 2γηξk .               (25)
                                |    {z      } |             {z         }
                                    prior downweighting        Langevin dynamics

We exactly recover Langevin dynamics in the last two terms if we set the hyperparameters η = ϵ/2
and γ = 1. The emergence of the term we call ‘prior downweighting’ can be interpreted as pushing
the samples away from q(x) by reducing its log-likelihood. Hence, WGF with f corresponding to
the KL divergence can be intuitively understood as an ‘enhanced’ version of Langevin dynamics,
where samples are pushed in the direction which not only increases log p(x), but also explicitly
decreases log q(x).

F    C LASSIFIERS ARE D ENSITY R ATIO E STIMATORS
To perform class-conditional generation in the DGGF framework, we would like to estimate the
density ratio of a certain class over the data distribution: p(x|y = n)/p(x). With Bayes rule, we can
write this as
                               p(x|y = n)       p(y = n|x)p(x)/p(y = n)
                                            =                                                          (26)
                                   p(x)                     p(x)
                                                p(y = n|x)
                                            =                .                                         (27)
                                                 p(y = n)
The denominator term p(y = n) can be viewed as a constant, e.g., assume the N classes are equally
distributed, then p(y = n) = 1/N . Therefore, we have that the class probability given by the
softmax output of a classifier is actually a density ratio:
                                                         p(x|y = n)
                                      N p(y = n|x) =                .                                  (28)
                                                            p(x)
We can use this equation to convert an unconditional DGGF to a class-conditional generator. Recall
the gradient flow equation:
                                  dxt = −∇x f ′ (rθ (xt ))dt + 2γdwt
                                                               p
                                                                                                       (29)
We can multiply the inverse of the classifier output with rθ (xt ) = qt (xt )/p(xt ) to get a density ratio
between qt (xt ) and the conditional data distribution p(xt |y = n):
                                              qt (xt ) N p(xt )              qt (xt )
                   rθ (xt )p(y = n|xt )−1 =                        =N                  .               (30)
                                               p(xt ) p(xt |y = n)       p(xt |y = n)
That is, we took our unconditional model and converted it to a conditional generative model by
composing it with a pretrained classifier. To get the correct class-conditional density ratio, we should
therefore compute
                                                   1
                               rθ (xt |y = n) = rθ (xt )p(y = n|xt )−1                                 (31)
                                                  N
and use this conditional density ratio estimator in the WGF SDE.


                                                      15
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                     Table 3: Network structures for the density ratio estimator rθ (x).
                                                        LSUN Church 128
      CIFAR10                     CelebA 64
                                                         3×3 Conv2d, 64
  3×3 Conv2d, 128               3×3 Conv2d, 64                                      Cat2dog 64
                                                        ResBlock Down 64
  3 × ResBlock 128             ResBlock Down 64                                   3×3 Conv2d, 64
                                                       ResBlock Down 128
 ResBlock Down 256            ResBlock Down 128                                  ResBlock Down 64
                                                       ResBlock Down 128
  2 × ResBlock 256               ResBlock 128                                   ResBlock Down 128
                                                          ResBlock 128
 ResBlock Down 256            ResBlock Down 256                                  Self Attention 128
                                                       ResBlock Down 256
  2 × ResBlock 256               ResBlock 256                                   ResBlock Down 128
                                                          ResBlock 256
 ResBlock Down 256            ResBlock Down 256                                 ResBlock Down 256
                                                       ResBlock Down 256
  2 × ResBlock 256               ResBlock 256                                   Global Mean Pooling
                                                          ResBlock 256
 Global Mean Pooling          Global Mean Pooling                                    Dense → 1
                                                       Global Mean Pooling
     Dense → 1                    Dense → 1
                                                           Dense → 1


G        E XPERIMENTAL D ETAILS
Unconditional Image Generation. For all datasets, we perform random horizontal flip as a form
of data augmentation. For CelebA, we center crop the image to 140×140 before resizing to 64×64.
For LSUN Church, we resize the image to 128×128 directly. We use the same training hyperpa-
rameters across all three datasets, which is as follows. We train all models with 120000 training
steps with the Adam optimizer with a batch size of 64. We use a learning rate of 1 × 10−4 and
decay by a factor of 0.1 at training steps 100000 and 110000. We set the number of gradient flow
steps to K = 100 at training time and K = 110 at test time as discussed in Sec. 5.2, and use a
step size η = 3 and noise factor ν = 10−2 . The specific residual architectures are given in Table
3. We update model weights using an exponential moving average (Song & Ermon, 2020) given by
θ ′ ← mθ ′ + (1 − m)θi , where θi is the parameters of the model at the i-th training step, and θ ′ is an
independent copy of the parameters that we save and use for evaluation. We set m = 0.998. We use
the LeakyReLU activation with a negative slope of 0.2. We experimented with spectral normaliza-
tion and self attention layers for unconditional image generation, but found that training was stable
enough such that they were not worth the added computational cost. The FID results in Table 1 are
obtained by generating 50000 images from the data-dependent prior, and testing the results against
the training set for both CIFAR10 and CelebA.

Conditional Generation with Robust Classifier. The unconditional model used for conditional
generation is the same model obtained from the section above. The pretrained robust classifier
checkpoint is obtained from the robustness3 Python library (Engstrom et al., 2019). It is based
on a ResNet50 architecture and is trained with L2 -norm perturbations of ε = 1.
We choose the LR-KL variant for our results in Fig. 4a. This means that our conditional gradient
flow is given by

                                                     1
                 xk+1 = xk − 2α∇x log rθ (xk ) ∗ p(y = n|xk )−1 + νξk                       (32)
                                                    N
                      = xk − 2α∇x (log rθ (xk ) − ϕ log p(y = n|xk )) + νξk                 (33)
where in the second line we introduce ϕ as a parameter that scales the magnitude of the classifier’s
gradients so they are comparable to the magnitude of DGGF’s gradients. We use ϕ = 0.1.

Unpaired Image-to-image Translation. The Cat2dog dataset contains 871 Birman cat images
and 1364 Samoyed and Husky dog images. 100 of each are set aside as test images. We first resize
the images to 84×84 before center cropping to 64×64. Due to the relatively small size of the dataset,
we use a shallower residual architecture as compared to CelebA 642 despite the same resolution
(Table 3) to prevent overfitting. We also utilize spectral normalization and a self attention layer at
the 128-channel level to further boost stability. We set K = 100 during training and K = 110
    3
        https://github.com/MadryLab/robustness


                                                     16
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


           Table 4: FID scores for image-to-image translation with the cat2dog dataset.
                                      Model            FID ↓
                                      DGGF             108.10
                                      CycleGAN         51.79


              (a)                                (b)                             (c)

Figure 8: Samples drawn from the data-dependent priors of (a) CIFAR10 322 , (b) CelebA 642 and
(c) LSUN Church 1282 .


at test time. As we observed the model tends to diverge late in training, we limit the number of
training steps to 40000, with a decay factor of 0.1 applied to the learning rate at steps 20000 and
30000. All other hyperparameters are kept identical to the experiments on unconditional image
generation. We report results for LSIF-Pearson, although we have experimented with LR-KL and
found performance to be similar. The FID result in Table. 4 is obtained by translating the 100 test
cat images, and testing the results against the 100 test dog images.


                                                17
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


H    N EAREST N EIGHBORS


                       (a)                                               (b)

Figure 9: Nearest neighbor images for CIFAR10 as measured by L2 distance in (a) the feature space
of an Inception V3 network pretrained on ImageNet and (b) data space. The column to the left of
the red line are samples from DGGF LSIF-χ2 . The images to the right of the line are the 10 nearest
neighbors in the training dataset.


                       (a)                                               (b)

Figure 10: Nearest neighbor images for CelebA as measured by L2 distance in (a) the feature space
of an Inception V3 network pretrained on ImageNet and (b) data space. The column to the left of
the red line are samples from DGGF LSIF-Pearson. The images to the right of the line are the 10
nearest neighbors in the training dataset.


                                                18
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


I   U NCURATED S AMPLES DGGF-DDP


                   Figure 11: Uncurated samples of CIFAR10 LSIF-Pearson.


                      Figure 12: Uncurated samples of CIFAR10 LR-KL.


                      Figure 13: Uncurated samples of CIFAR10 LR-JS.


                                             19
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                     Figure 14: Uncurated samples of CIFAR10 LR-logD.


                    Figure 15: Uncurated samples of CelebA LSIF-Pearson.


                       Figure 16: Uncurated samples of CelebA LR-KL.


                                             20
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                Figure 17: Uncurated samples of LSUN Church LSIF-Pearson.


                                             21
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


J   U NCURATED S AMPLES DGGF-UP


         (a) LSIF-Pearson uniform prior.                 (b) LR-KL uniform prior.

                    Figure 18: Uncurated CIFAR10 samples with DGGF-UP.


                                             22
