Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


R EPRESENTATIVE P ROTOTYPE WITH C ONSTRASTIVE
L EARNING FOR S EMI - SUPENVISED F EW- SHOT C LAS -
SIFICATION

 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                            A BSTRACT
         Few-shot learning aims to learn novel classes in the dataset with few samples per
         class, which is a very challenging task. To mitigate this issue, the prior work
         obtain representative prototypes with semantic embedding based on prototypi-
         cal networks. While the above methods do not meet the requirement of few-
         shot learning, which requires abundant labeled samples. Therefore, We propose
         a new model framework to get representative prototypes with semi-supervised
         learning. Specifically, we introduces the dataset containing unlabeled samples to
         assist training the model. More importantly, to fully utilize these unlabeled sam-
         ples, we adopt conditional variational autoencoder to construct more representa-
         tive prototypes. Simultaneously, we develop novel contrastive loss to improve
         the model generalization ability. We evaluate our method on miniImageNet and
         tieredImageNet benchmarks for both 1-shot and 5-shot settings and achieve better
         performance over the state-of-the-art semi-supervised few-shot method.


1   I NTRODUCTION
In real life, humans are able to quickly establish awareness of new concepts from just one or a few
examples. However, conventional machine learning usually learn with abundant labeled samples to
ensure its generalization ability. Actually, obtaining a plentiful of labeled samples is exceedingly
hard on account of security and the high cost time and money. Motivated by this, many researchers
turn to few-shot learning (FSL). In the field of image classification, FSL means getting better image
classification accuracy in a small dataset. Generally, prior knowledge is obtained from the base
classes and then applied to the novel classes, which contains a few labeled samples (Fei-Fei et al.,
2006) (Wang et al., 2020).
Existing studies on FSL roughly fall into four types. (1) Metric-based method (Koch et al., 2015)
(Vinyals et al., 2016) (Zhang et al., 2019b). The type of methods is a space mapping method,
which aims to learn a good feature space. In this space, all data is converted into feature vectors,
and the feature vectors of similar samples are close, while the feature vectors of dissimilar samples
are far, so as to distinguish samples, and the distance usually use Euclidean distance (Snell et al.,
2017) or cosine distance Chen et al. (2019a). (2) Optimization-based method. In the meta-learning
framework, the method first learns a group of good and potential parameters for the network model
with a large number of similar tasks, and then uses this group of parameters as the initial value to
train on specific tasks, so as to achieve the convergence effect as long as fine-tuning on the new
tasks, such as: (Finn et al., 2017) (Lee et al., 2019) (Fallah et al., 2020). (3) Data augmentation-
based method (Alfassy et al., 2019) (Schwartz et al., 2018). The fundamental problem of FSL is
that samples is few, so it can be solved by increasing the diversity of samples. For example, (Zhang
et al., 2019a) proposed to segment the image into foreground and background, and then combine the
foreground and background of different pictures, so as to expand the dataset. (4) Semantics-based
method (Chen et al., 2019b) (Xing et al., 2019) (Li et al., 2020) (Zhang et al., 2021) (Xu & Le, 2022).
This method is a recent research hotspot, which is mainly inspired by zero-shot learning (ZSL).
This series of methods use semantic information as auxiliary information to enhance classification
performance. In some cases, visual information is richer, while in some cases, semantic information
is richer (Xing et al., 2019), which explains that fusing cross-modal information plays an important
role in constructing representative class prototypes.


                                                  1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Generally, most of these methods are not used alone but integrated, and almost all are based on the
meta-learning framework. However, class prototypes based on the meta-learning framework are not
representative enough due to the number of samples in support set is few. Therefore, we propose
a new model to construct representative class prototypes. For FSL, prototype-based is the typical
method. Simply put, prototype-based is to construct a class prototype for each class using support
set, and then keep test samples (from query set) close to the class prototype to which they belong
and away from the other class prototypes. Prototypical networks (ProtoNet) firstly to tackle FSL
(Snell et al., 2017), the basic idea of which is that samples in each class will be mapped to a feature
space through neural network, and calculating the mean features of all samples of each class in this
space as class prototype. And then there are a lot of work around ProtoNet.
The novel extensions of ProtoNet (Ren et al., 2018) exploits unlabeled samples when constructing
prototypes, moreover, this paper makes the precise analysis of the distractor in unlabeled samples.
Furthermore, a cosine similarity based prototypical network to select neighbor samples to augment
support set (Liu et al., 2020) and training the regression model to restore the biased prototype with
the Euclidean distance between the biased prototype and the real prototype (Xue & Wang, 2020),
etc. The setting of our work is similar to (Ren et al., 2018), the different is that we cluster unlabeled
samples first, and then judge the labels of unlabeled samples according to cluster centers and class
prototypes. Except that we adopt the generation model to make full use of unlabeled samples.
We discover that the key of the prototype-based method is how to use a few samples to construct
a representative class prototype, which is the challenging task on account of few samples or noise
samples. The above approaches mentioned above rely solely on visual features for few-shot classifi-
cation. Recently, inspired by ZSL, some work combined semantic embedding with prototype-based
to enhance the performance. (Xing et al., 2019) utilize cross-modal information (visual features and
semantic embedding) to generate visual and semantic prototypes and fuse the two prototypes accord-
ing to different weights. (Zhang et al., 2021) takes attribute features as prior knowledge to complete
the biased prototype. (Xu & Le, 2022) first selects the representative samples in the base classes
via assuming that the features of each class follow the Gaussian multivariate distribution. Then,
conditional variational autoencoder (CVAE) is used to generate representative features with these
representative samples, and constructs representative class prototypes with the generate features and
the support features in the novel classes. This paper opens up a ideas for constructing representative
class prototypes, the one is data preprocessing, and the other is using generation models to augment
data.
Many previous methods require a large number of labeled samples at training stage, which is not
consistent with the common scenario in our life, so semi-supervised learning can be used in our
work. In order to make full use of unlabeled samples, these samples and semantic information are
inputed CVAE to generate more features to construct representative class prototypes. Concurrently,
the novel contrastive loss is introduced, which improves model generalization ability. Please note
that this contrastive loss is calculated in feature space via feature extractor. Based on the above
contents, we propose a novel model framework via meta-learning. Our main contributions of this
paper can be summarized as follows:


       • We propose a new prototype recovery framework based on meta-learning, which can effec-
         tively use unlabeled samples to construct representative class prototypes.


       • We develop novel contrastive loss, using class prototypes as the anchor, which allows better
         inter-class discriminability to mitigate generalization problem.


       • We evaluate our approach on two benchmark datasets for few-shot learning, namely mini-
         ImageNet and tieredImageNet. The experimental results show that our method achieves
         higher performance, outperforming semi-supervised few-shot learning baselines.


We summarize related works in Section 2. Section 3 provides a rundown of our approach. Section
4 reports the main results obtained with our method. In section 5, we analyzed our methods from
different aspects.


                                                   2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


2     R ELATED W ORK

2.1   S EMI -S UPERVISED L EARNING

Many methods for FSL are supervised learning. However, in many fields, such as medical treatment
and aerospace, there will be abundant information that has not been labeled, some of which are use-
ful, but if all of them are manually labeled, it will be very time-consuming and laborious. Therefore,
FSL based on semi-supervised learning paradigm is more practical (Ren et al., 2018) (Liu et al.,
2019) (Liu et al., 2020). Semi-supervised few-shot learning mainly improves performance with un-
labeled samples. Semi-supervised paradigm is used firstly to tackle FSL in (Ren et al., 2018), which
augmenting data by tagging unlabeled samples. Simultaneously, they proposed soft K-means, soft
K-means + cluster and soft K-means + mask to get more representative prototypes based on Pro-
toNet. (Liu et al., 2019) puts forward a new idea, which uses graph model and label propagation
to predict the labels of query set. Although these methods have achieved good performance, they
do not make further use of unlabeled samples, we propose to take these unlabeled samples as the
input of CVAE, combined with the corresponding class attributes, to construct more representative
prototypes and improve the classification performance.


2.2   C ONSTRASTIVE L EARNING

The core idea of contrastive learning is to shorten the distance between the positive samples and the
anchor sample in the vector representation space, and lengthen the distance between the negative
samples and the anchor sample. This makes the boundary between positive and negative samples
more obvious. The performance of contrastive learning has been demonstrated in the image do-
main (Kipf et al., 2019) (He et al., 2020) (Chen et al., 2020) (Han et al., 2021). Compared with
the generative methods, which need to reconstruct pixel details to learn sample features, contrastive
methods only need to learn discrimination in the feature space. Therefore, contrastive methods do
not pay too much attention to pixel details, but can focus on abstract semantic information (more
general knowledge), so as to improve the generalization ability of models. For sample selection, in
traditional contrastive learning, we regard the input samples as anchors, the samples after data aug-
mentation as positive samples, and other samples in the same batch as negative samples. Differently,
sample selection in our model is to use the original prototype as the anchor.


2.3   C ONDITIONAL VARIATIONAL AUTOENCODER

VAE (Kingma & Welling, 2013) belongs to the generation model family. Using VAE models for
generating features conditioned on the corresponding semantic embedding is fairly common in ZSL
methods (Mishra et al., 2018) (Schonfeld et al., 2019). (Mishra et al., 2018) is the first to propose
to use a conditional VAE for ZSL. (Xu & Le, 2022) is the first FSL method that uses a conditional
VAE model to generate visual features, conditioned on the semantic embedding of each class. In
(Xu & Le, 2022), focusing on generating more features for the novel classes and constructing rep-
resentative class prototypes with the support features in the novel classes, while our method focuses
on generating more features for the support set to construct the representative class prototypes at
two stages: meta-learning training and meta-learning test.


3     S EMI -S UPENVISED FSL WITH R EPRESENTATIVE P ROTOTYPE

In this section, we introduce the overall framework of our model. As shown in Figure 1. For N-way
                                                                                  N ×K
K-shot image classification, we have two set: one is support set S = {(xi , yi )}i=1    , where xi is
the image, yi is the label of xi , has few labeled samples. The other is query set Q = {(xi )}Q i=1 ,
where Q is the number of images in Q , contains unlabeled samples. The samples in both sets are
from Dnovel . Samples in Dnovel are few, so most work introduce an auxiliary dataset Dbase . During
Meta-Training stage, we add an additional dataset R = {(xi )}R   i=1 , contains a large of unlabeled
samples. Noted that the classes in Dbase and Dnovel are different, formalized as Cbase ∩ Cnovel = ∅.
Our goal is to classify query samples correctly using few labeled samples from the support set.


                                                  3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Figure 1: Overall Framework. First, getting features representation of samples. Then labeling
samples with GMM, the support set turn to the extended support set with unlabeled samples. Finally,
constructing class prototypes with CVAE. Training the model with loss function L = Lcl + Lvae +
Ltest , where the loss Lcl according to shrink the distance of the anchor and the positive samples,
while enlarging the distance between the anchor and the negative samples.


In this paper, we exploit a convolutional neural network fθf to extract features from an input xi ,
where θf indicates a parameter of the network. We adopt ResNet12 as feature extractor for both the
support set S and the query set Q.

3.1    L ABELING S AMPLES WITH G AUSSIAN M IXTURE M ODEL

In this part, generating label for unlabeled samples by the Gaussian mixture model. Specifically,
First, defining a multivariate Gaussian mixture model with K classes to estimate the probability
density of the samples. Its defined distribution as Equation (1), where µk , Σk denotes the mean and
covariance of the k-th multivariate Gaussian distribution, and αk denotes the probability of the k-th
mixture component.
                                              XK
                                    P (x) =       αk · p(x|µk , Σk )                              (1)
                                                  k=1

Next, calculating the parameters Θ = {α1 , α2 , . . . , αk , µ1 , µ2 , . . . , µk , Σ1 , Σ2 , . . . , Σk } with the
EM algorithm, which is divided into two steps: E-Step: calculating the posterior probability that the
sample xj comes from the k-th multivariate Gaussian distribution, where R denotes the number of
R, formalized as Equation (2):
                                   αk · p(xj |µk , Σk )
                           γjk = PK                        , j = 1, 2, 3, ..., R                               (2)
                                  k=1 αk · p(xj |µk , Σk )

M-step: calculating a new round of model parameter estimates (αk , µk , Σk ), formalized as Equation
(3) ∼ (5). Repeating the E-step and M-step until the model converges.
                                               PR
                                                   j=1 γjk
                                        αk =                                                     (3)
                                                    R
                                            PR
                                                j=1 γjk · xj
                                      µk = PR                                                    (4)
                                                  j=1 γjk
                                    PR                             T
                                      j=1 γjk (xj − µk )(xj − µk )
                              Σk =             PR                                                (5)
                                                   j=1 γjk

Finally, utilizing the labeled samples from S to label unlabeled samples. Specifically, after the model
convergence is completed, R is clustered into K classes, expressed as C = {c1 , c2 , . . . , ck }. The
model calculates the mean vector as the class prototypes pk in the support set according to Equation
(6), so we have K class prototypes, expressed as P = {p1 , p2 , . . . , pk }. Then the probability of each


                                                        4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


cluster ci to be class k is estimated based on the proximity between the ci ∈ C and pk ∈ P over a
softmax (Bridle, 1990), formalized as Equation (7).
                                             1     X
                                     pk =                fθf (xi )                            (6)
                                           |Sk |
                                                  (xi ,yi )∈Sk

where Sk ∈ S is the subset of support belonging to class k.
                                              exp(−d < ci , pk >)
                                P (ci = k) = P                                                        (7)
                                              k exp(−d < ci , pk >)

where d <, > denotes the Euclidean distance of two vectors.

3.2   C ONTRASTIVE L OSS

Contrastive learning has been widely shown to capable of improving model generalization. Hence,
we develop a new loss to further improve model generalization. Given the class prototype pk as
the anchor, simultaneously, we’ve possessed the dataset T = {x1 , x2 , . . . , xt }, having the sample
label as pk (in section 3.1), which as the positive samples. Also, having a negative dataset O =
{x1 , x2 , . . . , xo }, which has different label from pk . Here we propose a prototype-based contrastive
loss function, which adopts the class prototype the anchor, formalized as Equation 8. Now, our goal
is to shrink the distance between xi ∈ T and pk while enlarging the distance between xi ∈ O and
pk .                                             Pt
                                                     i=1 exp(−d < xi , pk >)
                                    Lcl = −log Pt+o                                                    (8)
                                                     i=1 exp(−d < xi , pk >)
where t denotes the number of positive samples, o denotes the number of negative samples, and
d <, > denotes the Euclidean distance of two vectors.

3.3   C ONSTRUCTING C LASS P ROTOTYPES WITH CVAE

Based on the above work, we already have the labeled samples (defined dataset S̃) according to the
support set S and the corresponding dataset C. To generate samples with semantic embedding, we
combine xi ∈ S̃ and the interrelated attributes embedding as the input of VAE. VAE consists of
an encoder E(x, a), which encodes a sample x to a latent code z, and a decoder D(x, a), which
reconstructs x from z. The objection loss can be defined as:
                         Lvae = KL(q(z|xi , ak )||p(z|ak )) − log p(xi |z, ak )                       (9)
        k
where a denotes the semantic embedding of class k. The first term is the regularization term, which
aligns the variation term q(z|x, a) to the prior distribution p(z|a) through the Kullback-Leibler di-
vergence. The second term is the reconstruction loss, which aims to make the features z from the
encoder generated by the decoder approximate the original input features..
We acquire a new dataset Ŝ whose samples contain semantic information. Combining the previous
datasets S̃, we can reconstruct representative class prototypes as follows:
                              1     X                      1    X
                      pk =                 (fθf (xi )) +               (fθf (xi ))        (10)
                            |S̃k |                       |Ŝk |
                                  (xi ,yi )∈S̃k                  (xi ,yi )∈Ŝk

where S̃k ∈ S̃ is the subset of support belonging to class k. Ŝk ∈ Ŝ is the subset of support
belonging to class k.

3.4   M ETA -L EARNING WITH R EPRESENTATIVE P TOTOTYPE

We construct a number of N-way K-shot tasks from Dbase following the episodic training manner
(Vinyals et al., 2016). Specially, in each task, we sample N classes from the base classes, K images
in each class as the support set S, and Q images as the query set Q. Beyond that, we introduce R,
having R images. For each task, first, we access more labeled samples from R with GMM, and
then calculating contrastive loss with these labeled samples, finally constructing class prototypes via


                                                     5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


VAE with semantic embedding. Next, calculating the Euclidean distance between the test samples,
which from the query set, and the representative class prototypes to predict the labels:
                                                    exp(−d < fθf (xi ), pk >
                                 P (ỹi = k|xi ) = P                                                           (11)
                                                    k exp(−d < fθf (xi ), pk >

Here, ỹi denotes the final predicted label for xi , and d <, > denotes the Euclidean similarity between
of two vector. The largest probability value is taken as the predict label. Then the loss function is
calculated as:
                                             Ltest = ce(ỹ, y)                                       (12)

Here, ỹi denotes the final predicted label for xi , y denotes the real label for xi , ce(, ) denotes the
cross-entropy loss. Therefore, at the meta-learning training stage, the loss function as follow:
                                                L = Lcl + Lvae + Ltest                                         (13)
Finally, applying the meta-trained model to the novel class.

Table 1: Few-shot classification accuracies on miniImageNet and teiredImageNet. All results are
averaged over 600 test episodes. Top results are highlighted.

                    Method                       Backbone            miniImageNet             teiredImageNet
                                                             5-way 1-shot 5-way 5-shot 5-way 1-shot 5-way 5-shot
          ProtoNet (Snell et al., 2017)         ConvNet-64   49.42 ± 0.78 68.20 ± 0.66       -               -
           MAML (Finn et al., 2017)             ResNet-18    48.70 ± 1.84 63.11 ± 0.92       -               -
         Soft k-Means (Ren et al., 2018)        ConvNet-64   50.09 ± 0.45 64.59 ± 0.28 51.52 ± 0.36 70.25 ± 0.31
           TPN-semi(Liu et al., 2019)           ConvNet-64       52.78          66.42      55.74           71.01
    PSN, Semi-supervised (Simon et al., 2018)   ConvNet-64         -        68.12 ± 0.67     -         71.15 ± 0.67
        Ours (Semi-supervised learning)         ResNet-12    53.10 ± 0.03 68.14 ± 0.02 57.14 ± 0.14 74.13 ± 0.02


4      E XPERIMENTS
4.1      B ENCHMARKS

miniImageNet. In 2016, Google DeepMind team extracted miniImageNet based on ImageNet,
which contains 100 classes, each class has 600 images. DeepMind team first applied miniImagenet
to few-shot learning research (Vinyals et al., 2016), since then miniImageNet has became the bench-
mark for few-shot learning fields. In general, we divided the dataset into 64 classes as training sets,
16 as validation sets, and 20 as test sets.
teiredImageNet. The data set is also a subset of ImageNet, which proposed in (Ren et al., 2018).
teiredImageNet is similar to Omniglot, its classification has the concept of hierarchy. The dataset is
divided into 34 high-level classes (such as Instruments, tools, vehicles, etc.), each of which contains
10-30 more detailed sub-classes (such as Musical Instruments, including guitars, pianos, etc.). The
34 classes are divided into 20 training classes, 6 validation classes and 8 test classes.

4.2      I MPLEMENTATION D ETAILS

Dataset Split. For each dataset, we first create an additional split to separate labeled and unlabeled
samples. For miniImagenet, 40% of the data for labeled samples and 60% of data for unlabeled sam-
ples. For teiredImagenet, 10% of the data for labeled samples and the remaining 90% for unlabeled
samples.
Training Details. We adopt ResNet12 architectures as feature extractor, and the dimension of the
feature representation is 512. The dimensions of semantic embedding are set to be 512, and are
extracted from CLIP Radford et al. (2021). And then, all parameters are trained jointly with 100
episodes in a epoch. All our models are trained with Adam KingaD (2015) and initial learning rate
of 10−3 .


                                                             6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                      (a)                                                      (b)

Figure 2: Clustering Visualization. (a) To update the parameters of ResNet12. (b) To compare
features distribution of the original and the clustered.


Evaluation. We conduct few-shot classification on 600 randomly sampled episodes from the test
set and report the mean accuracy together with the 95% confidence interval. In each episode, we
randomly sample 15 unlabeled images per class for augmenting the support set, and sample 15 query
images per class for evaluation in 5-way 1-shot/5-shot tasks .

4.3   R ESULTS

Table 1 presents the 5-way 1-shot and 5-way 5-shot classification results of our methods on miniIm-
ageNet and tieredImageNet in comparision with previous FSL methods. We compare our method
with (Snell et al., 2017) (Finn et al., 2017) (Ren et al., 2018) (Liu et al., 2019) (Simon et al., 2018).
The first is classical meta-learning methods, ProtoNet and MAML. The second is Semi-supervised
method, such as Soft k-Means and TPN-semi. Since we use the Semi-supervised method paradigm
for training, we choose these two methods for comparison. Our method outperforms existing semi-
supervised methods, which demonstrates its effectiveness.


5     A NALYSES

In order to better illustrate the experimental results, we explained and visualized some details of the
experiment, found the experimental results under different experimental settings, and found better
experimental settings.

5.1   F EATURE D ISTRIBUTION A NALYSIS

Clustering Visualization. As shown in Figure 2(a), we first extract features of the input samples to
obtain 512-dimensional feature vectors. And then in feature space, clustering features of unlabeled
samples. Finally, updating the parameters of feature extractor according to the classifier. To sum
up, we cluster unlabeled samples in feature space. To further understand the distribution of clusters
in the feature space. We use t-SNE (Hinton & van der Maaten, 2008) to map feature representation
to 2-d space. Figure 2(b) shows the feature distribution. The left is the original feature distribution,
and the right is the clustered distribution. We find that clustering will change the feature distribution
of the original data and cluster the features of the same samples. However, since the image is high-
dimensional data, the label generated by clustering may not be correct, which also causes problems
in downstream tasks. Therefore, we will study how to further improve the accuracy of clustering by
GMM.
Features Visualization on Training. To verify whether feature extractor has learned discriminative
features, we randomly select three classes to visualized the feature distribution at different training
stages. Figure 3(a) is the original features distribution. Figure3(b) is the features distribution after
epoch 1. Figure.3(c) is the features distribution after epoch 64. Figure3(d) is the features distribution
after epoch 128. As shown in Figure 3, we find that with the increase of training epochs, the features
extracted by feature extractor become more and more discriminative. This shows that the model
obtained in this training stage is effective.


                                                   7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


          (a)                      (b)                      (c)                      (d)

Figure 3: Feature Visualization on Training. (a) Epoch 0. (b) Epoch 1. (c) Epoch 64. (d) Epoch
128.


5.2   P ERFORMANCE ON D IFFERENT NUMBER OF UNLABELED SAMPLES

Figure 1 shows the classification accuracy with different number of unlabeled samples. The model is
carried out under the setting of way = 5. The number of unlabeled samples of each class increases
from 0 to 25, and we observe that the classification accuracy of the model also increases. This
demonstrates that under the meta-learning framework, even under the semi-supervised paradigm,
the model can learn to obtain a better representation.


Figure 4: Model Performance on miniImageNet with different numbers of unlabeled samples at
meta-learning test.



6     C ONCLUSIONS

A novel framework for few-shot learning to construct representative class prototypes is proposed.
First, clustering unlabeled samples with GMM, and predict the labels of unlabeled samples accord-
ing to the support set with few labeled samples, thus the model conforms to the supervised learning
paradigm. Then, in order to learn more distinctive features, the prototype-based contrastive loss
is developed. Finally, the corresponding semantic embedding of the extended support set and the
extended support set as the input of CVAE to reconstruct more features, so as to calculate more
representative class prototypes. The whole model is based on the meta-learning framework, and the
whole training loss is composed of three parts. The results show that the performance of our method
is better than the existing semi-supervised learning methods. In the future, we will focus on how to
get better clustering results in high-dimensional data.


                                                 8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


R EFERENCES
Amit Alfassy, Leonid Karlinsky, Amit Aides, Joseph Shtok, Sivan Harary, Rogerio Feris, Raja
 Giryes, and Alex M Bronstein. Laso: Label-set operations networks for multi-label few-shot
 learning. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern recogni-
 tion, pp. 6548–6557, 2019.
John S Bridle. Probabilistic interpretation of feedforward classification network outputs, with rela-
  tionships to statistical pattern recognition. In Neurocomputing, pp. 227–236. Springer, 1990.
Ting Chen, Simon Kornblith, Mohammad Norouzi, and Geoffrey Hinton. A simple framework for
  contrastive learning of visual representations. In International conference on machine learning,
  pp. 1597–1607. PMLR, 2020.
Wei-Yu Chen, Yen-Cheng Liu, Zsolt Kira, Yu-Chiang Frank Wang, and Jia-Bin Huang. A closer
 look at few-shot classification. arXiv preprint arXiv:1904.04232, 2019a.
Zitian Chen, Yanwei Fu, Yinda Zhang, Yu-Gang Jiang, Xiangyang Xue, and Leonid Sigal. Multi-
  level semantic feature augmentation for one-shot learning. IEEE Transactions on Image Process-
  ing, 28(9):4594–4605, 2019b.
Alireza Fallah, Aryan Mokhtari, and Asuman Ozdaglar. On the convergence theory of gradient-
  based model-agnostic meta-learning algorithms. In International Conference on Artificial Intelli-
  gence and Statistics, pp. 1082–1092. PMLR, 2020.
Nanyi Fei, Zhiwu Lu, Tao Xiang, and Songfang Huang. Melr: Meta-learning via modeling episode-
  level relationships for few-shot learning. In International Conference on Learning Representa-
  tions, 2020.
Li Fei-Fei, Robert Fergus, and Pietro Perona. One-shot learning of object categories. IEEE trans-
  actions on pattern analysis and machine intelligence, 28(4):594–611, 2006.
Chelsea Finn, Pieter Abbeel, and Sergey Levine. Model-agnostic meta-learning for fast adaptation
  of deep networks. In International conference on machine learning, pp. 1126–1135. PMLR, 2017.
Junlin Han, Mehrdad Shoeiby, Lars Petersson, and Mohammad Ali Armin. Dual contrastive learning
  for unsupervised image-to-image translation. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on
  Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 746–755, 2021.
Kaiming He, Haoqi Fan, Yuxin Wu, Saining Xie, and Ross Girshick. Momentum contrast for
  unsupervised visual representation learning. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on
  computer vision and pattern recognition, pp. 9729–9738, 2020.
G Hinton and L van der Maaten. Visualizing data using t-sne journal of machine learning research.
  2008.
A KingaD. A methodforstochasticoptimization. Anon. International Conferenceon Learning Rep-
  resentations. SanDego: ICLR, 2015.
Diederik P Kingma and Max Welling.            Auto-encoding variational bayes.       arXiv preprint
  arXiv:1312.6114, 2013.
Thomas Kipf, Elise van der Pol, and Max Welling. Contrastive learning of structured world models.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:1911.12247, 2019.
Gregory Koch, Richard Zemel, Ruslan Salakhutdinov, et al. Siamese neural networks for one-shot
  image recognition. In ICML deep learning workshop, volume 2, pp. 0. Lille, 2015.
Kwonjoon Lee, Subhransu Maji, Avinash Ravichandran, and Stefano Soatto. Meta-learning with
 differentiable convex optimization. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer
 vision and pattern recognition, pp. 10657–10665, 2019.
Aoxue Li, Weiran Huang, Xu Lan, Jiashi Feng, Zhenguo Li, and Liwei Wang. Boosting few-shot
  learning with adaptive margin loss. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer
  vision and pattern recognition, pp. 12576–12584, 2020.


                                                 9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Jinlu Liu, Liang Song, and Yongqiang Qin. Prototype rectification for few-shot learning. In Euro-
   pean Conference on Computer Vision, pp. 741–756. Springer, 2020.
Yanbin Liu, Juho Lee, Minseop Park, Saehoon Kim, Eunho Yang, Sung Ju Hwang, and Yi Yang.
  Learning to propagate labels: Transductive propagation network for few-shot learning. In Inter-
  national Conference on Learning Representations, 2019.
Ashish Mishra, Shiva Krishna Reddy, Anurag Mittal, and Hema A Murthy. A generative model
  for zero shot learning using conditional variational autoencoders. In Proceedings of the IEEE
  conference on computer vision and pattern recognition workshops, pp. 2188–2196, 2018.
Alec Radford, Jong Wook Kim, Chris Hallacy, Aditya Ramesh, Gabriel Goh, Sandhini Agarwal,
  Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, Pamela Mishkin, Jack Clark, et al. Learning transferable visual
  models from natural language supervision. In International Conference on Machine Learning,
  pp. 8748–8763. PMLR, 2021.
Mengye Ren, Eleni Triantafillou, Sachin Ravi, Jake Snell, Kevin Swersky, Joshua B Tenenbaum,
 Hugo Larochelle, and Richard S Zemel. Meta-learning for semi-supervised few-shot classifica-
 tion. In Proceedings of 6th International Conference on Learning Representations ICLR, 2018.
Edgar Schonfeld, Sayna Ebrahimi, Samarth Sinha, Trevor Darrell, and Zeynep Akata. Generalized
  zero-and few-shot learning via aligned variational autoencoders. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF
  Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 8247–8255, 2019.
Eli Schwartz, Leonid Karlinsky, Joseph Shtok, Sivan Harary, Mattias Marder, Abhishek Kumar,
  Rogerio Feris, Raja Giryes, and Alex Bronstein. Delta-encoder: an effective sample synthesis
  method for few-shot object recognition. Advances in neural information processing systems, 31,
  2018.
Christian Simon, Piotr Koniusz, and Mehrtash Harandi. Projective subspace networks for few-shot
  learning. 2018.
Jake Snell, Kevin Swersky, and Richard Zemel. Prototypical networks for few-shot learning. Ad-
  vances in neural information processing systems, 30, 2017.
Oriol Vinyals, Charles Blundell, Timothy Lillicrap, Daan Wierstra, et al. Matching networks for one
  shot learning. Advances in neural information processing systems, 29, 2016.
Yaqing Wang, Quanming Yao, James T Kwok, and Lionel M Ni. Generalizing from a few examples:
  A survey on few-shot learning. ACM computing surveys (csur), 53(3):1–34, 2020.
Chen Xing, Negar Rostamzadeh, Boris Oreshkin, and Pedro O O Pinheiro. Adaptive cross-modal
  few-shot learning. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 32, 2019.
Jingyi Xu and Hieu Le. Generating representative samples for few-shot classification. In Proceed-
   ings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 9003–9013,
   2022.
Wanqi Xue and Wei Wang. One-shot image classification by learning to restore prototypes. In
 Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, volume 34, pp. 6558–6565, 2020.
Baoquan Zhang, Xutao Li, Yunming Ye, Zhichao Huang, and Lisai Zhang. Prototype completion
  with primitive knowledge for few-shot learning. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on
  Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 3754–3762, 2021.
Hongguang Zhang, Jing Zhang, and Piotr Koniusz. Few-shot learning via saliency-guided halluci-
  nation of samples. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
  Recognition, pp. 2770–2779, 2019a.
Jian Zhang, Chenglong Zhao, Bingbing Ni, Minghao Xu, and Xiaokang Yang. Variational few-shot
   learning. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision, pp.
   1685–1694, 2019b.
Manli Zhang, Jianhong Zhang, Zhiwu Lu, Tao Xiang, Mingyu Ding, and Songfang Huang. Iept:
 Instance-level and episode-level pretext tasks for few-shot learning. In International Conference
 on Learning Representations, 2020.


                                                10
