Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


S EMI - SUPERVISED
                LEARNING WITH A PRINCIPLED
LIKELIHOOD FROM A GENERATIVE MODEL OF DATA
CURATION

 Stoil Ganev and Laurence Aitchison
 Department of Computer Science
 University of Bristol,
 Bristol, UK
 laurence.aitchison@bristol.ac.uk



                                              A BSTRACT
            We currently do not have an understanding of semi-supervised learning (SSL)
            objectives such as pseudo-labelling and entropy minimization as log-likelihoods,
            which precludes the development of e.g. Bayesian SSL. Here, we note that bench-
            mark image datasets such as CIFAR-10 are carefully curated, and we formulate
            SSL objectives as a log-likelihood in a generative model of data curation. We show
            that SSL objectives, from entropy minimization and pseudo-labelling, to state-of-
            the-art techniques similar to FixMatch can be understood as lower-bounds on our
            principled log-likelihood. We are thus able to introduce a Bayesian extension of
            SSL, which gives considerable improvements over standard SSL in the setting of
            40 labelled points on CIFAR-10, with performance of 92.2±0.3% vs 88.6% in the
            original FixMatch paper. Finally, our theory suggests that SSL is effective in part
            due to the statistical patterns induced by data curation. This provides an explana-
            tion of past results which show SSL performs better on clean datasets without any
            “out of distribution” examples. Confirming these results we find that SSL gave
            much larger performance improvements on curated than on uncurated data, using
            matched curated and uncurated datasets based on Galaxy Zoo 2.1


1       I NTRODUCTION
To build high-performing deep learning models for industrial and medical applications, it is neces-
sary to train on large human-labelled datasets. For instance, Imagenet (Deng et al., 2009), a classic
benchmark dataset for object recognition, contains over 1 million labelled examples. Unfortunately,
human labelling is often prohibitively expensive. In contrast obtaining unlabelled data is usually
very straightforward. For instance, unlabelled image data can be obtained in almost unlimited vol-
umes from the internet. Semi-supervised learning (SSL) attempts to leverage this unlabelled data to
reduce the required number of human labels (Seeger, 2000; Zhu, 2005; Chapelle et al., 2006; Zhu
& Goldberg, 2009; Van Engelen & Hoos, 2020). One family of SSL methods — those based on
low-density separation — assume that decision boundaries lie in regions of low probability density,
far from all labelled and unlabelled points. To achieve this, pre deep learning (DL) low-density
separation SSL methods such as entropy minimization and pseudo-labelling (Grandvalet & Bengio,
2005; Lee, 2013) use objectives that repel decision boundaries away from unlabelled points by en-
couraging the network to make more certain predictions on those points. Entropy minimization (as
the name suggests) minimizes the predictive entropy, whereas pseudo-labelling treats the currently
most-probable label as a pseudo-label, and minimizes the cross entropy to that pseudo-label. More
modern work uses the notion of consistency regularisation, which augments the unlabelled data (e.g.
using translations and rotations), then encourages the neural network to produce similar outputs for
different augmentations of the same underlying image (Sajjadi et al., 2016; Xie et al., 2019; Berth-
elot et al., 2019b; Sohn et al., 2020). Further developments of this line of work have resulted in
many variants/combinations of these algorithms, from directly encouraging the smoothness of the
classifier outputs around unlabelled datapoints (Miyato et al., 2018) to the “FixMatch” family of
    1
        Our code: https://anonymous.4open.science/r/GZ_SSL-ED9E; MIT Licensed


                                                    1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


algorithms (Berthelot et al., 2019b;a; Sohn et al., 2020), which combine pseudo-labelling and con-
sistency regularisation by augmenting each image twice, and using one of the augmented images to
provide a pseudo-label for the other augmentation.
However, some of the biggest successes of deep learning, from supervised learning to many gen-
erative models, have been built on a principled statistical framework as maximum (marginal) like-
lihood inference (e.g. the cross-entropy objective in supervised learning can be understood as the
log-likelihood for a Categorical-softmax model of the class-label MacKay, 2003). Low-density sep-
aration SSL methods such as pseudo-labelling and entropy minimization are designed primarily to
encourage the class-boundary to lie in low-density regions. Therefore they cannot be understood
as log-likelihoods and cannot be combined with principled statistical methods such as Bayesian
inference.
Here, we give a formal account of SSL methods based on low-density separation (Chapelle et al.,
2006) as lower bounds on a principled log-likelihood. In particular, we consider pseudo-labelling
(Lee, 2013), entropy minimization (Grandvalet & Bengio, 2005), and modern methods similar to
FixMatch (Sohn et al., 2020). Thus, we introduce a Bayesian extension of SSL which gives 92.2 ±
0.3% accuracy, vs 88.6% in the case of 40 labelled examples in the original FixMatch paper. We
confirm the importance of data curation for SSL on real data from Galaxy Zoo 2 (also see Cozman
et al., 2003; Oliver et al., 2018; Chen et al., 2020; Guo et al., 2020).


2     BACKGROUND

The intuition behind low-density separation objectives for semi-supervised learning is that decision
boundaries should be in low-density regions away from both labelled and unlabelled data. As such,
it is sensible to “repel” decision boundaries away from labelled and unlabelled datapoints and this
can be achieved by making the classifier as certain as possible on those points. This happens au-
tomatically for labelled points as the standard supervised objective encourages the classifier to be
as certain as possible about the true class label. But for unlabelled points we need a new objective
that encourages certainty, and we focus on two approaches. First, and perhaps most direct is entropy
minimization (Grandvalet & Bengio, 2005)
                                                   X
                                Lneg entropy (X) =   py (X) log py (X)                            (1)
                                                y∈Y

where X is the input, y is the on particular label and Y is the set of possible labels. Here, we
have followed the typical probabilistic approach in writing the negative entropy as an objective to
be maximized. Alternatively, we could use pseudo-labelling, which takes the current classification,
y ∗ , to be the true label, and maximizes the log-probability of that label (Lee, 2013),
                Lpseudo (X) = log py∗ (X)                  y ∗ = arg max log py (X).               (2)
                                                                   y∈Y

Lee (2013) regarded pseudo-labelling as closely related to entropy miminization as the optimal
value of both objectives is reached when all the probability mass is assigned to one class. However,
they are not formulated as a principled log-likelihood, which gives rise to at least three problems.
First, these methods cannot be combined with other principled statistical methods such as Bayesian
inference. Second, it is unclear how to combine these objectives with standard supervised objectives,
except by taking a weighted sum and doing hyperparameter optimization over the weight. Third,
these objectives risk reinforcing any initial poor classifications and it is unclear whether this is
desirable.

2.1   I N STANDARD SUPERVISED LEARNING , UNLABELLED POINTS SHOULD BE
      UNINFORMATIVE

It is important to note that under the standard supervised-learning generative model unlabelled points
should not give any information about the weights. The typical supervised learning setup assumes
that the joint probability factorises as,
                              P (X, θ, Y ) = P (X) P (θ) P (Y |X, θ) ,                             (3)


                                                  2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


      A                                                            B more invariant NN   less invariant NN
            5
                                             y=1


                                                                    py (X10 )
            4
                                             y=0
            3                                true boundary

            2


                                                                    py (X20 )
            1
      x1


            0


                                                                    py (X30 )
           −1

           −2


                                                                  E py (X 0 ) X
           −3
                −4   −3   −2   −1   0    1   2      3        4


                                    x0                                              y           y



Figure 1: A. A toy dataset generated to illustrate the dangers of using the clustering of the input
points to inform classification boundaries. The input features, x0 and x1 are plotted on the x and y-
axes and the class is represented by colour. B. A schematic diagram demonstrating the effect of our
principled likelihood incorporating data-augmentation on the certainty of predictions for different
degrees of invariance. More invariant NNs (left) give similar predictive distributions for different
augmentations (blue), and hence a certain averaged predictive distribution (bottom; orange). Less
invariant NNs (right) give different predictive distributions for different augmentations (blue), and
hence highly uncertain averaged predictive distributions (bottom; orange).


as the prior over weights, θ is usually chosen to be independent of the inputs (e.g. IID Gaussian).
Thus, X and θ are marginally independent and we cannot obtain any information about θ from X
alone. Formally, the posterior over θ conditioned on X is equal to the prior,
                             P                                      P
                P (θ, X)        y∈Y P (θ, X, Y =y)     P (θ) P (X) y∈Y P (Y =y|θ, X)
  P (θ|X) =               =                         =                                     = P (θ) .
                 P (X)               P (X)                           P (X)
        P
as 1 = y∈Y P (Y =y|θ, X). To confirm this result is intuitively sensible, note that there are many
situations where encouraging the decision boundary to lie in low density regions would be very
detrimental to performance. Consider a classifier with two input features: x0 and x1 (Fig. 1A). The
class boundary lies in the high-density region crossing both clusters, so to obtain a reasonable re-
sult, the classifier should ignore the low-density region lying between the clusters. However, strong
low-density separation SSL terms in the objective may align the cluster boundaries with the class
boundaries, leading the classifier to wrongly believe that one cluster is entirely one class and the
other cluster is entirely the other class. In contrast, supervised learning without SSL will ignore
clustering and obtain a reasonable answer close to the grey dashed line. Importantly, this is just
an illustrative example to demonstrate that without further assumptions, the standard supervised ap-
proach of ignoring unlabelled data is sensible; semi-supervised learning without loss of performance
in such settings has been studied and is known as Safe SSL (Li & Zhou, 2014; Krijthe & Loog, 2014;
Kawakita & Takeuchi, 2014; Loog, 2015; Krijthe & Loog, 2016; Guo & Li, 2018; Li et al., 2019).

2.2        A GENERATIVE MODEL OF DATA CURATION

Here, we give details on the generative model of data curation from Aitchison (2021). The key obser-
vation behind this model is that the dataset curators for image datasets like CIFAR-10 and ImageNet
were very careful to include only images with a clear and unambiguous class label. For instance, for
image datasets like CIFAR-10 and ImageNet, annotators were instructed that “It’s worse to include
one that shouldn’t be included than to exclude one”, and Krizhevsky (2009) “personally verified
every label submitted by the annotators”. In creating ImageNet, Deng et al. (2009) made sure that
a number of Amazon Mechanical Turk annotators agreed upon the class before including an image
in the dataset. Remarkably, this means that not all images have a valid class label. For instance,
an image of a radio would not have a valid CIFAR-10 class-label, and hence it would have been
rejected from the CIFAR-10 dataset. And further, because an “intelligent” decision has been made
on whether or not to include the datapoint in the dataset, it might actually be possible to extract
useful information from merely inclusion of the point in the dataset (which is precisely what SSL
does).


                                                         3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                     A        decision boundary        consensus: class 1       B
                              no consensus             consensus: class 2
                          8   unlabelled


                          6


                     x1
                          4


                          2


                               0        2              4         6                   0    2        4   6
                                                  x0                                          x0


Figure 2: The generative model of data curation applied to a simple 2D dataset. Data from each
class was sampled from a different Gaussian, and the true decision boundary (green dashed line)
was given by the posterior probability of class given (x0 , x1 ). A Datapoints far from the decision
boundary are unambiguous, so annotators agree and consensus is reached (red and blue points).
Datapoints close to the decision boundary are ambiguous, so consensus is not reached (grey crosses).
The consensus datapoints thus exhibit artificially induced low-density separation. B When using
benchmark datasets such as CIFAR-10, the unlabelled points (yellow triangles) are selected from
the consensus points (red or blue points) as the noconensus points are not available. The unlabelled
points therefore also exhibit artificially induced low-density separation.


Formally, Aitchison (2021) considers a simplified generative model of consensus-formation between
multiple annotators, as in Deng et al. (2009). In particular, for any image, X, S human annotators,
indexed i, are asked to give a label, {Yi }Si=1 (e.g. using Mechanical Turk). Every annotator is forced
to label every image and if the image is ambiguous they are instructed to give a random label. If all
the annotators agree, Y1 =Y2 = · · · =YS , they have consensus and the datapoint is included in the
dataset. However, in the case of any disagreement, consensus is not reached and the datapoint is
excluded. Concretely, the final label, Y is Y1 (which is the same as all the other labels) if consensus
was reached and Undef otherwise,

                                        Y1          if Y1 =Y2 = · · · =YS
                                Y =                                                                 (4)
                                        Undef otherwise
Taking Y to be the label set, we have Yi ∈ Y, and the final label, Y , could be any of the underlying
labels in Y, or Undef if consensus is not reached, so Y ∈ Y ∪ {Undef}. When consensus was
reached, the likelihood is,
                                                     QS
             P (Y =y|X, θ) = P {Yi =y}Si=1 |X, θ = i=1 P (Yi =y|X, θ)
                                                                                                       S        S
                                                                                    = P (Yi =y|X, θ) = (py (X))     (5)
where we have assumed annotators are IID, and py (X) = P (Yi =y|X, θ) is the single-annotator
probability.

3   M ETHODS
Now, we apply this model of data curation to SSL. The key question is what likelihood to use for
unlabelled points. To understand this, remember that SSL methods are usually applied to benchmark
datasets such as CIFAR-10 or ImageNet; these datasets were first carefully curated during the la-
belling process, implying that all points in the dataset have reached consensus. Critically, in typical
benchmarks, unlabelled points are obtained by taking labelled points (which have reached consen-
sus) and throwing away their labels (Fig. 2B). Under the generative model of consensus described
above, we can obtain a probability of consensus by summing over class labels,
                                                       P               S
                            P (Y ̸=Undef|X, θ) = y∈Y (py (X)) .                                     (6)
                                                                                                            S
This probability is close to 1 (for S > 1) if the underlying distribution, (py (X)) puts most of its
mass onto one class, and the probability is smaller if the mass is spread out over classes. As such, the


                                                                            4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


likelihood “repels” decision boundaries away from unlabelled points, which is the common intuition
behind low-density separation SSL methods, and which should be beneficial if class boundaries
indeed lie in regions of low probability density away from both labelled and unlabelled points.
If noconsensus images are observed, we can include a likelihood term for those images,
                                                                    P               S
          P (Y =Undef|X, θ) = 1 − P (Y ̸= Undef|X, θ) = 1 − y∈Y (py (X)) .                         (7)

If noconsensus images are not observed, we could in principle integrate over the underlying distribu-
tion over images, P (X). However, we do not even have samples from the underlying distributions
over images (and if we did, we would have the noconsensus images so we could use Eq. 7). As such
we omit this term, but the use of out-of-distribution (OOD) datasets as surrogate noconsensus points
is an important direction for future work.

3.1   E NTROPY MINIMIZATION AND PSEUDO - LABELS ARE LOWER BOUNDS ON OUR
      PRINCIPLED LOG - LIKELIHOOD

Now, we try to understand whether our log-likelihood for noconsensus points bears any relation
to previous successful methods for low-density separation based SSL. In particular, we begin by
proving that entropy minimization forms a lower-bound on our log-likelihood (Eq. 6). First, we
write the log-likelihood of consensus as an expectation over labels, y,
                                      X                                     h            i
                                                          S−1                        S−1
       log P (Y ̸=Undef|X, θ) = log        py (X) (py (X))     = log Epy (X) (py (X))      . (8)
                                         y∈Y

Applying Jensen’s inequality, the negative entropy gives a lower-bound on our log-likelihood,
                                          h                 i
                                                       S−1
      log P (Y ̸=Undef|X, θ) ≥ Epy (X) log (py (X))
                                          P
                                = (S − 1) y∈Y py (X) log py (X) = (S − 1)Lneg entropy (X)          (9)

This bound is tight for a uniform predictive distribution,

                                                     S             1 S
                                   P
   log P (Y ̸=Undef|X, θ) = log       y∈Y (py (X))       = log S   S

                                                         = −(S − 1) log S = (S − 1)Lneg entropy (X)
                                                                                                  (10)
Pseudo-labelling forms an alternative lower bound on the log-likelihood which is obtained by noting
                  S
that all (py (X)) are positive, so selecting any subset of terms in the sum gives a lower bound,
                                             P                S
              log P (Y ̸=Undef|X, θ) = log y∈Y (py (X))
                                                         S
                                      ≥ log (py∗ (X)) = S log py∗ (X) = SLpseudo (X).             (11)
                                     ∗
The inequality holds if we choose y to be any class, but will be tightest if we choose the highest
probability class. This bound is tight for a predictive distribution that puts all its mass on y ∗ , so
py∗ (X) = 1 and py̸=y∗ = 0
                                        P                S                  S
        log P (Y ̸=Undef|X, θ) = log y∈Y (py (X)) = log (py∗ (X)) = S log 1 = 0
                     SLpseudo (X) = S log p∗y (X) = S log 1 = 0.
As such, entropy minimization and pseudo-labelling optimize different lower-bounds on our prin-
cipled log-likelihood, log P (Y ̸=Undef|X, θ), which gives a potential explanation for the effec-
tiveness of pseudo-labelling and entropy minimization. Additionally, low-density separation SSL
objectives encourages class-labels to be more certain. We can therefore expect pseudo-labelling to
be the more relevant bound, as that bound is tight when the predictive distribution puts all its mass
onto one class. In contrast, the entropy maximization bound is tight when the predictive distribution
is uniform, which is discouraged by all low-density separation SSL objectives. This provides a po-
tential explanation for the use of psuedo-labelling rather than entropy regularisation in modern SSL
approaches such as (Sohn et al., 2020).


                                                  5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


3.2   DATA AUGMENTATION PRIORS AND F IX M ATCH FAMILY METHODS

The simple bounds above do not include data augmentation. However, modern FixMatch family
methods combine data augmentation and pseudo-labelling. To understand FixMatch as a bound
on a principled log-likelihood, we therefore need a principled account of data augmentation as a
likelihood. Inspired by and Wenzel et al. (2020) (their Appendix K) and Nabarro et al. (2022) we
consider a distribution, P (X ′ |X), over augmented images, X ′ , given the underlying unaugmented
image, X. We choose the single-annotator predictive distribution as the average over predictive
distributions for many different augmented images,
                                  Paug (Yi =y|X, θ) = E [py (X ′ )|X]                              (12)
              ′
where py (X ) is the predictive probabilities resulting from applying the neural network to the aug-
mented image, and remember s ∈ {1, . . . , S} indexes the annotator. To obtain a tractable objective
in the supervised setting, Nabarro et al. (2022) recommend using a multi-sample version of Jensen’s
inequality, with K augmented images denoted Xk′ ,
                                                           1          ′
                                                             P
                         log Paug (Yi =y|X, θ) ≥ E log K       k py (Xk ) X .                      (13)
Combining this single-annotator probability with our generative model of curation, we obtain,
            log Paug (Y =y|X, θ) = S log P (Ys =y|X, θ) = S log E [py (X ′ )|X]
                                                                         1           ′
                                                                           P
                                                            ≥ S E log K      k py (Xk ) X ,        (14)
The resulting objective for unlabelled points is,
                                                                                             S
  log Paug (Y ̸=Undef|X, θ) = log y∈Y Paug (Y =y|X, θ) = log y∈Y E [py (X ′ )|X]
                                      P                               P

                                                                                1           ′ S
                                                                      P           P
                                                               ≈ log y∈Y K          k py (Xk )   , (15)
where we approximate the expectation with K different samples of X ′ , denoted Xk′ . Unfortunately,
this approach does not immediately form a bound on the log-likelihood due to the convex nonlinear-
ity in taking the power of S. Nonetheless, one key problem with approximating machine learning
losses is that the optimizer learns to exploit approximation errors to find a pathological solution that
makes the objective unboundedly large. We appear to be safe from that pathology here, as we are
simply forming predictions by averaging over K augmentations of the underlying image. Nonethe-
less, to form a lower bound, we can follow FixMatch family algorithms by pseudo-labelling, i.e. by
taking only one term in the sum for class y ∗ . FixMatch chooses y ∗ by using the highest-probability
class for a weakly-augmented    image. An alternative approach is to choose the y ∗ giving the tightest
                        1           ′
                          P
bound, i.e. arg maxy K        p
                            k y (X k ). In either case,
                                                         S
       log Paug (Y ̸=Undef|X, θ) ≥ log E [py∗ (X ′ )|X] ≥ S E log K      1           ′
                                                                           P
                                                                              k py (Xk ) X ,       (16)
                                                                                  ∗

If K = 1 and y ∗ is chosen using a separate “weak” augmentation, then this is exactly equal to the
FixMatch objective for unlabelled points.
Note that both of these objectives (Eq. 15 and 16) promote reduced predictive uncertainty. Im-
portantly, this does not just increase confidence in the single-augmentation predictive distributions,
py (Xk′ ), but also increases alignment between the predictive distributions for different augmenta-
tions (Fig. 1B). In particular, if the single-augmentation predictives are all highly confident, but place
that high-confidence on different classes, then the multi-augmentation predictive formed by averag-
ing will have low-confidence (Fig. 1B right). The only way for the multi-augmentation predictive
to have high confidence is if the underlying single-augmentation predictive distributions have high
confidence in the same class (Fig. 1B left), which encourages the underlying network to become
more invariant. This makes sense: if data-augmentation changes the class predicted by the neural
network, then any predictions should be low confidence. And it implies that combining principled
data augmentation with a generative model of data curation automatically gives rise to an objective
encouraging invariance.

3.3   A BAYESIAN EXTENSION OF SSL

Once we have derived a principled likelihood for SSL, P (Y |X, θ), we can combine that likelihood
with standard priors over Bayesian neural network weights, P (θ), (in particular, we use independent
Gaussians), and standard inference methods, specifically SGLD (Welling & Teh, 2011). This allows
us to draw samples from the Bayesian posterior, P (θ|X, θ)
                                 P (θ|X, Y ) ∝ P (Y |X, θ) P (θ) .                              (17)


                                                    6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                         A                                                   B
                                                                                                 100


                                                                         test accuracy (%)
                    test log-likelihood
                                          −0.1                                                                                 S
                                                                                                  95                               1
                                          −0.2                                                                                     2
                                                                                                  90                               3
                                          −0.3
                                                                                                                                   4
                                                                                                  85
                                                 0            1000                                     0            1000
                                                     unlabelled points                                     unlabelled points


Figure 3: Test log-likelihood (A) and accuracy (B) for Langevin sampling for Bayesian SSL on toy
datasets sampled from the model as a function of the number of unlabelled points. Note the lines
for different values of S are not directly comparable, as they use different data: each line uses data
curated with a different value of S, and as we increase S we curate more aggressively. More aggres-
sive curation will improve performance as it eliminates ambiguous or difficult-to-classify points.


4     R ESULTS

We began by giving a proof-of-principle for a Bayesian extension of SSL on a toy generated dataset,
then we assessed the performance of Bayesian SSL on CIFAR-10. Finally, we confirmed the impor-
tance of curation for low-density separation based semi-supervised learning using Galaxy Zoo 2 as
this was a real-world dataset which allowed us to generate matched curated and uncurated datasets.

4.1   BAYESIAN SSL ON A GENERATED DATASET

Our formulation of SSL as a likelihood implies that it should be possible to take entirely novel
approaches, such as using low-density separation SSL in a Bayesian neural network (BNN). We
considered a toy dataset generated from a “true” neural network model with one hidden layer and
30 hidden units, 5 dimensional inputs and 2 output classes. We did Bayesian inference in a network
with the same architecture, with an independent Gaussian prior over the weights, with prior variance
1/fan-in, which is necessary to ensure that the outputs have a sensible scale. We generated inputs
IID from a Gaussian, then passed them through the “true” neural network, then sampled multiple
categorical class-labels corresponding to different annotators. If all the simulated annotators agreed,
consensus was reached and if any simulated annotators disagreed, consensus was not reached. We
used 100 labelled datapoints, though not all of them will have reached consensus, and we used up to
1600 unlabelled points, though again not all of them will have reached consensus. Note that as the
consensus/noconsensus status of a point arises from the generative model, we cannot independently
specify the number of consensus/noconsensus points. We used Eq. (5) as the likelihood for labelled
points, Eq. (6) as the likelihood for unlabelled points and Eq. (7) as the likelihood for noconsensus
points. We sampled (and trained networks on) 500 datasets in parallel. We trained using Langevin
dynamics with all data simultaneously (no minibatching) with no momentum and no rejection.
For a generative model with S = 1, consensus is always reached and the problem is equivalent to
standard supervised learning. As such, we found no benefits from including unlabelled points for
S = 1. In contrast, for any setting of S > 1 we found that increasing the number of unlabelled
points improved the test log-likelihood (Fig. 3A) and the test accuracy (Fig. 3B).

4.2   BAYESIAN SSL ON CIFAR-10

Our work opens the possibility of combining Bayesian neural networks with SSL. We therefore de-
signed a Bayesian variant of FixMatch, using the bound on the likelihood in Eq. (16), where we take
y ∗ from the weak augmentation and take the probabilities from the strong augmentation (remember
the bound is valid for any choice of y ∗ ). We used the same network, augmentation (RandAugment)
and optimization schedule as in the original FixMatch paper, with the only modifications being to
use 300 epochs rather than 1024 epochs, due to time constraints, and to add noise to the gradient up-
dates. These noisy gradient updates convert SGD to a principled Bayesian inference method, SGLD
(Welling & Teh, 2011). We used an isotropic Gaussian prior over the weights with variance 10−3 as
that roughly corresponded to the usual 1/fan-in variance initialisation, and we chose a temperature


                                                                                             7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Table 1: Accuracy of standard vs Bayesian FixMatch for different numbers of unlabelled points.
Three seeds were used for all FixMatch and Bayesian FixMatch experiments except for FixMatch
with 40 labelled points, where we used 12 seeds because the noise was much higher than that for
any other setting. Bold indicates statistically significant improvements.
                number of labelled points:            40           250    4000
                       FixMatch                 88.5 ± 0.7     93.9 ± 0.2    94.6 ± 0.1
                   Bayesian FixMatch            92.2 ± 0.3     93.9 ± 0.1    94.9 ± 0.0
             FixMatch (unlab CIFAR-100)            41.35          62.63          86.66


of T = 10−3 (Wenzel et al., 2020; Aitchison, 2021). The accuracy was computed by averaging over
the last 100 epochs. As expected, we found that Bayesian FixMatch performed considerably better
with the smallest number of unlabelled points (including better than the original FixMatch paper
result of 88.6%), where uncertainty was highest, and gave similar performance otherwise (Tab. 1).
Finally, we also tried training on on labelled points from CIFAR-10 and unlabelled points from
CIFAR-100. As expected, we found a catastrophic drop in performance (Tab. 1).

4.3   G ALAXY Z OO 2

Our data curation based likelihood predicts that low-density separation based SSL should be much
more effective on curated than uncurated data. To test this prediction on real-world data, we turned
to Galaxy Zoo 2 (GZ2) (Willett et al., 2013) which uses images from the Sloan Digital Sky Survey.
This dataset is particularly useful for us as it has received only very minimal filtering based on
criteria such as object brightness and spatial extent. We defined 9 labels by truncating the complex
decision tree followed by the annotators (for further details see Aitchison, 2021). Further, as each
GZ2 image has received ∼ 50 labels, we can define a consensus coefficient by taking the fraction of
annotators that agreed upon the highest probability class. We can then define a curated dataset by
taking the images with consensus coefficient above some threshold within each class. Note that we
needed to select images on a per-class basis, because annotators tend to be more confident on some
classes than others, so taking the highest consensus coefficients overall would dramatically change
the class balance. In particular, we used the top 8.2% of images, which gave a full curated dataset of
just over 20,000 images. Of those, we randomly selected 2000 as labelled examples, 10000 as test
examples, and 0 – 6000 as unlabelled examples. The images were preprocessed by center-cropping
to 212 × 212 and then scaled to 32 × 32. We applied a FixMatch-inspired semi-supervised learning
algorithm, with a standard supervised objective, with unlabelled objective given by Eq. (15) with
K = 2 and S = 10. Data augmentation was given by vertical and horizontal flips, rotations from
−180◦ to 180◦ , translations by up to 40% on both axes and scaling from 20% to 180%. We trained
a ResNet18 with our maximum likelihood objective using SGD with a batch size of 500, a learning
rate of 0.01 and 1500 epochs. We used an internal cluster of nVidia 1080 and 2080 GPUs, and the
experiments took roughly 300 GPU hours.
We found that the test-log-likelihood for curated data improved slightly as more unlabelled points
were included, whereas the test-log-likelihood for uncurated dramatically declined as unlabelled
points were added (Fig. 4A–B). We saw strong improvements in test accuracy with the number of
unlabelled points for curated datasets (Fig. 4C–D). Note that in Fig. 4C the error rate for curated
datasets is already very small, so to see any effect we needed to plot the test error, normalized to the
initial test error (Fig. 4D). For uncurated data, the inclusion of large numbers of unlabelled points
dramatically worsened performance, though the inclusion of a small number of unlabelled points
gave very small performance improvements (Fig. 4C–D). Thus, this experiment is consistent with
the idea that the effectiveness of SSL arises at least in part from curation of the underlying dataset.


5     R ELATED WORK

There are at least three main approaches to semi-supervised learning (Seeger, 2000; Zhu, 2005;
Chapelle et al., 2006; Zhu & Goldberg, 2009). First there is low-density separation, where we
assume that the class boundary lies in a region of low probability density away from both labelled


                                                   8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Figure 4: Test log-likelihood and error for curated and uncurated GZ2 datasets as a function of the
number of unlabelled points. Exact corresponds to Eq. (15) (which is exact in the limit as K → ∞)
and pseudo corresponds to the pseudo labelling version of the augmented objective (Eq. 16). Note
the green line (exact curated) is under the red line in A–C.


and unlabelled points. This approach dates back at least to transductive support vector machines
(SVMs) where the model is to be tested on a finite number of known test locations (Vapnik, 1998;
Chapelle et al., 1999). Those known test locations are treated as unlabelled points, and we find the
decision boundary that perfectly classifies the limited number of labelled points, while at the same
time being as far as possible from labelled and unlabelled data. Alternative approaches include
pseudo-labelling and entropy minimization (Grandvalet & Bengio, 2005; Lee, 2013). Second, there
are graph-based methods such as (Zhu & Ghahramani, 2002) which are very different from the
methods considered here. Third, there are approaches that use unlabelled points to build a generative
model of the inputs and leverage that model to improve classification (e.g. Kingma et al., 2014;
Odena, 2016; Gordon & Hernández-Lobato, 2017). This approach was originally explored in a
considerable body of classical work (e.g. McLachlan, 1975; Castelli & Cover, 1995; Druck et al.,
2007) for a review, see Seeger (2000) and references therein. These approaches are fundamentally
different from the SSL approaches considered here, as they require a generative model of inputs,
while low-density separation methods do not. Generative modelling can be problematic as training
a generative model can be more involved than training a discriminative model and because the even
when the model can produce excellent samples, the high-level representation may be “entangled”
(Higgins et al., 2017) in which case it may not offer benefits for classification.

6   D ISCUSSION AND C ONCLUSION
In conclusion, we showed that low-density separation SSL objectives can be understood as a lower-
bound on a log-probability which arises from a principled generative model of data curation. This
allows us to develop Bayesian SSL, which performs better in settings where there are a very small
number of unlabelled points.
Our theory provides a theoretical understanding of past results showing that SSL is more effective
when unlabelled data is drawn from the original, curated training set (Cozman et al., 2003; Oliver
et al., 2018; Chen et al., 2020; Guo et al., 2020). In the extreme, our theory might be taken to
imply that if data has not been curated, then SSL cannot work, and therefore that low-density sepa-
ration SSL methods will not be effective in messy, uncurated real-world datasets. However, this is
not the complete picture. Low-density separation SSL methods, including our log-likelihood, fun-
damentally exploit class-boundaries lying in low-density regions. As such, low-density separation
could equally come from the real underlying data or could be artificially induced by data curation
(Fig. 2). None of these methods are able to distinguish between these different underlying sources
of low-density separation and as such any of them may work on uncurated data where the underly-
ing distribution displays low-density separation. However, the possibility for curation to artificially
induce low-density separation does imply that we should be cautious about overinterpreting spec-
tacular results for low-density separation based SSL obtained on very carefully curated benchmark
datasets such as CIFAR-10.


                                                  9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


R EFERENCES
Aitchison, L. A statistical theory of cold posteriors in deep neural networks. ICLR, 2021.
Berthelot, D., Carlini, N., Cubuk, E. D., Kurakin, A., Sohn, K., Zhang, H., and Raffel, C. Remix-
  match: Semi-supervised learning with distribution alignment and augmentation anchoring. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:1911.09785, 2019a.
Berthelot, D., Carlini, N., Goodfellow, I., Papernot, N., Oliver, A., and Raffel, C. A. Mixmatch:
  A holistic approach to semi-supervised learning. In Advances in Neural Information Processing
  Systems, pp. 5050–5060, 2019b.
Castelli, V. and Cover, T. M. On the exponential value of labeled samples. Pattern Recognition
  Letters, 16(1):105–111, 1995.
Chapelle, O., Vapnik, V., and Weston, J. Transductive inference for estimating values of functions.
  In NIPS, pp. 421–427. Citeseer, 1999.
Chapelle, O., Scholkopf, B., and Zien, A. Semi-supervised learning. 2006.
Chen, Y., Zhu, X., Li, W., and Gong, S. Semi-supervised learning under class distribution mismatch.
  In AAAI, pp. 3569–3576. AAAI Press, 2020.
Cozman, F. G., Cohen, I., Cirelo, M. C., et al. Semi-supervised learning of mixture models. In
  ICML, volume 4, pp. 24, 2003.
Deng, J., Dong, W., Socher, R., Li, L.-J., Li, K., and Fei-Fei, L. Imagenet: A large-scale hierarchical
  image database. In 2009 IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition, pp. 248–
  255. Ieee, 2009.
Druck, G., Pal, C., McCallum, A., and Zhu, X. Semi-supervised classification with hybrid genera-
  tive/discriminative methods. In Proceedings of the 13th ACM SIGKDD international conference
  on Knowledge discovery and data mining, pp. 280–289, 2007.
Gordon, J. and Hernández-Lobato, J. M. Bayesian semisupervised learning with deep generative
  models. arXiv preprint arXiv:1706.09751, 2017.
Grandvalet, Y. and Bengio, Y. Semi-supervised learning by entropy minimization. In Advances in
  neural information processing systems, pp. 529–536, 2005.
Guo, L., Zhang, Z., Jiang, Y., Li, Y., and Zhou, Z. Safe deep semi-supervised learning for unseen-
  class unlabeled data. In ICML, volume 119 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pp.
  3897–3906. PMLR, 2020.
Guo, L.-Z. and Li, Y.-F. A general formulation for safely exploiting weakly supervised data. In
  Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, volume 32, 2018.
Higgins, I., Matthey, L., Pal, A., Burgess, C., Glorot, X., Botvinick, M., Mohamed, S., and Lerchner,
  A. beta-vae: Learning basic visual concepts with a constrained variational framework. ICLR,
  2017.
Kawakita, M. and Takeuchi, J. Safe semi-supervised learning based on weighted likelihood. Neural
  Networks, 53:146–164, 2014.
Kingma, D. P., Mohamed, S., Jimenez Rezende, D., and Welling, M. Semi-supervised learning with
  deep generative models. Advances in neural information processing systems, 27:3581–3589,
  2014.
Krijthe, J. H. and Loog, M. Implicitly constrained semi-supervised linear discriminant analysis. In
  2014 22nd International Conference on Pattern Recognition, pp. 3762–3767. IEEE, 2014.
Krijthe, J. H. and Loog, M. The pessimistic limits and possibilities of margin-based losses in semi-
  supervised learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:1612.08875, 2016.
Krizhevsky, A. Learning multiple layers of features from tiny images. Tech. report, 2009.


                                                  10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Lee, D.-H. Pseudo-label: The simple and efficient semi-supervised learning method for deep neural
  networks. In Workshop on challenges in representation learning, ICML, volume 3, pp. 2, 2013.
Li, Y.-F. and Zhou, Z.-H. Towards making unlabeled data never hurt. IEEE transactions on pattern
  analysis and machine intelligence, 37(1):175–188, 2014.
Li, Y.-F., Guo, L.-Z., and Zhou, Z.-H. Towards safe weakly supervised learning. IEEE transactions
  on pattern analysis and machine intelligence, 43(1):334–346, 2019.
Loog, M. Contrastive pessimistic likelihood estimation for semi-supervised classification. IEEE
  transactions on pattern analysis and machine intelligence, 38(3):462–475, 2015.
MacKay, D. J. Information theory, inference and learning algorithms. Cambridge university press,
 2003.
McLachlan, G. J. Iterative reclassification procedure for constructing an asymptotically optimal rule
 of allocation in discriminant analysis. Journal of the American Statistical Association, 70(350):
 365–369, 1975.
Miyato, T., Maeda, S.-i., Koyama, M., and Ishii, S. Virtual adversarial training: a regularization
 method for supervised and semi-supervised learning. IEEE transactions on pattern analysis and
 machine intelligence, 41(8):1979–1993, 2018.
Nabarro, S., Ganev, S., Garriga-Alonso, A., Fortuin, V., van der Wilk, M., and Aitchison, L. Data
  augmentation in bayesian neural networks and the cold posterior effect. In Uncertainty in Artifi-
  cial Intelligence, pp. 1434–1444. PMLR, 2022.
Odena, A. Semi-supervised learning with generative adversarial networks.             arXiv preprint
  arXiv:1606.01583, 2016.
Oliver, A., Odena, A., Raffel, C., Cubuk, E. D., and Goodfellow, I. J. Realistic evaluation of deep
  semi-supervised learning algorithms. In NeurIPS, pp. 3239–3250, 2018.
Sajjadi, M., Javanmardi, M., and Tasdizen, T. Regularization with stochastic transformations and
  perturbations for deep semi-supervised learning. In Advances in neural information processing
  systems, pp. 1163–1171, 2016.
Seeger, M. Learning with labeled and unlabeled data. 2000.
Sohn, K., Berthelot, D., Li, C.-L., Zhang, Z., Carlini, N., Cubuk, E. D., Kurakin, A., Zhang, H.,
  and Raffel, C. Fixmatch: Simplifying semi-supervised learning with consistency and confidence.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2001.07685, 2020.
Van Engelen, J. E. and Hoos, H. H. A survey on semi-supervised learning. Machine Learning, 109
  (2):373–440, 2020.
Vapnik, V. Statistical learning theory. NY: Wiley, 1998.
Welling, M. and Teh, Y. W. Bayesian learning via stochastic gradient langevin dynamics. In Pro-
 ceedings of the 28th international conference on machine learning (ICML-11), pp. 681–688,
 2011.
Wenzel, F., Roth, K., Veeling, B. S., Światkowski,
                                          ˛         J., Tran, L., Mandt, S., Snoek, J., Salimans, T.,
 Jenatton, R., and Nowozin, S. How good is the bayes posterior in deep neural networks really?
 arXiv preprint arXiv:2002.02405, 2020.
Willett, K. W., Lintott, C. J., Bamford, S. P., Masters, K. L., Simmons, B. D., Casteels, K. R.,
 Edmondson, E. M., Fortson, L. F., Kaviraj, S., Keel, W. C., et al. Galaxy zoo 2: detailed morpho-
 logical classifications for 304 122 galaxies from the sloan digital sky survey. Monthly Notices of
 the Royal Astronomical Society, 435(4):2835–2860, 2013.
Xie, Q., Dai, Z., Hovy, E., Luong, M.-T., and Le, Q. V. Unsupervised data augmentation for consis-
  tency training. arXiv:1904.12848, 2019.
Zhu, X. and Ghahramani, Z. Learning from labeled and unlabeled data with label propagation. 2002.

                                                 11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Zhu, X. and Goldberg, A. B. Introduction to semi-supervised learning. Synthesis lectures on artifi-
  cial intelligence and machine learning, 3(1):1–130, 2009.
Zhu, X. J. Semi-supervised learning literature survey. 2005.


                                                12
