Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


N EURAL S YSTEMATIC B INDER
  Gautam Singh1∗, Yeongbin Kim2 & Sungjin Ahn2
 1
   Rutgers University
 2
   KAIST



                                               A BSTRACT

             The key to high-level cognition is believed to be the ability to systematically
             manipulate and compose knowledge pieces. While token-like structured knowledge
             representations are naturally provided in text, it is elusive how to obtain them
             for unstructured modalities such as scene images. In this paper, we propose a
             neural mechanism called Neural Systematic Binder or SysBinder for constructing
             a novel structured representation called Block-Slot Representation. In Block-Slot
             Representation, object-centric representations known as slots are constructed by
             composing a set of independent factor representations called blocks, to facilitate
             systematic generalization. SysBinder obtains this structure in an unsupervised
             way by alternatingly applying two different binding principles: spatial binding for
             spatial modularity across the full scene and factor binding for factor modularity
             within an object. SysBinder is a simple, deterministic, and general-purpose layer
             that can be applied as a drop-in module in any arbitrary neural network and
             on any modality. In experiments, we find that SysBinder provides significantly
             better factor disentanglement within the slots than the conventional object-centric
             methods, including, for the first time, in visually complex scene images such as
             CLEVR-Tex. Furthermore, we demonstrate factor-level systematicity in controlled
             scene generation by decoding unseen factor combinations. https://sites.
             google.com/view/neural-systematic-binder


1        I NTRODUCTION

One of the most remarkable traits of human intelligence is the ability to generalize systematically.
Humans are good at dealing with out-of-distribution situations because of the ability to understand
them as a composition of pre-acquired knowledge pieces and knowing how to manipulate these
pieces (Lake et al., 2017; Fodor & Pylyshyn, 1988). This also seems to be foundational for a broad
range of higher-level cognitive functions, such as planning, reasoning, analogy-making, and causal
inference. However, realizing this ability in machines still remains a major challenge in modern
machine learning (McVee et al., 2005; Bottou, 2014; Schölkopf et al., 2021).
This problem is considerably more difficult for unstructured modalities such as visual scenes or
speech signals compared to modalities such as language. In language, we can consider embeddings of
words or other forms of tokens as modular knowledge pieces. However, for unstructured modalities,
we would first need to obtain such tokens, e.g., by grouping relevant low-level features, through a
process called binding (Greff et al., 2020a). Yet it is quite elusive what should be the appropriate
structure and granularity of these tokens to support systematic generalization and how to obtain them,
particularly in the unsupervised setting where the model should learn this ability only by observing.
In visual scenes, binding has recently been pursued by object-centric learning methods through the
spatial binding approach (Locatello et al., 2020; Singh et al., 2022a). Spatial binding aims to divide a
scene spatially into smaller areas so that each area contains a meaningful entity like an object. The
information in each area is then grouped and aggregated to produce a representation of an object
i.e., a slot, resulting in a set of slots per scene. These slots can be seen as independent modular
knowledge pieces describing the full scene. However, the main limitation of the current methods
based on spatial binding is that a slot is an entangled vector and not a composition of independent
     ∗
         Correspondence to singh.gautam@rutgers.edu and sjn.ahn@gmail.com.


                                                     1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Figure 1: Overview. Left: We propose a novel binding mechanism, Neural Systematic Binder, that
represents an object as a slot constructed by concatenating multi-dimensional factor representations
called blocks. Without any supervision, each block learns to represent a specific factor of the object
such as color, shape, or position. Right: Neural Systematic Binder works by combining two binding
principles: spatial binding and factor binding. In spatial binding, the slots undergo a competition
for each input feature followed by iterative refinement, similar to Slot Attention. In factor binding,
unlike Slot Attention, for each slot, the bottom-up information from the attended input features is
split and routed to M independent block refinement pathways. Importantly, each pathway provides a
representation bottleneck by performing dot-product attention on a memory of learned prototypes.


modular representations. As such, a systematically novel object would map to an unfamiliar slot
vector rather than a modular combination of familiar factor tokens, such as color, shape, and position.
In this paper, we propose the Neural Systematic Binder, or SysBinder for short. SysBinder generalizes
the conventional binding process by combining spatial binding and factor binding. While spatial
binding provides spatial modularity across the full scene, factor binding provides factor modularity
within an object. More specifically, given an input, SysBinder produces a set of vector representations,
called slots, via spatial binding. However, unlike typical object-centric learning, each of these slots is
constructed by concatenating a set of independent factor representations called blocks obtained via
factor binding. SysBinder uses iterative refinement to learn the slots by applying spatial binding step
and factor-binding steps alternatingly during the refinement process. In the spatial binding step, slots
compete with each other to find an input attention area per slot. The information in each area is then
grouped and used to refine the blocks. Crucially, to achieve factor binding, each block is refined in a
modular fashion by applying an independent RNN and a soft information bottleneck on each block.
We train SysBinder in a fully unsupervised manner by reconstructing the input from the slots using
the decoding framework of SLATE (Singh et al., 2022a;b).
The contributions of this paper are as follows. First, SysBinder is the first deterministic binding
mechanism to produce disentangled factors within a slot. This deterministic nature of SysBinder
is remarkable since, conventionally, probabilistic modeling has been considered crucial for the
emergence of factors within slots (Higgins et al., 2017; Greff et al., 2019). Second, in probabilistic
frameworks, the representation of a factor is a single dimension of the slot, while in SysBinder, the
representation of a factor is a multi-dimensional block, providing a more flexible and richer way
to represent a factor. Third, similar to Slot Attention, SysBinder is a simple, deterministic, and
general-purpose layer that can be applied as a drop-in module in any arbitrary neural network and
on any modality. In experiments, we show that i) SysBinder achieves significantly better factor
disentanglement within the slots than conventional object-centric methods, including those based
on probabilistic frameworks. ii) Notably, for the first time in this line, we show factor emergence in
visually complex scene images such as CLEVR-Tex (Karazija et al., 2021b). iii) Using the emergent
factor blocks obtained from SysBinder, we demonstrate factor-level systematicity in controlled scene
generation by decoding unseen block combinations. iv) Lastly, we provide an extensive analysis by
evaluating the performance of several key model variants.


                                                    2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


2     M ETHOD
2.1     B LOCK -S LOT R EPRESENTATION

We propose and define Block-Slot Representation as a set of slots where each slot is constructed by
concatenating a set of factor representations called blocks. For images, a slot would represent one
object in the scene, similar to the conventional slots. However, unlike the conventional slots which
either i) do not seek intra-slot factors at all (Locatello et al., 2020) or ii) seek to make each individual
dimension a factor (Greff et al., 2019), we seek to make each multi-dimensional block a factor. Each
block should represent at most one factor of the object, and, conversely, each factor should be fully
represented by a single block. Formally, by denoting the number of slots by N , the number of blocks
per slot by M , and the dimension of a block by d, we denote the collection of N slots by a matrix
S ∈ RN ×M d . Each slot sn ∈ RM d is a concatenation of M blocks. We denote the m-th block of
slot n as sn,m ∈ Rd .

2.2     S YS B INDER : N EURAL S YSTEMATIC B INDER

We propose Neural Systematic Binder or simply SysBinder as a novel binding mechanism to encode a
set of L input vectors E into Block-Slot Representation S. SysBinder is a general-purpose mechanism
that, in principle, can be used for any input modality (e.g., speech signals) as long as it is provided as
a set of vectors. It can therefore be seen as a drop-in module that can be plugged into any arbitrary
neural architecture. SysBinder is based on two binding principles: spatial binding and factor binding.
In spatial binding, each slot sn performs competitive attention on the input features E to find a spatial
attention area. In factor binding, each of the M blocks is updated modularly using the information
from the attended spatial area by applying an independent RNN and a soft information bottleneck
on each block. We first initialize the slots by randomly sampling them from a learned Gaussian
distribution. We then refine the slots by alternatingly applying the spatial binding and factor binding
steps multiple times. We now describe a single refinement iteration in detail.

2.2.1    S PATIAL B INDING
In the spatial binding, the slots S ∈ RN ×M d first perform competitive attention (Locatello et al.,
2020) on the input features E ∈ RL×D to attend to a local area. For this, we apply linear projection q
on the slots to obtain the queries, and projections k and v on the inputs to obtain the keys and the
values, all having the same size M d. We then perform dot-product between the queries and the keys
to get the attention matrix A ∈ RN ×L . In A, each entry An,l is the attention weight of slot n for
attending over the input vector l. We normalize A by applying softmax across slots i.e., along the
axis N . This implements a form of competition among slots for attending to each input l.
We now seek to group and aggregate the attended inputs and obtain the attention readout for each slot.
For this, we normalize the attention matrix A ∈ RN ×L along the axis L, and multiply it with the input
values v(E) ∈ RL×M d . This produces the attention readout in the form of a matrix U ∈ RN ×M d
where each row un ∈ RM d is the readout corresponding to slot n.
                       q(S) · k(E)T

                                                             An,l
    A = softmax            √               =⇒ An,l = PL                  =⇒ U = A · v(E),
              N               Md                            l=1 An,l

2.2.2    FACTOR B INDING
In factor binding, we seek to use the readout information obtained from spatial binding and update
each block in a modular manner. This is achieved via the following two steps:
Modular Block Refinement. For this, we split each slot’s readout vector un into M vector segments
of equal sizes (denoting the m-th segment as un,m ∈ Rd ). We then apply a refinement RNN
independently on each block sn,m in parallel by providing its corresponding readout segment un,m
as the input. The RNN is implemented using a GRUϕm and a residual MLPϕm . In our design, we
choose to maintain separate parameters ϕm for each m as this design can potentially scale better for
complex large-scale problems where the number of blocks can be large. However, depending on the
context, it is also a sensible design to share the parameters ϕm = ϕ for all m.
          sn,m = GRUϕm (sn,m , un,m )              =⇒            sn,m += MLPϕm (LN(sn,m )).


                                                     3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Block Bottleneck. Next, we apply a soft information bottleneck on each block by making each block
retrieve a representation from a concept memory. A concept memory Cm ∈ RK×d is a set of K
learnable vectors or K latent prototype vectors associated with the particular factor m. Each block
sn,m performs dot-product attention on its corresponding concept memory Cm , and the retrieved
vector is used as the block representation:
                                                   sn,m · CTm

                             sn,m = softmax           √           · Cm .
                                            K           d
The spatial binding and the factor binding together form one refinement iteration. The refinement
iterations are repeated several times and the slots obtained from the last iteration are taken to be the
final Block-Slot Representation for providing downstream. We provide a pseudo-code of our method
in Algorithm 1.

2.3   U NSUPERVISED O BJECT-C ENTRIC L EARNING WITH S YS B INDER

In this section, we propose an unsupervised object-centric learning method for images using the
proposed binding mechanism, SysBinder. For this, we adopt an auto-encoding approach in which
we apply SysBinder to encode the image and then apply an autoregressive transformer decoder to
reconstruct the image.
Encoding. Given an image x ∈ RH×W ×C , we first obtain a set of image features using a backbone
encoder network, e.g., a CNN in our experiments. In this CNN, positional encodings are added
in the second-last layer and the final output feature map is flattened to form a set of input vectors
represented in a matrix form E ∈ RL×D . We then apply SysBinder on E to obtain slots S.
Block Coupling. One crucial benefit realized by Block-Slot Representation is that the relationships
and interactions among the representations can be modeled explicitly at the level of blocks rather
than the level of slots. To obtain this benefit, we would like to provide all block vectors together as a
set of tokens {sn,m } to the downstream transformer decoder. However, because a set is order-less,
it is difficult for the transformer (i) to know which concept each block is representing and (ii) to
identify to which slot each block is belonging. Following the traditional approach for dealing with
the order issue in Transformer, one possible approach to this problem is to provide two positional
embeddings to each block indexed by (n, m): one for slot membership n and the other for the block
index m. However, this would mean that the decoder should take the burden of learning invariance to
the slot order which is not built-in into the design. Furthermore, it could be difficult for the decoder
to generalize well when many more slots than the number seen during training are given at test time.
To avoid these challenges, we propose the following method. To each block, we add a positional
encoding pblock
             m    that depends only on m but not on n. We then let the blocks belonging to the same
slot interact via a 1-layer transformer, termed block coupler, as follows:
       s̄n,m = sn,m + pblock
                         m          =⇒        s̃n,1 , . . . , s̃n,M = BlockCoupler(s̄n,1 , . . . , s̄n,M )
After this, we provide all the returned vectors to the transformer decoder as a single set S = {s̃n,m }.
With this approach, the decoder is informed about the role of each block via the positional encoding
pblock
 m . Because the blocks in the same slot have interacted with each other, the information about
which blocks belong to the same slot is also implicitly available to the decoder. Furthermore, the
decoder treats the slots as order-invariant and can also deal with more slots than shown in training.
Autoregressive Decoding. Conditioned on S obtained via block coupling, a transformer decoder
learns to reconstruct the image. Similarly to the decoder of SLATE (Singh et al., 2022a) and
STEVE (Singh et al., 2022b), the transformer does not directly reconstruct the pixels of the image.
Instead, we reconstruct a discrete code representation z1 , . . . , zL′ of the given image x obtained from
a discrete VAE (dVAE). In autoregressive decoding, the transformer predicts each code zl at position
l by looking at all the previous codes z1 , . . . , zl−1 and the input blocks S. For this, we first retrieve a
learned embedding for each discrete code z1 , . . . , zl−1 . To these, we add positional encodings and
provide the resulting embeddings e1 , . . . , el−1 to the transformer to predict the next token:
      el = Dictionaryθ (zl ) + ptoken
                                 l         =⇒       ol = TransformerDecoderθ (e1 , . . . , el−1 ; S),
where ol are the predicted logits for the token at position l. The training isP
                                                                              done by learning to predict
                                                                                L′
all tokens in parallel using causal masking via the learning objective L = l=1 CrossEntropy(zl , ol ).
The dVAE may be pre-trained or trained jointly with the model. For more details, see Appendix D.4.


                                                      4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


3    E VALUATING B LOCK -S LOT R EPRESENTATION

In this section, we introduce the method to quantitatively evaluate Block-Slot Representations based
on the DCI framework (Eastwood & Williams, 2018). The DCI framework is multi-faceted and
evaluates multiple aspects of the quality of a representation vector in terms of Disentanglement (D),
Completeness (C), and Informativeness (I). Although the original DCI framework is designed for a
single vector representation, Nanbo et al. (2020) proposed a method to make it applicable to a set of
slots by first matching the slots with the true objects using IoU before applying the DCI procedure.
Specifically, let S = (s1 , . . . , sO ) be a set of slots, with a slot so ∈ Rd . Also, for each object, let there
be K ground-truth factors of object variation such as color, shape, and position. We train K probe
functions g1probe , . . . , gK
                             probe
                                   , one for each factor, to predict the factor label yok from the slot vector so .
The probes are classifiers implemented using gradient-boosted trees (Locatello et al., 2019). Using
the trained probes, we can obtain a feature importance matrix R = (Rk,j ) ∈ RK×d . Each entry Rk,j
denotes the importance of feature dimension j in predicting the factor k and is obtained from the
corresponding probe gkprobe . Using the importance matrix, the disentanglement-score Dj for a specific
feature dimension j and the completeness-score Ck for a specific factor k are computed as follows:
                      Dj = 1 − HK (R:,j ),                          Ck = 1 − Hd (Rk,: ),
where HK (·) denotes entropy with log-base K and Hd (·) denotes entropy with log-base d. From
these, the final disentanglement-score D and completeness-score C are computed as the weighted
average of Dj over all the dimensions j = 1, . . . , d and similarly for Ck by averaging over k =
1, . . . , K. The informativeness-score is the average of the prediction accuracies of all the probes.
For evaluating the Block-Slot Representation, we first apply the same probing approach as described
above to obtain the importance matrix R = (Rk,j ) ∈ RK×M d , where M is the number of blocks, d is
the block size, and M d is the size of the slot. To evaluate the representation in the setting where each
block is an independent factor, we obtain an importance score per block by summing the importance
scores across the dimensions belonging to the same block, giving us block importance matrix
Rblock = (Rk,m
             block
                   ) ∈ RK×M . Using these block importance values, we compute the disentanglement-
scores and the completeness-scores in the same way as described above.

4    R ELATED W ORK

Our work belongs in the line of unsupervised object-centric learning methods (Greff et al., 2016;
Burgess et al., 2019; Greff et al., 2019; Locatello et al., 2020; Greff et al., 2017; Engelcke et al., 2019;
Engelcke et al., 2021; Anciukevicius et al., 2020; von Kügelgen et al., 2020; Greff et al., 2020b; Singh
et al., 2022a; Chang et al., 2022). In this line, intra-slot disentanglement has been explored inside
the VAE framework (Greff et al., 2019; Burgess et al., 2019; Nanbo et al., 2020; Zoran et al., 2021).
However, unlike these, our work achieves this goal without taking the complexity of probabilistic
modeling. Another parallel line of work pursues disentanglement of object properties by adopting a
spatial transformer decoder – a special decoder designed to accept explicit values of object size and
position (Jaderberg et al., 2015; Eslami et al., 2016; Crawford & Pineau, 2019b; Lin et al., 2020b;
Jiang & Ahn, 2020; Deng et al., 2020; Chen et al., 2021). However, these cannot scale to other
factors of variation such as color or material. Prabhudesai et al. (2021) seek object and factor-level
disentanglement but require the use of 3D viewpoint, occupancy labels, and an auxiliary consistency
loss. Learning neural networks composed of independent competing modules has been explored by
Goyal et al. (2021b; 2020); Lamb et al. (2021); Goyal et al. (2021a). Our prototype learning is related
to van den Oord et al. (2017); Liu et al. (2021); Caron et al. (2020) and our concept memory attention
is related to (Ramsauer et al., 2021). However, these works do not focus on object-centric learning or
intra-slot disentanglement.
Disentangling single-vector scene representations has been pursued in Chen et al. (2016); Higgins
et al. (2017); Kim & Mnih (2018); Kumar et al. (2017); Chen et al. (2018); Locatello et al. (2019);
Montero et al. (2021). Parallel to these, Hu et al. (2022); Zhou et al. (2020) pursue block-level
disentanglement but on 3D mesh data and in single object scenes. Stammer et al. (2021) use
prototypes to learn block-wise disentangled codes. However, this is not unsupervised and does not
deal with multiple objects, unlike ours. Several metrics have also been proposed alongside the above
works to measure disentanglement in single vector representations (Higgins et al., 2017; Kim & Mnih,


                                                        5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


2018; Chen et al., 2018; Eastwood & Williams, 2018; Ridgeway & Mozer, 2018; Kumar et al., 2018;
Andreas, 2019). For slot representations, several metrics have been proposed but these do not apply
to block-level disentanglement within slots (Racah & Chandar, 2020; Xie et al., 2022; Nanbo et al.,
2020). The metric of Dang-Nhu (2022) applies to block-level disentanglement. However, it involves
simultaneously optimizing slot permutation and factor prediction which could be unstable. Also, it
requires building a much larger feature-importance matrix which can be extremely slow.


5       E XPERIMENTS

Datasets. We evaluate our model on three datasets: CLEVR-Easy, CLEVR-Hard, and CLEVR-Tex.
These are variants of the original CLEVR dataset (Johnson et al., 2017) having large object sizes to
make object properties such as shape or texture clearly visible in the image. These datasets have
different difficulty levels: i) In CLEVR-Easy, there are three ground-truth factors of variation, i.e.,
color, shape, and position while the material and the size are fixed. As in the original CLEVR, the
color takes values from a small palette of 8 colors. ii) In CLEVR-Hard, all 5 properties i.e. color,
shape, position, material, and size are the factors of variation. Furthermore, the color takes values
from a much larger palette containing 137 colors. iii) CLEVR-Tex is derived from the original
CLEVR-Tex dataset (Karazija et al., 2021a). Here, the objects and the backgrounds can take textured
materials from a total of 57 possible materials and is much more complex than the previous two
datasets. In addition to the material, the object shapes and positions are also varied. Our model
only sees the raw images as input and no other supervision is provided. For evaluation, we use
ground-truth object masks and factor labels. See Fig. 5 for sample images of these datasets. We
release our code and the datasets here1 .
Baselines. We compare our model with three state-of-the-art unsupervised object-centric representa-
tion models: IODINE (Greff et al., 2019), Slot Attention (Locatello et al., 2020), and SLATE (Singh
et al., 2022a). IODINE represents the class of VAE-based object-centric models while Slot Attention
and SLATE are two deterministic object-centric models. The number of factor representations per
slot for the baseline models is their slot size since every dimension acts as a factor representation.
Following their original papers, we set this to 64. In our model, the number of factor representations
per slot is the number of blocks M . We use 8, 16, and 8 blocks for CLEVR-Easy, CLEVR-Hard,
and CLEVR-Tex, respectively. Importantly, having such few factor representations, e.g., 8 or 16, is
a desirable characteristic of our model because it leads to better interpretability within a slot. As
such, we also test how IODINE would perform with such few factor representations. We test this by
training IODINE by setting its slot size equal to the number of blocks M of our model (termed as
IODINE-M ). Because using such small slot sizes deviates from IODINE’s original hyperparameters,
we also analyze a wide range of other slot sizes for IODINE in Fig. 6 and find that it does not lead to
much improvement in IODINE’s performance.

5.1      O BJECT AND FACTOR D ISENTANGLEMENT

To compare how well the models decompose the image into slots and then the slots into the factors
of object variation, we use four metrics. To evaluate object segmentation, we adopt the Adjusted
Rand Index applied to the foreground objects (FG-ARI), as done in prior works (Greff et al., 2019;
Locatello et al., 2020). FG-ARI has also been shown to correlate with downstream task performance
(Dittadi et al., 2022). To evaluate intra-slot disentanglement, we use DCI introduced in Section 3.
Quantitative Results. We show a quantitative evaluation of object-level and factor-level disentan-
glement in Fig. 2. We note that our model significantly outperforms the baselines in all 3 datasets,
nearly doubling the disentanglement and completeness-scores in CLEVR-Easy and CLEVR-Hard. In
CLEVR-Tex, the other models except for SLATE completely fail in handling the visual complexity
of the textured scenes while our model remains robust. To the best of our knowledge, it is for the
first time in this line of research that factor-level disentanglement has been achieved on this level of
textural complexity. The informativeness-score and FG-ARI also suggest that our model is superior
in factor prediction and object segmentation to the other methods. In Fig. 3, we visualize the feature
importance matrices used for computing the DCI scores in CLEVR-Easy. We note that our importance
matrix is more sparse than other methods. We also note that deterministic baselines like SLATE and
    1
        https://sites.google.com/view/neural-systematic-binder


                                                   6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                             CLEVR-Easy                           CLEVR-Hard                      CLEVR-Tex
                   Our Model        IODINE   IODINE-M
                   Slot Attention   SLATE
          1                                              1                               1
         0.8                                            0.8                             0.8
 Score


         0.6                                            0.6                             0.6
         0.4                                            0.4                             0.4
         0.2                                            0.2                             0.2
          0                                              0                               0
               D              C          I     FG-ARI         D   C        I   FG-ARI         D   C       I   FG-ARI



Figure 2: Slot Learning and Intra-Slot Disentanglement. We compare our model with the baselines
in terms of Disentanglement (D), Completeness (C), Informativeness (I), and FG-ARI.


Figure 3: Feature Importances in CLEVR-Easy. We visualize the intra-slot feature importance
matrices of the evaluated models. Each row corresponds to a ground-truth intra-object factor and
each column corresponds to a factor representation. In our model, a factor representation is a block
while in the baselines, a factor representation is a single dimension of the slot.


Slot Attention have significantly more active dimensions than the IODINE baseline due to the effect
of the VAE prior in IODINE. This observation also correlates with lower completeness-scores of Slot
Attention and SLATE relative to IODINE. Such effect of the VAE prior was also noted in Dang-Nhu
(2022). Surprisingly, unlike the conventional methods, in SysBinder, such disentanglement emerges
with a simple deterministic model and without applying a VAE framework.
Qualitative Results. In Fig. 4 and 10, we visualize the learned representation space of each block.
For this, we feed a large batch of images to SysBinder, collect the m-th blocks, and then apply
k-means clustering on the collected block representations. By visualizing the objects belonging
to various clusters in each m-th block, we observe the emergence of semantically meaningful and
abstract factor concepts. For CLEVR-Easy as an example, in m = 3 we can see shape concepts like
sphere or cylinder; in m = 2 color concepts like cyan and blue; and in m = 5 the position concepts.
It is remarkable that this emergence also occurs in the visually complex CLEVR-Tex dataset—for
the first time in this line of research. It is remarkable to see all the spheres of CLEVR-Tex dataset
are clustered together despite the fact that their low-level surface appearances and textures are very
different from each other.

5.2        FACTOR - LEVEL S YSTEMATICITY IN S CENE C OMPOSITION

Since SysBinder provides knowledge blocks at the level of intra-object factors, we test whether these
blocks can be composed to generate novel scenes with systematically novel factor combinations.
We do this by first representing a given image as Block-Slot Representation using SysBinder. We
then choose two slots, select the blocks that capture a specific object factor e.g., color, and swap
the selected blocks across the two slots. The manipulated slots are then provided to the decoder to
generate the scene. In Fig. 5, we show that our model can effectively generate novel images in this
way. This shows that our blocks are indeed modular, allowing us to manipulate a specific factor
without affecting the other properties. We also found the blocks to be interpretable and compact which
enabled us to easily identify which blocks to swap in order to swap a specific factor. Furthermore,
our model demonstrates this ability not only in simple scenes but also in complex textured scenes of
CLEVR-Tex.


                                                                  7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Figure 4: Visualization of object clusters obtained by applying k-means on specific blocks in
CLEVR-Tex and CLEVR-Easy. Each block learns to specialize to a specific object factor e.g.,
shape or material, abstracting away the remaining properties. See Fig. 10 for clusters of all datasets.


Figure 5: Visualization of Factor-level Scene Manipulation. We manipulate a given scene by
swapping a specific factor of two objects in the scene. For a given scene, we choose two objects and
swap their shape, color, position, material, and size. White arrows shown on the input images point
to two objects in each scene whose properties are swapped. See also, Figures 11, 12, and 13.


5.3   A NALYSIS

In this section, we analyze several model variants and hyperparameters. We perform these evaluations
on the CLEVR-Easy dataset and report the results in Fig. 6.
Role of Architectural Components of SysBinder. In Fig. 6 (a), we analyze the role of various
architectural components of our model. First, we compare the effect of sharing the parameters of
the RNN used during block update (i.e. the GRU and the MLP) relative to having separate RNN
parameters for each block. While we do not find a significant difference in performance, nevertheless,
having a separate RNN per block may serve as a more flexible and modular design for more complex
large-scale problems. Second, we test the performance by removing the RNN used during the block
refinement. We find that this has a significant adverse effect on the segmentation quality as well
as the DCI performance, showing that the RNN is a crucial component. Third, we test the role of
having the concept memory bottleneck by removing it. We find that while this does not affect the
segmentation and informativeness of the slots, however, it significantly reduces the disentanglement
and the completeness-scores, showing the importance of block bottleneck in enabling specialization
of blocks to various intra-object factors. Fourth, we test the role of the block coupling used as the
interface between SysBinder and the transformer decoder. We test this by training a variant of our
model in which we provide all the blocks as a single set to the decoder. We find that performance


                                                  8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                   (a) Analysis of Architectural Components                        (b) Effect of Number of Prototypes                (c) Effect of Number of Blocks
                  Ours-Separate-RNNs        Ours-Shared-RNNs    No-RNN                   K=8       K = 64        K = 1024              M =4         M =8                M = 16
                  No-Concept-Library        No-Block-Coupling   Mixture Decoder
                                                                                                                                 1
              1                                                                     1                                          0.8
    Score

            0.8                                                                   0.8
                                                                                                                               0.6
            0.6                                                                   0.6
            0.4                                                                   0.4                                          0.4
            0.2                                                                   0.2                                          0.2
              0                                                                     0                                            0
                    D                   C                  I         FG-ARI              D         C         I        FG-ARI           D            C               I        FG-ARI

                               (d) Effect of Block Size                                 (e) Effect of β on IODINE-M              (f) Effect of Slot Size on IODINE
                  d = 64      d = 128        d = 256                                     Ours M = 8         IODINE-M β = 1             Ours M = 8       IODINE-8           IODINE-16
                                                                                         IODINE-M β = 2     IODINE-M β = 4             IODINE-32        IODINE-64          IODINE-128
                                                                                         IODINE-M β = 8     IODINE-M β = 16            IODINE-256
    Score


              1                                                                     1                                            1
            0.8                                                                   0.8                                          0.8
            0.6                                                                   0.6                                          0.6
            0.4                                                                   0.4                                          0.4
            0.2                                                                   0.2                                          0.2
              0                                                                     0                                            0
                    D                   C                  I         FG-ARI              D         C         I        FG-ARI           D            C               I        FG-ARI



Figure 6: Analysis. We evaluate the role of various design choices and hyperparameters for our
model and the baseline IODINE. In all plots, we report the DCI and the FG-ARI.


drops severely with some seeds failing completely. This is because without knowing the role of each
block and their membership information, the decoder is unable to reconstruct well.
Role of Transformer Decoder. In Fig. 6 (a), we also analyze the importance of the transformer
decoder in our model and whether using the mixture-based decoder, a common choice in several
object-centric learning methods, can also provide a similar performance or not. To implement this
variant, we adopt the decoder design of Locatello et al. (2020). We decode each object component by
concatenating the blocks of a slot and providing it to a spatial broadcast decoder Watters et al. (2019).
Interestingly, we find that this leads to a large drop in the disentanglement and the completeness
scores, showing the important role of our expressive decoder.
Effect of Number of Prototypes, Number of Blocks, and Block Size. In Fig. 6 (b), (c), and (d), we
study the effect of the number of prototypes K, the number of blocks M , and block size d on the
DCI performance. First, with the increasing number of prototypes, we note improvement, especially
in the completeness-score. This suggests that more prototypes increase the expressiveness of each
block and thus fewer blocks are needed to represent a single factor. Second, for the number of blocks
M = 4, we see low disentanglement and completeness scores. Because this dataset has 3 factors of
object variation, this suggests that 4 blocks may be too few for them to train well. However, going
to M = 8 and M = 16, the performance improves and then saturates. Third, with increasing block
sizes, we note a steady increase in performance.
Analysis of IODINE. In Fig. 6 (e) and (f), we analyze IODINE. We test the effect of adopting the
β-VAE objective (Higgins et al., 2017) and the effect of varying the slot size. While larger β leads to
a slight increase in the disentanglement-score and the completeness-score, it still remains significantly
worse than ours. Large β also leads to a slight drop in the informativeness-score due to the greater
regularizing effect of the KL term. Increasing the slot size d which is equivalent to increasing the
number of factor representations in IODINE slightly improves performance but still remains worse
than our method. We also note that while we test IODINE with a slot size as large as 256, having few
factor representations, e.g., 8 or 16, provides better interpretability within a slot.

6           C ONCLUSION
We propose a new structured representation, Block-Slot Representation, and its new binding mecha-
nism, Neural Systematic Binder (SysBinder). Unlike traditional Slot Attention, SysBinder learns to
discover the factors of variation within a slot. Also, SysBinder provides the factor representations
in a vector form, called block, rather than a single-dimensional variable. Using SysBinder, we also
introduce a new unsupervised object-centric learning method for images. In achieving this, we also
note the importance of autoregressive transformer-based decoding as well as our novel block-coupling
approach. Our results show various benefits in disentanglement produced by the proposed model.


                                                                                         9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


R EPRODUCIBILITY S TATEMENT
We release all the resources used in this work, including the code and the datasets, at the project link:
https://sites.google.com/view/neural-systematic-binder.

E THICS S TATEMENT
Future extensions and applications arising from our work should be mindful of the environmental
impact of training large-scale models. They should actively avoid its potential misuse in surveillance
or by generating synthetic images with malicious intent. However, it is unlikely that the model in its
current form would lead to such an impact in the near future. Our model also has the potential for
making a positive impact in areas such as scene understanding, robotics, and autonomous navigation.

ACKNOWLEDGEMENT
This work is supported by Brain Pool Plus (BP+) Program (No. 2021H1D3A2A03103645) and
Young Researcher Program (No. 2022R1C1C1009443) through the National Research Foundation
of Korea (NRF) funded by the Ministry of Science and ICT. The authors would like to thank the
members of Agent Machine Learning Lab for their helpful comments.

R EFERENCES
Titas Anciukevicius, Christoph H Lampert, and Paul Henderson. Object-centric image generation
  with factored depths, locations, and appearances. arXiv preprint arXiv:2004.00642, 2020.
Jacob Andreas. Measuring compositionality in representation learning. ArXiv, abs/1902.07181, 2019.
Federico Baldassarre and Hossein Azizpour. Towards self-supervised learning of global and object-
  centric representations. ArXiv, abs/2203.05997, 2022.
Beril Besbinar and Pascal Frossard. Self-supervision by prediction for object discovery in videos.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2103.05669, 2021.
Léon Bottou. From machine learning to machine reasoning. Machine learning, 94(2):133–149, 2014.
Christopher P Burgess, Loic Matthey, Nicholas Watters, Rishabh Kabra, Irina Higgins, Matt Botvinick,
  and Alexander Lerchner. Monet: Unsupervised scene decomposition and representation. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:1901.11390, 2019.
Mathilde Caron, Ishan Misra, Julien Mairal, Priya Goyal, Piotr Bojanowski, and Armand Joulin.
 Unsupervised learning of visual features by contrasting cluster assignments. ArXiv, abs/2006.09882,
 2020.
Mathilde Caron, Hugo Touvron, Ishan Misra, Hervé Jégou, Julien Mairal, Piotr Bojanowski, and
 Armand Joulin. Emerging properties in self-supervised vision transformers. In ICCV 2021 -
 International Conference on Computer Vision, 2021.
Michael Chang, Thomas L Griffiths, and Sergey Levine. Object representations as fixed points: Train-
 ing iterative refinement algorithms with implicit differentiation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2207.00787,
 2022.
Chang Chen, Fei Deng, and Sungjin Ahn. Roots: Object-centric representation and rendering of 3d
  scenes. Journal of Machine Learning Research, 22(259):1–36, 2021.
Tian Qi Chen, Xuechen Li, Roger B Grosse, and David K Duvenaud. Isolating sources of disentan-
  glement in variational autoencoders. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, pp.
  2610–2620, 2018.
Xi Chen, Yan Duan, Rein Houthooft, John Schulman, Ilya Sutskever, and Pieter Abbeel. Infogan:
  Interpretable representation learning by information maximizing generative adversarial nets. In
  Advances in neural information processing systems, pp. 2172–2180, 2016.


                                                  10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Eric Crawford and Joelle Pineau. Exploiting spatial invariance for scalable unsupervised object
  tracking. arXiv preprint arXiv:1911.09033, 2019a.
Eric Crawford and Joelle Pineau. Spatially invariant unsupervised object detection with convolutional
  neural networks. In Proceedings of AAAI, 2019b.
Eric Crawford and Joelle Pineau. Learning 3d object-oriented world models from unlabeled videos.
  In Workshop on Object-Oriented Learning at ICML, 2020.
Antonia Creswell, Kyriacos Nikiforou, Oriol Vinyals, Andre Saraiva, Rishabh Kabra, Loic Matthey,
  Chris Burgess, Malcolm Reynolds, Richard Tanburn, Marta Garnelo, et al. Alignnet: Unsupervised
  entity alignment. arXiv preprint arXiv:2007.08973, 2020.
Antonia Creswell, Rishabh Kabra, Chris Burgess, and Murray Shanahan. Unsupervised object-based
  transition models for 3d partially observable environments. arXiv preprint arXiv:2103.04693,
  2021.
Raphaël Dang-Nhu. Evaluating disentanglement of structured representations. In ICLR, 2022.
Fei Deng, Zhuo Zhi, Donghun Lee, and Sungjin Ahn. Generative scene graph networks. In
  International Conference on Learning Representations, 2020.
Andrea Dittadi, Samuele Papa, Michele De Vita, Bernhard Schölkopf, Ole Winther, and Francesco
  Locatello. Generalization and robustness implications in object-centric learning. In ICML, 2022.
Yilun Du, Kevin Smith, Tomer Ulman, Joshua Tenenbaum, and Jiajun Wu. Unsupervised discovery
  of 3d physical objects from video. arXiv preprint arXiv:2007.12348, 2020.
Yilun Du, Shuang Li, Yash Sharma, Josh Tenenbaum, and Igor Mordatch. Unsupervised learning of
  compositional energy concepts. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 34, 2021a.
Yilun Du, Kevin A. Smith, Tomer Ulman, Joshua B. Tenenbaum, and Jiajun Wu. Unsupervised
  discovery of 3d physical objects from video. ArXiv, abs/2007.12348, 2021b.
Cian Eastwood and Christopher K. I. Williams. A framework for the quantitative evaluation of
  disentangled representations. In ICLR, 2018.
Gamaleldin F. Elsayed, Aravindh Mahendran, Sjoerd van Steenkiste, Klaus Greff, Michael Curtis
  Mozer, and Thomas Kipf. Savi++: Towards end-to-end object-centric learning from real-world
  videos. ArXiv, abs/2206.07764, 2022.
Martin Engelcke, Adam R. Kosiorek, Oiwi Parker Jones, and Ingmar Posner. Genesis: Generative
 scene inference and sampling with object-centric latent representations, 2019.
Martin Engelcke, Oiwi Parker Jones, and Ingmar Posner. Genesis-v2: Inferring unordered object
 representations without iterative refinement. arXiv preprint arXiv:2104.09958, 2021.
SM Ali Eslami, Nicolas Heess, Theophane Weber, Yuval Tassa, David Szepesvari, and Geoffrey E
 Hinton. Attend, infer, repeat: Fast scene understanding with generative models. In Advances in
 Neural Information Processing Systems, pp. 3225–3233, 2016.
Jerry A Fodor and Zenon W Pylyshyn. Connectionism and cognitive architecture: A critical analysis.
  Cognition, 28(1-2):3–71, 1988.
Anirudh Goyal, Alex Lamb, Phanideep Gampa, Philippe Beaudoin, Sergey Levine, Charles Blundell,
 Yoshua Bengio, and Michael C. Mozer. Object files and schemata: Factorizing declarative and
  procedural knowledge in dynamical systems. ArXiv, abs/2006.16225, 2020.
Anirudh Goyal, Aniket Didolkar, Nan Rosemary Ke, Charles Blundell, Philippe Beaudoin, Nicolas
  Manfred Otto Heess, Michael C. Mozer, and Yoshua Bengio. Neural production systems. ArXiv,
  abs/2103.01937, 2021a.
Anirudh Goyal, Alex Lamb, Jordan Hoffmann, Shagun Sodhani, Sergey Levine, Yoshua Bengio, and
  Bernhard Schölkopf. Recurrent independent mechanisms. ArXiv, abs/1909.10893, 2021b.


                                                 11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Klaus Greff, Antti Rasmus, Mathias Berglund, Tele Hao, Harri Valpola, and Jürgen Schmidhuber.
  Tagger: Deep unsupervised perceptual grouping. In Advances in Neural Information Processing
  Systems, pp. 4484–4492, 2016.
Klaus Greff, Sjoerd van Steenkiste, and Jürgen Schmidhuber. Neural expectation maximization. In
  Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, pp. 6691–6701, 2017.
Klaus Greff, Raphaël Lopez Kaufmann, Rishab Kabra, Nick Watters, Chris Burgess, Daniel Zoran,
  Loic Matthey, Matthew Botvinick, and Alexander Lerchner. Multi-object representation learning
  with iterative variational inference. arXiv preprint arXiv:1903.00450, 2019.
Klaus Greff, Sjoerd van Steenkiste, and Jürgen Schmidhuber. On the binding problem in artificial
  neural networks. arXiv preprint arXiv:2012.05208, 2020a.
Klaus Greff, Sjoerd van Steenkiste, and Jürgen Schmidhuber. On the binding problem in artificial
  neural networks. arXiv preprint arXiv:2012.05208, 2020b.
Zhen He, Jian Li, Daxue Liu, Hangen He, and David Barber. Tracking by animation: Unsupervised
  learning of multi-object attentive trackers. In Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer
  Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 1318–1327, 2019.
Olivier J. H’enaff, Skanda Koppula, Evan Shelhamer, Daniel Zoran, Andrew Jaegle, Andrew Zis-
  serman, João Carreira, and Relja Arandjelovi’c. Object discovery and representation networks.
  ArXiv, abs/2203.08777, 2022.
Paul Henderson and Christoph H. Lampert. Unsupervised object-centric video generation and
  decomposition in 3d. ArXiv, abs/2007.06705, 2020.
Irina Higgins, Loïc Matthey, Arka Pal, Christopher Burgess, Xavier Glorot, Matthew M Botvinick,
   Shakir Mohamed, and Alexander Lerchner. beta-vae: Learning basic visual concepts with a
   constrained variational framework. In ICLR, 2017.
Xue Hu, Xinghui Li, Benjamin Busam, Yiren Zhou, Ale Leonardis, and Shanxin Yuan. Disentangling
  3d attributes from a single 2d image: Human pose, shape and garment. ArXiv, abs/2208.03167,
  2022.
Max Jaderberg, Karen Simonyan, Andrew Zisserman, and Koray Kavukcuoglu. Spatial transformer
 networks. In Advances in neural information processing systems, pp. 2017–2025, 2015.
Eric Jang, Shixiang Gu, and Ben Poole. Categorical reparameterization with gumbel-softmax. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:1611.01144, 2016.
Jindong Jiang and Sungjin Ahn.          Generative neurosymbolic machines.         arXiv preprint
   arXiv:2010.12152, 2020.
Jindong Jiang, Sepehr Janghorbani, Gerard de Melo, and Sungjin Ahn. SCALOR: generative
   world models with scalable object representations. In International Conference on Learning
   Representations, 2020.
Justin Johnson, Bharath Hariharan, Laurens van der Maaten, Li Fei-Fei, C Lawrence Zitnick, and
  Ross Girshick. Clevr: A diagnostic dataset for compositional language and elementary visual
  reasoning. In Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition,
  pp. 2901–2910, 2017.
Rishabh Kabra, Daniel Zoran, Goker Erdogan, Loic Matthey, Antonia Creswell, Matthew Botvinick,
  Alexander Lerchner, and Christopher P Burgess. Simone: View-invariant, temporally-abstracted
  object representations via unsupervised video decomposition. arXiv preprint arXiv:2106.03849,
  2021.
Laurynas Karazija, Iro Laina, and C. Rupprecht. Clevrtex: A texture-rich benchmark for unsupervised
  multi-object segmentation. ArXiv, abs/2111.10265, 2021a.
Laurynas Karazija, Iro Laina, and Christian Rupprecht. Clevrtex: A texture-rich benchmark for
  unsupervised multi-object segmentation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2111.10265, 2021b.


                                                12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Hyunjik Kim and Andriy Mnih. Disentangling by factorising. arXiv preprint arXiv:1802.05983,
  2018.
Thomas Kipf, Gamaleldin F. Elsayed, Aravindh Mahendran, Austin Stone, Sara Sabour, Georg
  Heigold, Rico Jonschkowski, Alexey Dosovitskiy, and Klaus Greff. Conditional Object-Centric
  Learning from Video. arXiv preprint arXiv:2111.12594, 2021.
Adam Kosiorek, Hyunjik Kim, Yee Whye Teh, and Ingmar Posner. Sequential attend, infer, repeat:
  Generative modelling of moving objects. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems,
  pp. 8606–8616, 2018.
Abhishek Kumar, Prasanna Sattigeri, and Avinash Balakrishnan. Variational inference of disen-
  tangled latent concepts from unlabeled observations. In International Conference on Learning
 Representations, 2017.
Abhishek Kumar, Prasanna Sattigeri, and Avinash Balakrishnan. Variational inference of disentangled
  latent concepts from unlabeled observations. ArXiv, abs/1711.00848, 2018.
Brenden M Lake, Tomer D Ullman, Joshua B Tenenbaum, and Samuel J Gershman. Building
  machines that learn and think like people. Behavioral and brain sciences, 40, 2017.
Alex Lamb, Di He, Anirudh Goyal, Guolin Ke, Chien-Feng Liao, Mirco Ravanelli, and Yoshua
  Bengio. Transformers with competitive ensembles of independent mechanisms. In arXiv e-prints,
  2021.
Zhixuan Lin, Yi-Fu Wu, Skand Vishwanath Peri, Jindong Jiang, and Sungjin Ahn. Improving
  generative imagination in object-centric world models. In International Conference on Machine
  Learning, pp. 4114–4124, 2020a.
Zhixuan Lin, Yi-Fu Wu, Skand Vishwanath Peri, Weihao Sun, Gautam Singh, Fei Deng, Jindong
  Jiang, and Sungjin Ahn. Space: Unsupervised object-oriented scene representation via spatial
  attention and decomposition. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2020b.
Dianbo Liu, Alex Lamb, Kenji Kawaguchi, Anirudh Goyal, Chen Sun, Michael Curtis Mozer, and
  Yoshua Bengio. Discrete-valued neural communication. In NeurIPS, 2021.
Francesco Locatello, Stefan Bauer, Mario Lucic, Gunnar Raetsch, Sylvain Gelly, Bernhard Schölkopf,
  and Olivier Bachem. Challenging common assumptions in the unsupervised learning of dis-
  entangled representations. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 4114–4124,
  2019.
Francesco Locatello, Dirk Weissenborn, Thomas Unterthiner, Aravindh Mahendran, Georg Heigold,
  Jakob Uszkoreit, Alexey Dosovitskiy, and Thomas Kipf. Object-centric learning with slot attention,
  2020.
Sindy Löwe, Klaus Greff, Rico Jonschkowski, Alexey Dosovitskiy, and Thomas Kipf. Learning
  object-centric video models by contrasting sets. arXiv preprint arXiv:2011.10287, 2020.
Sindy Lowe, Phillip Lippe, Maja R. Rudolph, and Max Welling. Complex-valued autoencoders for
  object discovery. ArXiv, abs/2204.02075, 2022.
Mary B McVee, Kailonnie Dunsmore, and James R Gavelek. Schema theory revisited. Review of
 educational research, 75(4):531–566, 2005.
Milton Llera Montero, Casimir JH Ludwig, Rui Ponte Costa, Gaurav Malhotra, and Jeffrey Bow-
 ers. The role of disentanglement in generalisation. In International Conference on Learning
 Representations, 2021. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=qbH974jKUVy.
Li Nanbo, Cian Eastwood, and Robert B Fisher. Learning object-centric representations of multi-
  object scenes from multiple views. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems,
  2020.
Mihir Prabhudesai, Shamit Lal, Darshan Patil, Hsiao-Yu Fish Tung, Adam W. Harley, and Katerina
 Fragkiadaki. Disentangling 3d prototypical networks for few-shot concept learning. ArXiv,
 abs/2011.03367, 2021.


                                                13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Evan Racah and A. P. Sarath Chandar. Slot contrastive networks: A contrastive approach for
  representing objects. ArXiv, abs/2007.09294, 2020.

Hubert Ramsauer, Bernhard Schafl, Johannes Lehner, Philipp Seidl, Michael Widrich, Lukas Gruber,
  Markus Holzleitner, Milena Pavlovi’c, Geir Kjetil Sandve, Victor Greiff, David P. Kreil, Michael
  Kopp, Günter Klambauer, Johannes Brandstetter, and Sepp Hochreiter. Hopfield networks is all
  you need. ArXiv, abs/2008.02217, 2021.

Karl Ridgeway and Michael C. Mozer. Learning deep disentangled embeddings with the f-statistic
  loss. ArXiv, abs/1802.05312, 2018.

Mehdi S. M. Sajjadi, Daniel Duckworth, Aravindh Mahendran, Sjoerd van Steenkiste, Filip Pavetić,
 Mario Lučić, Leonidas J. Guibas, Klaus Greff, and Thomas Kipf. Object Scene Representation
 Transformer. NeurIPS, 2022.

Bernhard Schölkopf, Francesco Locatello, Stefan Bauer, Nan Rosemary Ke, Nal Kalchbrenner,
  Anirudh Goyal, and Yoshua Bengio. Toward causal representation learning. Proceedings of the
  IEEE, 109(5):612–634, 2021.

Gautam Singh, Skand Peri, Junghyun Kim, Hyunseok Kim, and Sungjin Ahn. Structured world
  belief for reinforcement learning in pomdp. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp.
  9744–9755. PMLR, 2021.

Gautam Singh, Fei Deng, and Sungjin Ahn. Illiterate dall-e learns to compose. In International
  Conference on Learning Representations, 2022a. URL https://openreview.net/forum?
  id=h0OYV0We3oh.

Gautam Singh, Yi-Fu Wu, and Sungjin Ahn. Simple unsupervised object-centric learning for complex
  and naturalistic videos. ArXiv, abs/2205.14065, 2022b.

Wolfgang Stammer, Marius Memmel, Patrick Schramowski, and Kristian Kersting. Interactive
 disentanglement: Learning concepts by interacting with their prototype representations. ArXiv,
 abs/2112.02290, 2021.

Aleksandar Stanić and Jürgen Schmidhuber. R-sqair: relational sequential attend, infer, repeat. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:1910.05231, 2019.

Karl Stelzner, Kristian Kersting, and Adam R Kosiorek. Decomposing 3d scenes into objects via
  unsupervised volume segmentation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2104.01148, 2021.

Aaron van den Oord, Oriol Vinyals, and koray kavukcuoglu. Neural discrete representation learning.
  In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 30, pp. 6306–6315, 2017.

Sjoerd Van Steenkiste, Michael Chang, Klaus Greff, and Jürgen Schmidhuber. Relational neural
  expectation maximization: Unsupervised discovery of objects and their interactions. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:1802.10353, 2018.

Rishi Veerapaneni, John D Co-Reyes, Michael Chang, Michael Janner, Chelsea Finn, Jiajun Wu,
  Joshua B Tenenbaum, and Sergey Levine. Entity abstraction in visual model-based reinforcement
  learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:1910.12827, 2019.

Julius von Kügelgen, Ivan Ustyuzhaninov, Peter Gehler, Matthias Bethge, and Bernhard
  Schölkopf. Towards causal generative scene models via competition of experts. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2004.12906, 2020.

Yangtao Wang, Xiaoke Shen, Shell Xu Hu, Yuan Yuan, James L. Crowley, and Dominique Vaufreydaz.
  Self-supervised transformers for unsupervised object discovery using normalized cut. ArXiv,
  abs/2202.11539, 2022.

Nicholas Watters, Loic Matthey, Matko Bosnjak, Christopher P Burgess, and Alexander Lerchner.
  Cobra: Data-efficient model-based rl through unsupervised object discovery and curiosity-driven
  exploration. arXiv preprint arXiv:1905.09275, 2019.


                                                 14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Nicholas Watters, Loic Matthey, Christopher P. Burgess, and Alexander Lerchner. Spatial broadcast
  decoder: A simple architecture for learning disentangled representations in vaes. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:1901.07017, 2019.
Marissa A Weis, Kashyap Chitta, Yash Sharma, Wieland Brendel, Matthias Bethge, Andreas Geiger,
 and Alexander S Ecker. Unmasking the inductive biases of unsupervised object representations for
 video sequences. arXiv preprint arXiv:2006.07034, 2, 2020.
Xin Wen, Bingchen Zhao, Anlin Zheng, X. Zhang, and Xiaojuan Qi. Self-supervised visual represen-
  tation learning with semantic grouping. ArXiv, abs/2205.15288, 2022.
Yi-Fu Wu, Jaesik Yoon, and Sungjin Ahn. Generative video transformer: Can objects be the words?
  In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 11307–11318. PMLR, 2021.
Sirui Xie, Ari S. Morcos, Song-Chun Zhu, and Ramakrishna Vedantam. Coat: Measuring object
  compositionality in emergent representations. In ICML, 2022.
Peiyu Yu, Sirui Xie, Xiaojian Ma, Yixin Zhu, Ying Nian Wu, and Song-Chun Zhu. Unsupervised
  foreground extraction via deep region competition. In NeurIPS, 2021.
Keyang Zhou, Bharat Lal Bhatnagar, and Gerard Pons-Moll. Unsupervised shape and pose disentan-
  glement for 3d meshes. In ECCV, 2020.
Daniel Zoran, Rishabh Kabra, Alexander Lerchner, and Danilo J Rezende. Parts: Unsupervised seg-
  mentation with slots, attention and independence maximization. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF
  International Conference on Computer Vision, pp. 10439–10447, 2021.


                                               15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


A     P SEUDO -C ODE

Algorithm 1 Neural Systematic Binder. The algorithm receives the set of input features E ∈ RL×D ;
the number of slots N ; the number of blocks M ; and the block size d. The model parameters include:
the linear projections k, q, v with output dimension M d; GRU and MLP networks for each m
i.e. GRUϕ1 . . . GRUϕM and MLPϕ1 . . . MLPϕM ; the learned concept memories C1 , . . . , CM ∈ RK×d ;
and a Gaussian distribution’s mean and diagonal covariance µ, σ ∈ RM d .
  01:   S = Tensor(N , M d)
  02:   S ∼ N (µ, σ )
  03:   E = LayerNorm(E)
  04:   for t = 1 . . . T sequentially:
  05:          S = LayerNorm(S)
                                  1
  06:          A = Softmax( √M      d
                                      q(S) · k(E)T , axis=‘slots’)
  07:          A = A / A.Sum(axis=‘inputs’, keepdim=True)
  08:          U = A · v(E)
  09:          for n = 1 . . . N and m = 1 . . . M in parallel:
  10:                     sn,m = GRUϕm (state=sn,m , update=un,m )
  11:                     sn,m += MLPϕm (LayerNorm(sn,m ))
  12:                     sn,m = Softmax( √1d sn,m · CT  m , axis=‘prototypes’) · Cm
  13:   return S


B     A DDITIONAL R ELATED W ORK

Unsupervised Object-Centric Learning. Object-centric learning has also been explored extensively
in dynamic scenes (Kosiorek et al., 2018; Stanić & Schmidhuber, 2019; Jiang et al., 2020; Crawford
& Pineau, 2019a; Lin et al., 2020a; Wu et al., 2021; Singh et al., 2021; He et al., 2019; Greff et al.,
2017; Van Steenkiste et al., 2018; Veerapaneni et al., 2019; Watters et al., 2019; Weis et al., 2020;
Du et al., 2020; Kipf et al., 2021; Kabra et al., 2021; Zoran et al., 2021; Besbinar & Frossard, 2021;
Creswell et al., 2020; 2021; Elsayed et al., 2022); and in 3D scenes (Chen et al., 2021; Henderson
& Lampert, 2020; Crawford & Pineau, 2020; Stelzner et al., 2021; Du et al., 2021b; Kabra et al.,
2021; Sajjadi et al., 2022; Nanbo et al., 2020; Singh et al., 2022b). However, adopting Block-Slot
Representation in dynamic and 3D scenes is a future direction and is orthogonal to our current
focus. Aside from these auto-encoding-based methods, alternative frameworks have also shown
promise, notably compositional energy-based scene modeling (Du et al., 2021a; Yu et al., 2021),
complex-valued neural networks Lowe et al. (2022), and reconstruction-free representation learning
(Caron et al., 2021; Löwe et al., 2020; Wang et al., 2022; H’enaff et al., 2022; Wen et al., 2022;
Baldassarre & Azizpour, 2022). However, these methods do not disentangle object properties.


C     A DDITIONAL R ESULTS

C.1     E XTENDED A NALYSIS OF O UR M ODEL

In this section, we perform additional ablations of our model that shed further light on it.
In Fig. 7, we show all the ablation results together, including those that we could not include in the
main paper due to a limitation of space. Below, we analyze these ablation results.
Sharing the concept-memory across blocks. We test what would be the effect of sharing not just
the RNNs across the blocks but also sharing the concept memory across the blocks. We can see that
as the level of weight-sharing increases, the ‘completeness’ score decreases. In other words, with
more weight-sharing among blocks, the model tends to use more blocks on average to represent
a single factor. However, as this is not a drastic degradation, we can say that weight-separation is
not the major factor responsible for the emerged disentanglement. What is crucial for getting good
disentanglement is doing each block’s prototype attention and refinement independently.
Concatenating blocks to construct a slot instead of Block-Coupling. In this ablation, we test
an alternative to the block-coupling approach: what if we simply concatenate the blocks in a slot
and directly provide the set of slots as input to the transformer decoder? We find that this variant


                                                  16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                            Analysis of Architectural Components (Extended)
                Ours-Separate-RNNs                     Ours-Shared-RNNs     Ours-Shared-RNNs-and-Shared-Memories   Concatenate-Blocks
                No-RNN                                 No-Concept-Library   No-Block-Coupling                      Mixture Decoder
                Concept-Memory-with-QKV -Projections
            1
  Score



          0.8
          0.6
          0.4
          0.2
            0
                          D                               C                                I                          FG-ARI


Figure 7: Extended Analysis of Our Model. We report Disentanglement (D), Completeness (C),
Informativeness (I), and FG-ARI.


achieves a significantly worse performance in the FG-ARI score while also achieving a slightly worse
performance in the DCI scores.
Linear projections in concept-memory attention. In this ablation, we test the effect of applying
linear projections on the query, key, and value when performing attention on the concept memory as
follows:
                                            qm (sn,m ) · km (Cm )T

                    sn,m = softmax                    √               · vm (Cm ).
                                   K                     d
Here, qm , km , and vm are the per-block linear projections for computing the queries, the keys, and
the values. We find that this variant of our model is much more unstable and performs significantly
worse than our default architecture.

C.2       A NALYSIS OF C ONCEPT M EMORY AND P ROTOTYPES

In this section, we qualitatively analyze several questions regarding the concept-memory bottleneck
and the prototypes.
Does concept memory attention perform hard selection of a single prototype? We analyze the
attention weights of a block on the concept memory in Fig. 8. We note that the weights are not
one-hot and thus the model is not making a single hard selection of prototype. Rather, it is performing
a soft selection of multiple activated prototypes. Thus, its capacity is not limited to the K prototype
vectors but can be much more flexible.
How is the coverage of prototype usage? We analyze the average activation of each prototype across
a large batch of input images in the CLEVR-Easy dataset. We show these average activations in
Fig. 9. We find that a large majority of prototypes seem to be active.

C.3       B LOCK - WISE O BJECT C LUSTERS

C.4       C OMPUTATIONAL R EQUIREMENTS

In Table 1, we compare the memory requirements of our model with respect to IODINE, our main
baseline that pursues intra-slot disentanglement. Here, we can see that our memory consumption
is better than that of IODINE. We also note that our training speed is slightly slower than that of
IODINE. However, we must interpret these results with care and take into account the fact that
IODINE performs significantly worse than our model when it comes to disentanglement performance.


                                                                     17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Figure 8: Prototype Attention Weights. Three instances of blocks attending to the prototypes in the
concept memory. A cell (m, k) in the visualized matrices corresponds to a block m = 1, . . . , 8 and a
prototype vector k = 1, . . . , 64 from the concept memory of the corresponding block. We note that
the attention patterns are not one-hot selection of a single prototype. Instead, it is a soft and flexible
linear combination of multiple prototypes.


Figure 9: Prototype Coverage. We show the attention weight of each prototype averaged over
a batch of 300 input images of CLEVR-Easy dataset. Each cell (m, k) in the visualized matrix
corresponds to a block m = 1, . . . , 8 and a prototype k = 1, . . . , 64 from its corresponding concept
memory Cm .


                                                         IODINE       Our Model
                       Memory Consumption               37.30 GiB     31.01 GiB
                       Time per Training Iteration        0.84s         1.01s

Table 1: Comparison of computational requirements between IODINE and our model. For fair
comparison, all values are measured on training runs with the same batch size of 40.


                                                   18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Figure 10: Visualization of object clusters obtained by applying k-means on specific blocks in
CLEVR-Easy, CLEVR-Hard, and CLEVR-Tex. Each block learns to specialize to a specific object
factor e.g., shape or color, abstracting away the remaining properties.


                                               19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


               Figure 11: Additional samples of factor-swapping in CLEVR-Easy.


                                               20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


              Figure 12: Additional samples of factor-swapping in CLEVR-Hard.


                                               21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


               Figure 13: Additional samples of factor-swapping in CLEVR-Tex.


                                               22
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Figure 14: Systematic Scene Generation in CLEVR-Hard. We are given 8 input images from
which we extract slots. Using these extracted slots, we compose new objects by combining object
properties into novel combinations. By decoding these composed novel slots, we show that we can
generate novel scenes.



                                               23
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Figure 15: Systematic Scene Generation in CLEVR-Easy. We are given 8 input images from which
we extract slots. Using these extracted slots, we compose new objects by combining object properties
into novel combinations. By decoding these composed novel slots, we show that we can generate
novel scenes.



                                                24
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


D     A DDITIONAL I MPLEMENTATION D ETAILS

                                                                            Dataset
Module                  Hyperparameter                 CLEVR-Easy          CLEVR-Hard     CLEVR-Tex
General                 Batch Size                             40              40             40
                        Training Steps                        200K            200K           400K
SysBinder               Block Size                             256            128             256
                        # Blocks                                8              16              8
                        # Prototypes                            64             64              64
                        # Iterations                            3               3              3
                        # Slots                                 4               4              6
                        Learning Rate                        0.0001          0.0001         0.0001
Transformer Decoder     # Decoder Blocks                        8               8              8
                        # Decoder Heads                         4               4              8
                        Hidden Size                            192            192             192
                        Dropout                                0.1             0.1            0.1
                        Learning Rate                        0.0003          0.0003         0.0003
dVAE                    Learning Rate                        0.0003          0.0003         0.0003
                        Patch Size                         4 × 4 pixels    4 × 4 pixels   4 × 4 pixels
                        Vocabulary Size                       4096             4096          4096
                        Temperature Start                      1.0              1.0           1.0
                        Temperature End                        0.1              0.1           0.1
                        Temperature Decay Steps               30000           30000          30000


                 Table 2: Hyperparameters of our model used in our experiments.


D.1    BACKBONE I MAGE E NCODER

The backbone image encoder consists of a CNN encoder that encodes the image into a feature map.
The specifications of this CNN encoder are described in Table 3. For CLEVR-Tex dataset, we found
it useful to use a deeper CNN network described in Table 4. After applying the CNN, positional
encodings are added to the feature map. Layer-normalization is applied on the resulting feature map
followed by a 2-layer MLP with hidden dimension 192. The resulting feature map is flattened along
the spatial dimensions to produce a set of input features that are then provided to the SysBinder
module. The positional encodings are learned in a similar way as in Slot Attention by mapping a
4-dimensional grid of position coordinates to a 192-dimensional vector via a linear projection.

                Layer   Kernel Size      Stride   Padding       Channels    Activation
                Conv       5×5             2           2           512        ReLU
                Conv       5×5             1           2           512        ReLU
                Conv       5×5             1           2           512        ReLU
                Conv       5×5             1           2           192        None

Table 3: Specifications of CNN layers of the backbone image encoder in CLEVR-Easy and CLEVR-
Hard datasets.


D.2    R ECURRENT B LOCK U PDATE

The block update is performed using a GRU network and a 2-layer MLP network with dimensions
equal to the block size. For maintaining the separation of GRU and MLP model parameters between
blocks and to apply GRU and MLP on all the M blocks in parallel, we adopt the implementation of
Goyal et al. (2021b).


                                                  25
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                 Layer    Kernel Size     Stride   Padding     Channels     Activation
                 Conv        5×5            2           2         512          ReLU
                 Conv        5×5            1           2         512          ReLU
                 Conv        5×5            2           2         512          ReLU
                 Conv        5×5            1           2         512          ReLU
                 Conv        5×5            1           2         192          None

    Table 4: Specifications of CNN layers of the backbone image encoder in CLEVR-Tex dataset.


D.3    C ONCEPT M EMORY

To facilitate the training of the concept memories C1 , . . . , CM , we parameterize prototypes as an
MLP projection of a learned vector: Cm,k = MLPprototype (ϵm,k ), where each ϵm,k is a learned vector
of dimension equal to the block size. The MLP has 4 layers with hidden dimensions 4 times the block
size and the output dimension set to be equal to the block size.

D.4    I MAGE T OKENIZER AND T RANSFORMER

We use discrete VAE, or simply dVAE, as our image tokenizer. We adopt the same architecture as that
used in SLATE (Singh et al., 2022a). Like SLATE, the temperature of Gumbel-Softmax (Jang et al.,
2016) is decayed using cosine-annealing from 1.0 to 0.1 in the first 30K training iterations. Like
SLATE, the dVAE is trained simultaneously with the other parts of the model. We use a patch size of
4 × 4, meaning that a 128 × 128-sized image would be represented as a sequence of 1024 discrete
tokens. To learn to generate these tokens auto-regressively, we adopt the same transformer decoder
and configurations as SLATE without any architectural or significant hyperparameter changes.

D.5    T RAINING

Similar to SLATE (Singh et al., 2022a), we split the learning rates of the dVAE image tokenizer, the
SysBinder encoder, and the transformer decoder. The learning rates and the full set of hyperparameters
are provided in Table 2. During training, the learning rate is linearly warmed up to its peak value in
the first 30K training iterations and then decayed exponentially with a half-life of 250K iterations.

E     A DDITIONAL E XPERIMENTAL D ETAILS
E.1    V ISUALIZATION OF O BJECT C LUSTERS USING K- MEANS ON B LOCKS

In this section, we provide a more detailed description of the visualizations of Fig. 10. To generate
these visualizations, we first take a large collection of images. On these, we apply BSA and extract
S = {(si , xattn
              i )}: a collection of slots si paired with its corresponding object image xi
                                                                                               attn
                                                                                                    of the
obtained by multiplying the input image with the attention mask of the slot si . From this collection,
we take m-th blocks as Sm = {(si,m , xattni )} for each block index m. We then apply K-means on the
block vectors in Sm to obtain clusters of blocks. We use K = 12. In Fig. 10, we visualize the blocks
inside some of the clusters by showing the object that those blocks are representing. In the top-left of
Fig. 10, we show two of the clusters for the block index 6 for CLEVR-Tex by showing the object
images of blocks that lie in those clusters. It shows that all the sphere objects had a representation of
block 6 close to each other. Similarly, all the cylinder objects also have block 6 representations that
are close to each other. This shows which concept each block is capturing and which it is abstracting
away. That is, in this case, block 6 is capturing the shape factor of the object but abstracting away
other properties such as material or position.

E.2    S ELECTING B LOCKS FOR S WAPPING

We selected the blocks representing a specific factor by first applying K-means on each m-th block
as in the qualitative analysis of Fig. 10. We then manually inspected the resulting object clusters, and
identified, for each block, which factor a block is specializing in.


                                                   26
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


F    L IMITATIONS AND D ISCUSSION
The proposed model also shows some limitations. First, although our model significantly outperforms
the baselines, the absolute performance is still far from perfect. Second, the vector-formed factors in
our model make slots larger and thus take more computation. Lastly, our transformer decoder can be
computationally more expensive than the mixture decoders used in the conventional approaches.
A few future directions are as follows. First, it would be interesting to extend the model to make it
work on more complex natural scenes even though the current dataset is already much more complex
than those in a similar line of research (Greff et al., 2019; Locatello et al., 2020). Second, it would
be interesting to study the multi-modal aspect of the proposed model, particularly with language.
Finally, an extension to video learning is also interesting.


                                                  27
