S CALING L AWS FOR A M ULTI -AGENT R EINFORCE -
MENT L EARNING M ODEL

 Oren Neumann & Claudius Gros
 Institute for Theoretical Physics
 Goethe University Frankfurt
 Frankfurt am Main, Germany
 {neumann,gros}@itp.uni-frankfurt.de



                                           A BSTRACT

         The recent observation of neural power-law scaling relations has made a signifi-
         cant impact in the field of deep learning. A substantial amount of attention has
         been dedicated as a consequence to the description of scaling laws, although
         mostly for supervised learning and only to a reduced extent for reinforcement
         learning frameworks. In this paper we present an extensive study of performance
         scaling for a cornerstone reinforcement learning algorithm, AlphaZero. On the ba-
         sis of a relationship between Elo rating, playing strength and power-law scaling,
         we train AlphaZero agents on the games Connect Four and Pentago and analyze
         their performance. We find that player strength scales as a power law in neural
         network parameter count when not bottlenecked by available compute, and as a
         power of compute when training optimally sized agents. We observe nearly iden-
         tical scaling exponents for both games. Combining the two observed scaling laws
         we obtain a power law relating optimal size to compute similar to the ones ob-
         served for language models. We find that the predicted scaling of optimal neural
         network size fits our data for both games. We also show that large AlphaZero
         models are more sample efficient, performing better than smaller models with the
         same amount of training data.


1   I NTRODUCTION
In recent years, power-law scaling of performance indicators has been observed in a range of
machine-learning architectures (Hestness et al., 2017; Kaplan et al., 2020; Henighan et al., 2020;
Gordon et al., 2021; Hernandez et al., 2021; Zhai et al., 2022), such as Transformers, LSTMs, Rout-
ing Networks (Clark et al., 2022) and ResNets (Bello et al., 2021). The range of fields investigated
include natural language processing and computer vision (Rosenfeld et al., 2019). Most of these
scaling laws regard the dependency of test loss on either dataset size, number of neural network
parameters, or training compute. The robustness of the observed scaling laws across many orders of
magnitude led to the creation of large models, with parameters numbering in the tens and hundreds
of billions (Brown et al., 2020; Hoffmann et al., 2022; Alayrac et al., 2022).
Until now, evidence for power-law scaling has come in most part from supervised learning methods.
Considerably less effort has been dedicated to the scaling of reinforcement learning algorithms, such
as performance scaling with model size (Reed et al., 2022; Lee et al., 2022). At times, scaling laws
remained unnoticed, given that they show up not as power laws, but as log-linear relations when Elo
scores are taken as the performance measure in multi-agent reinforcement learning (MARL) (Jones,
2021; Liu et al., 2021) (see Section 3.2). Of particular interest in this context is the AlphaZero
family of models, AlphaGo Zero (Silver et al., 2017b), AlphaZero (Silver et al., 2017a), and MuZero
(Schrittwieser et al., 2020), which achieved state-of-the-art performance on several board games
without access to human gameplay datasets by applying a tree search guided by a neural network.
Here we present an extensive study of power-law scaling in the context of two-player open-
information games. Our study constitutes, to our knowledge, the first investigation of power-law
scaling phenomena for a MARL algorithm. Measuring the performance of the AlphaZero algorithm
using Elo rating, we follow a similar path as Kaplan et al. (2020) by providing evidence of power-law


                                                 1
Figure 1: Left: Optimal number of neural network parameters for different amounts of available
compute. The optimal agent size scales for both Connect Four and Pentago as a single power law
                                              opt
with available compute. The predicted slope αC    = αC /αN of Eq. (7) matches the observed data,
where αC and αN are the compute and model size scaling exponents, respectively. See Table 3 for
the numerical values. Right: The same graph zoomed out to include the resources used to create
AlphaZero (Silver et al., 2017a) and AlphaGoZero (Silver et al., 2017b). These models stand well
bellow the optimal trend for Connect Four and Pentago.


scaling of playing strength with model size and compute, as well as a power law of optimal model
size with respect to available compute. Focusing on AlphaZero-agents that are guided by neural nets
with fully connected layers, we test our hypothesis on two popular board games: Connect Four and
Pentago. These games are selected for being different from each other with respect to branching
factors and game lengths.
Using the Bradley-Terry model definition of playing strength (Bradley & Terry, 1952), we start
by showing that playing strength scales as a power law with neural network size when models are
trained until convergence in the limit of abundant compute. We find that agents trained on Connect
Four and Pentago scale with similar exponents.
In a second step we investigate the trade-off between model size and compute. Similar to scaling
observed in the game Hex (Jones, 2021), we observe power-law scaling when compute is limited,
again with similar exponents for Connect Four and Pentago. Finally we utilize these two scaling laws
to find a scaling law for the optimal model size given the amount of compute available, as shown in
Fig. 1. We find that the optimal neural network size scales as a power law with compute, with an
exponent that can be derived from the individual size-scaling and compute-scaling exponents. All
code and data used in our experiments are available online 1

2       R ELATED WORK
Little work on power-law scaling has been published for MARL algorithms. Schrittwieser et al.
(2021) report reward scaling as a power law with data frames when training a data efficient vari-
ant of MuZero. Jones (2021), the closest work to our own, shows evidence of power-law scaling of
performance with compute, by measuring the performance of AlphaZero agents on small-board vari-
ants of the game of Hex. For board-sizes 3-9, log-scaling of Elo rating with compute is found when
plotting the maximal scores reached among training runs. Without making an explicit connection to
power-law scaling, the results reported by Jones (2021) can be characterized by a compute exponent
of αC ≈ 1.3, which can be shown when using Eq. 3. In the paper, the author suggests a phenomeno-
logical explanation for the observation that an agent with twice the compute of its opponent seems to
win with a probability of roughly 2/3, which in fact corresponds to a compute exponent of αC = 1.
Similarly, Liu et al. (2021) report Elo scores that appear to scale as a log of environment frames for
humanoid agents playing football, which would correspond to a power-law exponent of roughly 0.5
for playing strength scaling with data. Lee et al. (2022) apply the Transformer architecture to Atari
games and plot performance scaling with the number of model parameters. Due to the substantially
increased cost of calculating model-size scaling compared to compute or dataset-size scaling, they
obtain only a limited number of data points, each generated by a single training seed. On this ba-
    1
        https://github.com/OrenNeumann/AlphaZero-scaling-laws


                                                  2
sis, analyzing the scaling behavior seems difficult. First indications of the model-size scaling law
presented in this work can be found in Neumann & Gros (2022).

3     BACKGROUND
3.1   L ANGUAGE MODEL SCALING LAWS

Kaplan et al. (2020) showed that the cross-entropy loss of autoregressive Transformers (Vaswani
et al., 2017) scales as a power law with model size, dataset size and compute. These scaling laws
hold when training is not bottlenecked by the other two resources. Specifically, the model size power
law applies when models are trained to convergence, while the compute scaling law is valid when
training optimal-sized models. By combining these laws a power-law scaling of optimal model
size with compute is obtained, with an exponent derived from the loss scaling exponents. These
exponents, later recalculated by Hoffmann et al. (2022), tend to fall in the range [0, 1].

3.2   P OWER LAW SCALING AND E LO RATING

The Elo rating system (Elo, 1978) is a popular standard for benchmarking of MARL algorithms, as
well as for rating human players in zero sum games. The ratings ri are calculated to fit the expected
score of player i in games against player j:
                                                     1
                                      Ei =                       ,                                (1)
                                             1 + 10(rj −ri )/400
where possible game scores are {0, 0.5, 1} for a loss/draw/win respectively. This rating system is
built on the assumption that game statistics adhere to the Bradley-Terry model (Bradley & Terry,
1952), for which each player i is assigned a number γi representing their strength. The player-
specific strength determines the expected game outcomes according to:
                                                     γi
                                           Ei =             .                                     (2)
                                                  γi + γj
Elo rating is a log-scale representation of player strengths (Coulom, 2007): ri = 400 log10 (γi ).
An observed logarithmic scaling of the Elo score is hence equivalent to a power-law scaling of the
individual strengths: If there exists a constant c such that ri = c · log10 (Xi ) for some variable Xi
(e.g. number of parameters), then the playing strength of player i scales as a power of Xi :
                                             γi ∝ Xiα ,                                            (3)
where α = c/400. Note that multiplying γi by a constant is equivalent to adding a constant to the
Elo score ri , which would not change the predicted game outcomes. This power law produces a
simple expression for the expected result of a game between i and j:
                                                   1
                                      Ei =                 α .                                (4)
                                             1 + (Xj /Xi )


4     E XPERIMENTAL SETTING
We train agents with the AlphaZero algorithm using Monte Carlo tree search (MCTS) (Coulom,
2006; Browne et al., 2012) guided by a multilayer perceptron. Kaplan et al. (2020) have observed

Table 1: Summary of scaling exponents. αN describes the scaling of performance with model size,
                                        opt
αC of performance with compute, and αC      of the optimal model size with compute. Connect Four
and Pentago have nearly identical values.

                               Exponents     Connect Four     Pentago
                               αN            0.88             0.87
                               αC            0.55             0.55
                                opt
                               αC            0.62             0.63


                                                  3
that autoregressive Transformer models display the same size scaling trend regardless of shape de-
tails, provided the number of layers is at least two. We therefore use a neural network architecture
where the policy and value heads, each containing a fully-connected hidden layer, are mounted on
a torso of two fully-connected hidden layers. All hidden layers are of equal width, which is varied
between 4 and 256 neurons. Training is done using the AlphaZero Python implementation available
in OpenSpiel (Lanctot et al., 2019).
In order to make our analysis as general as possible we specifically avoid hyperparameter tuning
whenever possible, fixing most hyperparameters to the ones suggested in OpenSpiel’s AlphaZero
example code, see Appendix A. The only parameter tailored to each board game is the temperature
drop, as we find that it has a substantial influence on agents’ ability to learn effectively within a span
of 104 training steps, the number used in our simulations.
We focus on two different games, Connect Four and Pentago, which are both popular two-player
zero-sum open-information games. In Connect Four, players drop tokens in turn into a vertical
board, trying to win by connecting four of their tokens in a line. In Pentago, players place tokens on
a board in an attempt to connect a line of five, with each turn ending with a rotation of one of the
four quadrants of the board. These two games are non-trivial to learn and light enough to allow for
training a larger number of agents with a reasonable amount of resources. Furthermore, they allow
for the benchmarking of the trained agents against solvers that are either perfect (for Connect Four)
or near-to-perfect (for Pentago). Our analysis starts with Connect Four, for which we train agents
with varying model sizes. Elo scores are evaluated both within the group of trained agents and with
respect to an open source game solver (Pons, 2015). We follow up the Connect Four results with
agents trained on Pentago, which has a much larger branching factor and shorter games (on average,
see Table 2).
For both games we train AlphaZero agents with different neural network sizes and/or distinct com-
pute budgets, repeating each training six times with different random seeds to ensure reproducibility
(Henderson et al., 2018). We run matches with all trained agents, in order to calculate the Elo rat-
ings of the total pools of 1326 and 714 agents for Connect Four and Pentago, respectively. Elo score
calculation is done using BayesElo (Coulom, 2008).


5     R ESULTS

5.1   N EURAL NETWORK SIZE SCALING

Fig. 2 (top) shows the improvement of Connect Four Elo scores when increasing neural network
sizes across several orders of magnitude. We look at the infinite compute limit, in the sense that
performance is not bottlenecked by compute-time limitations, by training all agents exactly 104
optimization steps. One observes that Elo scores follow a clear logarithmic trend which breaks only
when approaching the hard boundary of perfect play. In order to verify that the observed plateau
in Elo is indeed the maximal rating achievable, we plot the Elo difference between each agent and
an optimal player guided by a game solver (Pons, 2015) using alpha-beta pruning (Knuth & Moore,
1975). A vertical line in both plots marks the point beyond which we exclude data from the fit. This
is also the point where agents get within 10 Elo points difference from the solver.
Combining the logarithmic fit with Eq. 1 yields a simple relation between the expected game score
Ei for player i against player j and the ratio Ni /Nj , of the respective numbers of neural network


Table 2: Game details. Connect Four games last longer on average, but the branching factor of
Pentago is substantially larger. Game lengths are averaged over all training runs, citing the maximal
allowed number of turns as well.

          Game          Branching Factor      Average Game Length        Maximal Game Length
       Connect Four     ≤7                    25.4                       42
       Pentago          ≤ 288                 16.8                       36


                                                    4
Figure 2: AlphaZero performance scaling with neural-network parameters. Top left: Agents trained
on Connect Four. Elo scores follow a clear linear trend in log scale that breaks off only when
approaching the optimal playing strategy. This can can be seen using a game solver (top right). Top
right: Elo scores obtained by only considering matches against an optimal player, created with a
game solver (Pons, 2015). Agents to the right of the vertical line are within ten Elo-points distance
from the perfect solver. Increased data scattering is due to Elo scores being calculated against a
single benchmark player. Bottom left: The Elo scores of Pentago as a function of model size follow
the same trend as Connect Four. Improvement flattens for large parameter counts when performance
approaches the level of a benchmark agent aided by an optimal play database (Irving, 2014) (bottom
right).


parameters:
                                                   1
                                      Ei =                α ,                                      (5)
                                             1 + (Nj /Ni ) N
where the power αN is a constant determined by the slope of the fit. In the context of the Bradley-
Terry model, Eq. (2), this means that player strength follows a power law in model size, γ ∝ N αN .
Results for the game of Pentago are presented at the bottom of Fig. 2. Pentago similarly exhibits
log scaling of average agent Elo scores as a function of model size that flattens out only with a high
number of neural network parameters. The scaling exponent is strikingly close to that of Connect
Four (see Table 1), suggesting this exponent might be characteristic for a certain, yet unknown class
of games. Again, in order to verify that the observed plateau is due to approaching the boundary
of optimal play, we plot the Elo difference between each agent and a close to optimal benchmark
player aided by a game solver. The bottom right of Fig. 2 shows that large agents are much closer to
the level of the benchmark player. The benchmark player is based on the best performing Pentago
agent trained, given 10 times more MCTS steps per move. We further improve it by constraining all
moves before ply 18 to be optimal, using a 4TB dataset created by a Pentago solver program (Irving,
2014). A vertical line in both plots marks the point the log trend breaks, where agents approach the
level of the benchmark player. Similar to Connect four we exclude the largest agent size beyond that
point from the fit where adding more parameters no longer increases performance.
The power-law scaling of the playing strength of MARL agents can be considered analogous to the
scaling laws observed for supervised learning. A noteworthy difference is the type of performance
parameter being scaled. Scaling laws for language models tend to scale cross-entropy test loss with
resources, which has been correlated to improved performance on downstream tasks (Hoffmann
et al., 2022). In comparison, Eq. 5 shows power law scaling of player strength rather than test loss,


                                                  5
Figure 3: Elo scaling with parameters during training. For both games, log-linear scaling appears
already at early stages of training, albeit with lower slopes. Elo curves converge for large numbers
of training steps when agents approach their maximal potential.


which is directly related to the Elo score, a common measure of task performance in MARL. In fact,
neural network loss on a test set generated by a game solver are observed to be a poor predictor of
performance scaling both for the value head and the policy head, see Appendix F.

5.2   E FFECT OF TRAINING TIME ON SIZE SCALING

Similar to language model scaling laws, the scaling exponent of Eq. 5 only applies at the limit of
infinite compute when training is not bottlenecked by the number of training steps. Fig. 3 shows
how performance scaling is influenced by the amount of available compute in terms of training
steps. One observes that the Elo score scales logarithmically with model size for all training regimes
when performance is not affected, as before, by the perfect play barrier. The slope increases with
the number of training steps, but with diminishing returns, see Appendix D. For both games one
observes that Elo scores converge to a limiting curve when the compute budget becomes large.
There is hence a limiting value for the scaling exponent αN , as defined by Eq. (5).

5.3   C OMPUTE SCALING

To examine compute scaling we plot Elo scores against training self-play compute, defined here by
C = S ·T ·F ·D, where S is the number of optimization steps, T is the number of MCTS simulations
per move, F the compute cost of a single neural network forward pass, and D is the amount of
new datapoints needed to trigger an optimization step. We do not count the compute spent during
optimization steps, which is much smaller than the compute needed to generate training data. In
our case we have approximately 2000 forward passes for each backward pass. We also approximate
the number of MCTS simulations T to be the maximum number of simulations allowed, since the
maximum is reached at all game positions except late-game positions, where the remaining game
tree is already fully mapped.
Fig. 4 shows the Elo scores of agents with different training compute measured in units of floating-
point operations (FLOPs). The Pareto front, which is the group of all agents with maximum Elo
among agents with similar or less compute, follows a log-linear trend up to the point of optimal
play. Together with Eq. 1 this yields an expected game score of:
                                                   1
                                      Ei =                α ,                                      (6)
                                             1 + (Cj /Ci ) C
for agents i, j with training computes Ci , Cj and optimal neural network sizes. Player strength
scales with the same exponent, γ ∝ C αC . This scaling behaviour also holds for the average agent
performance when we plot the Pareto front of compute curves averaged over multiple training runs
with different random seeds (see Appendix D). Eq. 6 therefore applies not only to the best case
training scenario, but also when training a single agent instance.
As with the size scaling exponent, Connect Four and Pentago have similar compute scaling expo-
nents (see Table 1). We note that our training compute exponents are significantly smaller than the


                                                  6
Figure 4: Top: Performance scaling with training compute. The Pareto front follows a log-linear
trend in compute right up to the optimal play plateau, both for Connect Four and Pentago (left/right
panel). Bottom left: Average Connect Four training curves relative to the point at which they reach
the Pareto front. Agents continue to improve significantly after passing through the Pareto optimal
point, meaning optimal training should stop long before convergence (compare to the training curves
in Silver et al. (2017b;a)). Bottom right: The amount of data required to reach the compute Pareto
front increases as the parameter count increases. Large dots are the geometric mean of data usage
on the Pareto front.


compute exponent obtained when applying Eq. 6 to the data obtained by Jones (2021) for small-
board Hex, which would be roughly αC = 1.3. The reason for this difference is at present unclear.
Possible explanations could be the different game types, or the choice of neural net architecture;
while we keep the depth constant, Jones (2021) increase both depth and width simultaneously.

5.4   E STIMATING THE COMPUTE OPTIMAL MODEL SIZE

We now turn to our central result, efficiency scaling. Scaling laws are attracting considerable at-
tention as they provide simple rules for the optimal balancing between network complexity and
computing resources. The question is, to be precise, whether we can predict how many neural net-
work parameters one should use when constrained by a certain compute budget in order to get an
AlphaZero agent with a maximal Elo score.
The agents on the Pareto front shown in Fig. 4 have the highest Elo score for all agents with the
same or lower compute budget. In order to find the relationship between optimal network size and
the given compute budget, we examine the network size of the Pareto agents and the amount of
FLOPs they consumed in training. This is shown in Fig. 1, which contains an aggregate of all
compute-optimal agents trained on Connect Four and Pentago. We see a clear power law trend
common to both games of the form:
                                                            αopt
                                                      C      C
                                     Nopt (C) =                    ,                             (7)
                                                      C0
                                                   opt
where Nopt is the optimal neural network size and αC   , C0 are constants.
                                                        opt
Next we point out that the optimality scaling exponent αC   can be calculated analytically given the
scaling laws we demonstrated for parameter count and compute. For this we use Eq. (5) and Eq. (6).


                                                  7
Figure 5: Performance improvement with data (game states) generated. Model sizes are color coded.
Larger models are more sample efficient, achieving better Elo scores than smaller models when
training on the same amount of game states.


Based on the fact that the Bradley Terry playing strength γ scales as limC→∞ γ(N, C) ∝ N αN at
the limit of infinite compute, and as γ(Nopt , C) ∝ C αC along the curve of optimal sizes, we can
combine the two to obtain the constraint:
                                             opt   αC
                                           αC    =     .                                      (8)
                                                   αN
This relationship is obtained when N = Nopt and C → ∞, but holds for every choice of N or
C since the exponents are constants. The scale constant C0 is calculated empirically. We use the
scaling exponents αN and αC obtained by fitting the Elo ratings for Connect Four and Pentago to
      opt
get αC    via Eq. (8). The predicted scaling law is included in Fig. 1 fitting only C0 . The predicted
exponent fits the data remarkably well.

5.4.1    E XTRAPOLATING TO STATE OF THE ART MODELS
For comparison, Fig. 1 right shows where AlphaGo Zero, trained by Silver et al. (2017b), and
AlphaZero, trained by Silver et al. (2017a), would stand relative to the power law specified by
Eq. (8). We base our estimates for the number of parameters from the respective papers, and use
the training compute values estimated by Sevilla et al. (2022) and Amodei et al. (2018) for these
models. We find that these models fall well below the optimal curve predicted from scaling MLP
agents playing Connect Four and Pentago.
The scaling law plotted in Fig. 1 might not accurately describe AlphaGo Zero and AlphaZero trained
on Go, chess and shogi due to the differences between the games: these games are much larger in
observation size and branching factor than Connect Four and Pentago, as well as having different
win conditions and game mechanics. The use of ResNets rather than MLPs can also be significant.
It remains to future study to determine if these models exhibit related scaling trends. In the case
that Eq. (8) does apply to agents using ResNets and trained on Go, chess, or shogi, then a better
Elo score could have been achieved with the same training time by training larger neural nets by up
to two orders of magnitude. A possible indication that these models were too small for the amount
of compute spent training them can be seen from the training figures of Silver et al. (2017b;a); the
AlphaGo Zero and AlphaZero training curves both have long tails with minimal improvement at late
stages of training. Our analysis shows that optimal training for a fixed compute budget will stop long
before performance has converged, in agreement with language model scaling laws (Kaplan et al.,
2020), compare Fig. 4 bottom left. That being said, a reason to favour smaller models is their lower
inference-time compute cost, which can be critical in the case of a time limit on move selection. We
elaborate on inference compute scaling in Appendix B.

5.5     S AMPLE EFFICIENCY

Unlike supervised learning models where dataset size is an important metric due to the cost of
collecting it, AlphaZero is not constrained by data limitations since it generates its own data while
training. It is however important to understand how data requirements change as it provides us an
insight into other sub-fields of reinforcement learning where data generation is costly, for example


                                                  8
in robotics models, which need real life interactions with the environment in order to gather training
data (Dulac-Arnold et al., 2021).
For this reason we look at performance scaling with data for different sized models, as shown in
Fig. 5. We observe that agents improve at different rates with the amount of training data, which is
defined here by the number of game states seen during self-play. Specifically, agents with larger neu-
ral nets consistently outperform smaller agents trained on the same amount of data, a phenomenon
of data efficiency that has been observed in language models (Kaplan et al., 2020). However, when
training is not bottlenecked by the amount of training data, an opposite trend appears: the amount
of data required to reach optimal performance under a fixed compute budget increases with model
size, as is visible in the bottom right panel of Fig. 4.


6   D ISCUSSION

In this work we provided evidence to the existence of power-law scaling for the performance of
agents using the AlphaZero algorithm on two games, Connect Four and Pentago. For both games
one observes scaling laws qualitatively paralleling the ones found in neural language models. We
pointed out that a log-scaling of Elo scores implies a power law in playing strengths, a relation that is
captured by Eq. (4) and that can be used to predict game results. We showed that AlphaZero agents
that are trained to convergence, with no limit on available compute, achieve Elo scores that are pro-
portional to the logarithm of the respective number of neural network parameters. We demonstrated
this for two games with significantly different branching parameters and tyical game lengths, find-
ing that they share similar scaling exponents for playing strength. This result indicates the possible
existence of universality classes for performance scaling in two-player open information games.
We then demonstrated that Elo scores scale logarithmically with available compute when training
optimally sized agents, again finding similar scaling exponents for the two games studied. We
showed that the optimal number of neural network parameters scales as a power of compute with an
exponent that can be derived from the other two scaling laws. This scaling model is especially im-
portant as it allows one to achieve maximal performance within the limits of a given training budget
by using an optimally sized neural net. We showed optimal training stops long before convergence,
in contrast to what was done with state-of-the-art models. Finally we observed that agents with
larger neural nets are always more data efficient than smaller models, which could be important in
particular for reinforcement learning studies with expensive data generation.
We find it note worthy that scaling laws that are common to language and other supervised learning
models are also present in one of the most important MARL models. This scaling behavior could
be common to other reinforcement learning algorithms, which would provide an opportunity to
optimize their resource allocation. We note that the main significance of the scaling exponents found
in this study is not their reported value, but the evidence of power-law scaling. Consider the scaling
exponents found by Kaplan et al. (2020), which were later corrected by optimizing the learning
rate schedule (Hoffmann et al., 2022). The tuning of AlphaZero’s hyperparameters could affect the
observed exponents in a similar manner. Particularly important hyperparameters are the number of
states explored by the MCTS, the frequency of optimization steps, and the update frequency of the
data generating model. We leave the investigation of hyperparameter impact to future work.
As a side remark, we would like to comment on the relevance of scaling laws for studies without
massive computing budgets. A rising concern since the discovery of performance scaling laws
regards the resulting push towards substantially increased model sizes. This decreases the impact of
research utilizing smaller-sized models, the bread-and-butter approach of smaller research groups.
(Strubell et al., 2019). On the other hand, the existence of scaling laws implies that it is possible to
gain relevant insights into the behaviour of large models by training medium-sized models, the case
of the present work. Interestingly, our initial test runs were performed on a toy problem that involved
training agents on a desktop computer with just four CPU cores. Even with such a minimal compute
budget a clear scaling trend emerged (Neumann & Gros, 2021). We believe our work shows that
significant insights can be obtained at times also with small-scale analysis.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We would like to thank Ivo FD Oliveira and Geoffrey Irving for helpful discussions and feedback.


                                                   9
R EFERENCES
Jean-Baptiste Alayrac, Jeff Donahue, Pauline Luc, Antoine Miech, Iain Barr, Yana Hasson, Karel
  Lenc, Arthur Mensch, Katie Millican, Malcolm Reynolds, et al. Flamingo: a visual language
  model for few-shot learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2204.14198, 2022.
Dario Amodei, Danny Hernandez, Girish SastryJack, ClarkGreg Brockman, and Ilya Sutskever. Ai
  and compute, 2018. URL openai.com/blog/ai-and-compute/.
Irwan Bello, William Fedus, Xianzhi Du, Ekin Dogus Cubuk, Aravind Srinivas, Tsung-Yi Lin,
  Jonathon Shlens, and Barret Zoph. Revisiting resnets: Improved training and scaling strategies.
  Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 34:22614–22627, 2021.
Ralph Allan Bradley and Milton E Terry. Rank analysis of incomplete block designs: I. the method
  of paired comparisons. Biometrika, 39(3/4):324–345, 1952.
Tom Brown, Benjamin Mann, Nick Ryder, Melanie Subbiah, Jared D Kaplan, Prafulla Dhariwal,
  Arvind Neelakantan, Pranav Shyam, Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, et al. Language models are
  few-shot learners. Advances in neural information processing systems, 33:1877–1901, 2020.
Cameron B Browne, Edward Powley, Daniel Whitehouse, Simon M Lucas, Peter I Cowling, Philipp
  Rohlfshagen, Stephen Tavener, Diego Perez, Spyridon Samothrakis, and Simon Colton. A survey
  of monte carlo tree search methods. IEEE Transactions on Computational Intelligence and AI in
  games, 4(1):1–43, 2012.
Aidan Clark, Diego de Las Casas, Aurelia Guy, Arthur Mensch, Michela Paganini, Jordan Hoff-
  mann, Bogdan Damoc, Blake Hechtman, Trevor Cai, Sebastian Borgeaud, et al. Unified scaling
  laws for routed language models. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 4057–
  4086. PMLR, 2022.
Rémi Coulom. Efficient selectivity and backup operators in monte-carlo tree search. In International
   conference on computers and games, pp. 72–83. Springer, 2006.
Rémi Coulom. Computing ”elo ratings” of move patterns in the game of go. ICGA journal, 30(4):
   198–208, 2007.
Rémi Coulom. Whole-history rating: A bayesian rating system for players of time-varying strength.
   In International Conference on Computers and Games, pp. 113–124. Springer, 2008.
Gabriel Dulac-Arnold, Nir Levine, Daniel J Mankowitz, Jerry Li, Cosmin Paduraru, Sven Gowal,
  and Todd Hester. Challenges of real-world reinforcement learning: definitions, benchmarks and
  analysis. Machine Learning, 110(9):2419–2468, 2021.
Arpad E Elo. The rating of chessplayers, past and present. Arco Pub., 1978.
Mitchell A Gordon, Kevin Duh, and Jared Kaplan. Data and parameter scaling laws for neural
 machine translation. In Proceedings of the 2021 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural
 Language Processing, pp. 5915–5922, 2021.
Peter Henderson, Riashat Islam, Philip Bachman, Joelle Pineau, Doina Precup, and David Meger.
  Deep reinforcement learning that matters. In Proceedings of the AAAI conference on artificial
  intelligence, volume 32, 2018.
Tom Henighan, Jared Kaplan, Mor Katz, Mark Chen, Christopher Hesse, Jacob Jackson, Heewoo
  Jun, Tom B Brown, Prafulla Dhariwal, Scott Gray, et al. Scaling laws for autoregressive generative
  modeling. arXiv preprint arXiv:2010.14701, 2020.
Danny Hernandez, Jared Kaplan, Tom Henighan, and Sam McCandlish. Scaling laws for transfer.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2102.01293, 2021.
Joel Hestness, Sharan Narang, Newsha Ardalani, Gregory Diamos, Heewoo Jun, Hassan Kianinejad,
  Md Patwary, Mostofa Ali, Yang Yang, and Yanqi Zhou. Deep learning scaling is predictable,
  empirically. arXiv preprint arXiv:1712.00409, 2017.


                                                 10
Jordan Hoffmann, Sebastian Borgeaud, Arthur Mensch, Elena Buchatskaya, Trevor Cai, Eliza
  Rutherford, Diego de Las Casas, Lisa Anne Hendricks, Johannes Welbl, Aidan Clark, et al. Train-
  ing compute-optimal large language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2203.15556, 2022.
Geoffrey Irving. Pentago is a first player win: Strongly solving a game using parallel in-core retro-
  grade analysis. arXiv preprint arXiv:1404.0743, 2014.
Andy L Jones. Scaling scaling laws with board games. arXiv preprint arXiv:2104.03113, 2021.
Jared Kaplan, Sam McCandlish, Tom Henighan, Tom B Brown, Benjamin Chess, Rewon Child,
   Scott Gray, Alec Radford, Jeffrey Wu, and Dario Amodei. Scaling laws for neural language
   models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2001.08361, 2020.
Donald E Knuth and Ronald W Moore. An analysis of alpha-beta pruning. Artificial intelligence, 6
  (4):293–326, 1975.
Marc Lanctot, Edward Lockhart, Jean-Baptiste Lespiau, Vinicius Zambaldi, Satyaki Upadhyay,
 Julien Pérolat, Sriram Srinivasan, Finbarr Timbers, Karl Tuyls, Shayegan Omidshafiei, Daniel
 Hennes, Dustin Morrill, Paul Muller, Timo Ewalds, Ryan Faulkner, János Kramár, Bart De
 Vylder, Brennan Saeta, James Bradbury, David Ding, Sebastian Borgeaud, Matthew Lai, Julian
 Schrittwieser, Thomas Anthony, Edward Hughes, Ivo Danihelka, and Jonah Ryan-Davis. Open-
 Spiel: A framework for reinforcement learning in games. CoRR, abs/1908.09453, 2019. URL
 http://arxiv.org/abs/1908.09453.
Kuang-Huei Lee, Ofir Nachum, Mengjiao Yang, Lisa Lee, Daniel Freeman, Winnie Xu, Sergio
  Guadarrama, Ian Fischer, Eric Jang, Henryk Michalewski, et al. Multi-game decision transform-
  ers. arXiv preprint arXiv:2205.15241, 2022.
Timothy P Lillicrap, Jonathan J Hunt, Alexander Pritzel, Nicolas Heess, Tom Erez, Yuval Tassa,
  David Silver, and Daan Wierstra. Continuous control with deep reinforcement learning. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:1509.02971, 2015.
Siqi Liu, Guy Lever, Zhe Wang, Josh Merel, SM Eslami, Daniel Hennes, Wojciech M Czarnecki,
  Yuval Tassa, Shayegan Omidshafiei, Abbas Abdolmaleki, et al. From motor control to team play
  in simulated humanoid football. arXiv preprint arXiv:2105.12196, 2021.
Oren Neumann and Claudius Gros. Investment vs. reward in a competitive knapsack problem. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2101.10964, 2021.
Oren Neumann and Claudius Gros. Size scaling in self-play reinforcement learning. In ESANN,
  2022.
Ivo FD Oliveira, Nir Ailon, and Ori Davidov. A new and flexible approach to the analysis of paired
  comparison data. The Journal of Machine Learning Research, 19(1):2458–2486, 2018.
Shayegan Omidshafiei, Christos Papadimitriou, Georgios Piliouras, Karl Tuyls, Mark Rowland,
  Jean-Baptiste Lespiau, Wojciech M Czarnecki, Marc Lanctot, Julien Perolat, and Remi Munos.
  α-rank: Multi-agent evaluation by evolution. Scientific reports, 9(1):1–29, 2019.
Pascal Pons. Connect four solver, 2015. URL gamesolver.org.
Scott Reed, Konrad Zolna, Emilio Parisotto, Sergio Gomez Colmenarejo, Alexander Novikov,
  Gabriel Barth-Maron, Mai Gimenez, Yury Sulsky, Jackie Kay, Jost Tobias Springenberg, et al.
  A generalist agent. arXiv preprint arXiv:2205.06175, 2022.
Jonathan S Rosenfeld, Amir Rosenfeld, Yonatan Belinkov, and Nir Shavit. A constructive prediction
  of the generalization error across scales. arXiv preprint arXiv:1909.12673, 2019.
Julian Schrittwieser, Ioannis Antonoglou, Thomas Hubert, Karen Simonyan, Laurent Sifre, Simon
  Schmitt, Arthur Guez, Edward Lockhart, Demis Hassabis, Thore Graepel, et al. Mastering atari,
  go, chess and shogi by planning with a learned model. Nature, 588(7839):604–609, 2020.
Julian Schrittwieser, Thomas Hubert, Amol Mandhane, Mohammadamin Barekatain, Ioannis
  Antonoglou, and David Silver. Online and offline reinforcement learning by planning with a
  learned model. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 34:27580–27591, 2021.


                                                 11
Jaime Sevilla, Lennart Heim, Anson Ho, Tamay Besiroglu, Marius Hobbhahn, and Pablo Villalobos.
   Compute trends across three eras of machine learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2202.05924, 2022.
David Silver, Thomas Hubert, Julian Schrittwieser, Ioannis Antonoglou, Matthew Lai, Arthur Guez,
  Marc Lanctot, Laurent Sifre, Dharshan Kumaran, Thore Graepel, et al. Mastering chess and shogi
  by self-play with a general reinforcement learning algorithm. arXiv preprint arXiv:1712.01815,
  2017a.
David Silver, Julian Schrittwieser, Karen Simonyan, Ioannis Antonoglou, Aja Huang, Arthur Guez,
  Thomas Hubert, Lucas Baker, Matthew Lai, Adrian Bolton, et al. Mastering the game of go
  without human knowledge. nature, 550(7676):354–359, 2017b.
Emma Strubell, Ananya Ganesh, and Andrew McCallum. Energy and policy considerations for deep
  learning in nlp. arXiv preprint arXiv:1906.02243, 2019.
Ashish Vaswani, Noam Shazeer, Niki Parmar, Jakob Uszkoreit, Llion Jones, Aidan N Gomez,
  Łukasz Kaiser, and Illia Polosukhin. Attention is all you need. Advances in neural informa-
  tion processing systems, 30, 2017.
Xiaohua Zhai, Alexander Kolesnikov, Neil Houlsby, and Lucas Beyer. Scaling vision transformers.
  In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp.
  12104–12113, 2022.


A    H YPERPARAMETERS
In order to keep our results as general as possible, we try to avoid hyperparameter tuning and choose
to train all agents with the values suggested by OpenSpiel’s Python AlphaZero example. Table 3
contains a summary of all hyperparameters used and their meaning.

          Table 3: Training hyperparameters used for Connect Four, Pentago and Oware.

      Hyperparameter        Value                             Description
    cuct                   2         MCTS exploration constant
    Max simulations        300       Number of MCTS steps to run per move
    Batch size             210       Batch size during optimization steps
    Replay-buffer size     216       Number of game states stored in the replay buffer
    Replay-buffer reuse    10        Number of optimization steps a game state stays in the
                                     buffer before it is erased
    Learning rate          0.001     Optimization learning rate
    Weight decay           0.0001    L2 regularization strength
    Policy ϵ               0.25      Policy noise
    Policy α               1         Dirichlet noise variable
    Temperature            1         Temperature applied to the policy for final move selection
    Temperature drop       varied    Number of turns before temperature is set to 0

Temperature drop is the only parameter with a different value in each game, set to 15 and 5 for
Connect Four and Pentago, respectively. We do this since we find that this term, which should
correlate with game length, can drastically affect the performance of agents when we train them for
104 optimization steps.
Replay-buffer reuse is set to 10 rather than 3, the value suggested in the original example, to speed
up training by leaving states for longer in the replay buffer (Lillicrap et al., 2015).
During matches, all noise is set to zero but temperature is set to 0.25, with an infinite temperature
drop, meaning temperature stays constant throughout the game. We do this since without a random
element all games between two agents will be identical. A high temperature would distort the data


                                                 12
Figure 6: Left: Connect Four performance at fixed values of inference-time compute, enforced
by scaling MCTS search size inversely with forward-pass compute costs. Elo scores steadily im-
prove with increasing model size for smaller models, but the trend breaks for large models. Right:
The number of MCTS steps used by different sized models with different inference-time compute
budgets. Agents with less than 2 MCTS steps per turn are excluded from both plots.


by reducing the Elo difference between players, which is why we use a low temperature value of
0.25 that produces roughly 5% or less repeating games. The number of MCTS simulations per move
is the same for all agents at test time, equal to the number used during training.

B    I NFERENCE - TIME COMPUTE SCALING
Reinforcement learning models like AlphaZero are often required to perform fast at test time, ei-
ther in order to finish their calculation within a thinking time limit or to react quickly to a rapidly
changing environment. The AlphaZero algorithm provides the ability to tailor the move-selection
inference time to a given time limit by changing the number of MCTS steps, which does not have to
match the number of steps used during training. Since our main results all use a fixed number of 300
MCTS steps both at train and test time, we add here the scaling behavior of different sized Connect
Four agents using varying numbers of MCTS steps. We look at the case where training compute is
abundant but performance is bottlenecked by inference-time compute. To do so we match fully con-
verged agents against each other, all receiving a fixed amount of inference-time compute enforced
by scaling MCTS search size inversely with forward-pass compute costs.
Fig. 6 shows the Elo scaling of different sized agents under inference-time compute constraints.
Agents steadily improve with size at smaller sizes for all amounts of available inference-time com-
pute. Larger agents break off from this trend at different points which depend on the amount of
compute given, such that the the trend seems to hold longer for larger compute values. Interest-
ingly, a power law appears at the limit of large inference-time compute which breaks off only for
the largest agents. The scaling exponent is significantly smaller than that of Fig. 2, which is not
surprising given that small agents have access to up to two orders of magnitude more MCTS steps
than the largest agents, see Fig. 6 right. This scaling law may be related to the power law scaling of
inference-time compute with training compute found by Jones (2021) when fixing the Elo score of
AlphaZero agents.

C    M EASURING E LO AGAINST OTHER PLAYERS
Elo rating is a system that generates predictions of game outcomes that are based on ground truth
values. As such, it is vulnerable to biases in the underlying dataset of game outcomes. One example
of a potential bias is when all players use a restricted set of strategies, resulting in Elo scores that
will not necessarily represent the interactions of these players with agents utilizing different sets of
strategies. Here we provide evidence that the scaling laws presented in this paper are not the result
of such biases.
Although Fig. 2 right presents Elo scores calculated solely from matches between agents and a
perfect Connect Four game solver, these scores are only accurate close to the solver score and are
unreliable for agents far from optimal play. For example, the worst agent is almost 1,200 Elo points


                                                  13
Figure 7: Left: AlphaZero size scaling with Elo scores calculated by only using matches between
solver agents and AlphaZero agents, or matches between two solvers. The scaling behavior of
Fig. 2 holds here as well, with an almost identical scaling exponent. Since the true solver, with
temperature set to zero, is part of the agent pool, it has a well defined Elo score (green line). Right:
Solver-agent scaling with temperature. Each solver agent uses the prior produced by the Connect
Four game solver (Pons, 2015), applying a temperature transformation to it according to Eq. 9.
Low temperature agents asymptotically approach the true solver Elo score (green line), while high
temperature agents converge to the score of a random player. The range of Elo scores covers that of
AlphaZero agents, allowing an accurate measurement of their Elo scores.



away from the solver, meaning it should win about one game in a 1,000. This requires a large
amount of matches in order to model accurately, and indeed several agents are missing from this
figure since they received an Elo score of minus infinity, never winning a single match.
Here we solve this issue by producing a set of solver agents of varying playing strengths, matching
them with each other and with AlphaZero agents trained on Connect Four to produce Fig. 7. All
solver agents base their prior on the vector q provided by the game solver, which contains informa-
tion about the quality of all legal moves. Taking action a in game state s, the number q(s, a) equals
to 42 minus the minimal number of turns until either player can force a victory under perfect play,
with a minus sign if the current player would lose. See Pons (2015) for a detailed explanation of
how q is generated. The final prior π is created by applying a softmax to q divided by a temperature
value T :

                                                  eq(s,a)/T
                                       π(s, a) = P q(s,b)/T .                                          (9)
                                                   be



This provides a smooth interpolation between the optimal prior and a uniform prior. At T = 0 the
prior leads to the fastest victory if possible, otherwise to a draw if possible, and if neither then to the
slowest defeat. At the limit T → ∞ the prior is uniform, generating a completely random agent.
Note that T is not the temperature mentioned in Table 3, which is set to zero for the solver agents
and to 0.25 for AlphaZero agents, as it is done throughout this paper, see Appendix A.
Fig. 7 shows the Elo scaling calculated with solver agents. Unlike in Fig. 2, Elo scores are calculated
exclusively from data on matches between AlphaZero agents and solver agents as well as matches
between pairs of solver agents. No game between two AlphaZero agents was included in this cal-
culation. The resulting Elo scores scale as a log of model size with an almost identical exponent to
that found in Table 1, providing evidence that this scaling behavior is universal and not the product
of a bias in the choice of players.
We note that while this way of measuring Elo strengthens our results by reproducing the scaling
exponents, it is probably a less accurate measure than the one used in Section 5.1. This is because
all solver agents use the same strategy, which introduces bias into the match outcome dataset. This
could be the reason why the spread of agent Elo scores in Fig. 7 is slightly wider than that of Fig. 2
for smaller agents. Despite this bias, the model size scaling law seems robust enough to appear here
as well.


                                                    14
D     S UPPLEMENTAL F IGURES

D.1   AVERAGE COMPUTE SCALING

The scaling law presented in Fig. 4 is obtained by finding the Pareto optimal agents among all agents
trained. It does not make clear whether the same scaling law would apply when training a single
agent, rather than training with several random seeds and picking the best one. We therefore plot
Fig. 8, which displays Elo scaling with compute, but with scores averaged over each neural-net size
group. The scaling exponents deviate only slightly from the exponents calculated with individual
agent data. This implies one can expect to find compute log-scaling of Elo also when training single
agents, as opposed to training many seeds and picking the best performing one.


Figure 8: Averaged performance scaling with training compute. Re-plotting figure 4 with data
averaged over 6 different seeds for each number of neural-net parameters produces a Pareto front
with a similar scaling exponent.


D.2   S IZE SCALING CONVERGENCE

The parameter-count scaling law presented in section 5.1 only holds in the limit of infinite compute,
when agents are allowed to train to convergence. A way of measuring the proximity to this limit is
by looking at the evolution of the log-linear fit to the data. We have shown in Fig 3 that log-linear
scaling appears already at short training lengths, but with lower slopes. In Fig 9 we plot the exponent
values derived from these slopes. One can see that the exponent value slowly converges to its final
value at 104 training steps.


Figure 9: Convergence of the scaling exponent αN . Fitting the curves in Fig 3 we obtain interme-
diate values for the scaling exponent during training. The exponent fits grow larger with training
length, slowing down towards a final value for both games.


E     OWARE SCALING

We measure the scaling laws of another popular board game, Oware. We choose this game because
of its length; unlike Connect Four and Pentago, Oware games are not bound to end after a fixed


                                                  15
number of turns. This also means the average number of turns per game is much larger compared to
the other games, see Table 4. In practice, infinite games are handled in OpenSpiel by calling them
off after 1,000 steps have been played. These games, although rare, are excluded from our statistics.
Another difference between Oware and the other games is the shape of the observation tensor. For
Oware, neural network input is in the shape of a 14-elements vector of integers, counting the number
of seeds in each pit. This is unlike the observation tensor of Connect Four and Pentago as well as
games like Go, where board state is presented in binary encoding.
We find that Oware exhibits power-law scaling in playing strength in neural network size and com-
pute, but encounter two serious issues during training. One issue is the lack of sufficient training
time for agents to converge, not allowing us to gauge correctly the true value of the size scaling ex-
ponent. The other issue is that the largest models do not manage to reach their full potential, getting
Elo scores significantly lower than smaller models. We give a possible explanation to this in the last
section. This issue mostly affects the correct estimation of the compute exponent.

Table 4: Game details including Oware. Oware games are not bounded to a maximal number
of moves. As a result, they last much longer than Connect four or Pentago games on average.
Additionaly, the neural network input comes in the form of integer numbers in Oware, rather than
zeros and ones.

         Game          Branching Factor     Average Game Length           Observation Shape

      Connect Four     ≤7                   25.4 (max. 42)            3 × 6 × 7 Boolean tensor
      Pentago          ≤ 288                16.8 (max. 36)            3 × 6 × 6 Boolean tensor
      Oware            ≤6                   100 (unbounded)           14-long integer vector


E.1   S IZE SCALING

We repeat the analysis of neural network parameter scaling for Oware agents. Fig. 10 presents the
scaling of Elo scores with model size. For Oware one observes, interestingly, that agents with large
numbers of parameters do not train to optimality. Small- and medium-sized agents show however
evidence of power-law scaling. It is clear that large agents could in theory reach better performance,
since the range of strategies a MLP network could implement is always contained within that of a
larger model. We speculate about the cause to this in section E.4.


Figure 10: Oware size scaling. Oware shows a logarithmic scaling trend of Elo with neural net
size that breaks abruptly for larger networks. Since the strategy space available to smaller agents is
contained within that available to larger ones, large agents should at least reach an equal Elo score
to smaller agents. It is therefore clear that the large agents did not converge to optimal performance.

Medium-sized agents performance follows a log scaling with model size, with a smaller scaling
exponent than that found with Connect Four and Pentago. However when we plot the changing of
the exponent fit during training in Fig. 11, it seems very likely that it will keep increasing with


                                                  16
longer training. Unfortunately we could not extend training length by another order of magnitude in
the time given for this analysis.


Figure 11: Left: Elo scaling with parameters during training. Log-linear scaling already appears
at early stages of training, converging to a fixed curve. Right: αN convergence. The exponent fit
keeps increasing with training time for Oware, suggesting the final exponent should be larger.


E.2   C OMPUTE SCALING

Fig. 12 shows the Elo scores of Oware agents with different training compute. Despite the failure
of large agents to learn effectively, Oware matches a log-linear fit over several orders of magnitude
with a smaller exponent than that found in Connect Four and Pentago.


Figure 12: Oware performance scaling with training compute. The Pareto front follows a log-linear
trend in compute. Large models, which failed to train well, do not make it to the Pareto front.


E.3   E STIMATING THE COMPUTE OPTIMAL MODEL SIZE

We use the exponents αN and αC found for Oware to fit a new scaling law for the optimal model
size, Nopt . Since Oware has a smaller compute-scaling exponent than the other games, its optimality
             opt
exponent αC      is also smaller. Overlaying the resulting power law on data from other games in
Fig. 13, we find that it does not fit Connect Four and Pentago well. Even though the Oware exponent
is significantly smaller, it still predicts that AlphaGo Zero and AlphaZero would benefit from an
increase in model size.

E.4   T RAINING ISSUES

Reinforcement learning algorithms can exhibit convergence issues, as is evident in the case of
Oware. The largest agents trained on this game clearly failed to converge to their optimal playing
ability, since they under-performed smaller agents, which they should at least match in performance.
We believe a likely cause to that is the format of the input tensor, which is composed of a vector of


                                                 17
Figure 13: Optimal number of neural network parameters as in Fig. 1, with the scaling trend pre-
dicted with Oware in green. Even this lower exponent scaling law predicts previous state-of-the-art
models were undersized, although to a much lesser degree.


integers rather than a boolean tensor as used in Connect Four and Pentago and games like Go and
chess (see Table 4). We observe the same trend of large models consistently failing to train well in
another game, a toy model problem not presented here with floating-point inputs rather than binary
ones. We find that large models trained on the toy problem with no issues when we use a modified
version of AlphaZero created by us, which imports a key feature from AlphaGo Zero. Specifically,
the modified version tests each new candidate for the data generating model against the current
model, and only updates it if the new candidate is proved to perform better. OpenSpiel currently
does not contain this feature, but we believe it could be useful in the case of non-boolean input.

Table 5: Scaling exponent for all three games. Oware shows smaller size and compute exponents,
and a larger optimal size scaling exponent.

                          Exponents     Connect Four     Pentago     Oware
                          αN            0.88             0.87        0.75
                          αC            0.55             0.55        0.37
                           opt
                          αC            0.62             0.63        0.49



F    T EST SET LOSS

Most language model scaling laws revolve around scaling test-set loss as a power law of some
quantity. In contrast, scaling laws for AlphaZero appear in the form of playing strength power-laws.
When we look at the predictive ability of trained agents on a test dataset, we find that test loss does
not scale as a power law.
To measure test loss scaling, we create a dataset of game states from random Connect Four games
generated by taking random moves. We then annotate these states with a perfect solver (Pons, 2015).
The solver provides us with the ground-truth state value (1, 0, −1 for win, draw loss from the current
position, respectively) and a policy prior which is a uniform probability distribution over all optimal
moves. Optimal moves are defined as those which lead to either the fastest victory, a draw otherwise,
or the slowest loss otherwise. All sub-optimal moves are given probability zero.
We then compare the value estimations and policy priors created by the solver to those predicted by
fully trained Connect Four agents, by calculating the value and policy losses. These are defined in
the full AlphaZero loss function (Silver et al., 2017b):
                                             2
                                 l = (z − v) − π ⊤ log p + c||θ||2 ,                              (10)

where z is the recorded game outcome from the current position and π is the improved policy
generated by the MCTS using the visit count of each node. We replace z and π with predictions
made by the solver.


                                                  18
Figure 14: Test loss of Connect Four agents on a dataset created by a perfect solver. Left: Value head
test loss. Loss changes very little with model size, large models have similar loss to small models.
For comparison, we add a baseline loss received when always predicting a draw (v = 0). Right:
Policy head test loss minus irreducible loss. Loss does decrease with size, indicating larger models
produce a policy prior that is closer to the perfect policy. However the distance to the perfect prior
is still large across all scales. For comparison, we add a baseline achieved when always predicting a
uniform prior over all legal moves. Smaller agents achieve worse loss than the uniform baseline.


The resulting scaling trends appear in Fig. 14. For the policy head, we plot the test loss minus
the irreducible loss (equal 0.336), the minimum loss achieved by matching the solver’s policy prior
exactly.
While policy loss does seem to decrease with model size, it is contained to a small range far from
the minimal possible loss. Value loss decreases and then increases with model size. Both quantities
do not seem to be good indicators of performance scaling.
We note that even though Elo score turns out to be a better measure of performance than test loss,
there may exist even better measures. Elo rating fails to correctly model player dynamics when they
are non-transitive, for example (Omidshafiei et al., 2019). Some alternatives exist (Omidshafiei et al.,
2019; Oliveira et al., 2018), and it is possible they could capture elements of the agent dynamics that
Elo rating would miss.


                                                  19
