Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


PD-MORL: P REFERENCE -D RIVEN M ULTI -O BJECTIVE
R EINFORCEMENT L EARNING A LGORITHM
 Toygun Basaklar                 Suat Gumussoy                                Umit Y. Ogras
 UW-Madison                      Siemens Corporate Technology                 UW-Madison
 Madison, WI 53706               Princeton, NJ 08540                          Madison, WI 53706
 basaklar@wisc.edu               suat.gumussoy@siemens.com                    uogras@wisc.edu

                                             A BSTRACT

         Multi-objective reinforcement learning (MORL) approaches have emerged to tackle
         many real-world problems with multiple conflicting objectives by maximizing a
         joint objective function weighted by a preference vector. These approaches find
         fixed customized policies corresponding to preference vectors specified during
         training. However, the design constraints and objectives typically change dy-
         namically in real-life scenarios. Furthermore, storing a policy for each potential
         preference is not scalable. Hence, obtaining a set of Pareto front solutions for the
         entire preference space in a given domain with a single training is critical. To this
         end, we propose a novel MORL algorithm that trains a single universal network to
         cover the entire preference space scalable to continuous robotic tasks. The pro-
         posed approach, Preference-Driven MORL (PD-MORL), utilizes the preferences as
         guidance to update the network parameters. It also employs a novel parallelization
         approach to increase sample efficiency. We show that PD-MORL achieves up to
         25% larger hypervolume for challenging continuous control tasks and uses an order
         of magnitude fewer trainable parameters compared to prior approaches.

1    I NTRODUCTION

Reinforcement learning (RL) has emerged as a promising approach to solve various challenging
problems including board/video games (Silver et al., 2016; Mnih et al., 2015; Shao et al., 2019),
robotics (Nguyen & La, 2019), smart systems (Gupta et al., 2020; Yu et al., 2021), and chip de-
sign/placement (Zheng & Louri, 2019; Mirhoseini et al., 2020). The main objective in a standard RL
setting is to obtain a policy that maximizes a single cumulative reward by interacting with the envi-
ronment. However, many real-world problems involve multiple, possibly conflicting, objectives. For
example, robotics tasks should maximize speed while minimizing energy consumption. In contrast to
single-objective environments, performance is measured using multiple objectives. Consequently,
there are multiple Pareto-optimal solutions as a function of the preference between objectives (Navon
et al., 2020). Multi-objective reinforcement learning (MORL) approaches (Hayes et al., 2022) have
emerged to tackle these problems by maximizing a vector of rewards depending on the preferences.
Existing approaches for multi-objective optimization generally transform the multidimensional objec-
tive space into a single dimension by statically assigning weights (preferences) to each objective (Liu
et al., 2014). Then, they use standard RL algorithms to obtain a policy optimized for the given
preferences. These approaches suffer when the objectives have widely varying magnitudes since
setting the preference weights requires application domain expertise. More importantly, they can find
only a single solution for a given set of goals and constraints. Thus, they need to repeat the training
progress when the constraints or goals change. However, repetitive retraining is impractical since
the constraints and design can change frequently depending on the application domain. Therefore,
obtaining a set of Pareto front solutions that covers the entire preference space with a single training
is critical (Xu et al., 2020; Yang et al., 2019; Abdolmaleki et al., 2020).
This paper presents a novel multi-objective reinforcement learning algorithm using a single policy
network that covers the entire preference space scalable to continuous robotic tasks. At its core, it uses
a multi-objective version of Q-Learning, where we approximate the Q-values with a neural network.
This network takes the states and preferences as inputs during training. Making the preferences input
parameters allows the trained model to produce the optimal policy for any user-specified preference
at run-time. Since the user-specified preferences effectively drive the policy decisions, it is called


                                                    1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


preference-driven (PD) MORL. For each episode during training, we randomly sample a preference
                 PL
vector (ω ∈ Ω : i=0 ωi = 1) from a uniform distribution. Since the number of collected transitions
by interacting with the environment for some preferences may be underrepresented, we utilize
hindsight experience replay buffer (HER) (Andrychowicz et al., 2017). As a key insight, we observe
that the preference vectors have similar directional angles to the corresponding vectorized Q-values
for a given state. Using the insight, we utilize the cosine similarity between the preference vector
and vectorized Q-values in the Bellman’s optimality operator to guide the training. However, not
every Pareto front perfectly aligned with the preference vectors. To mitigate this adverse effect, we fit
a multi-dimensional interpolator to project the original preference vectors (ω ∈ Ω) to normalized
solution space to align preferences with the multi-objective solutions. The projected preference
vectors are used in our novel preference-driven optimality operator to obtain the target Q-values.
Additionally, to increase the sample efficiency of the algorithm, we divide the preference space into
sub-spaces and assign a child process to these sub-spaces. Each child process is responsible for its
own preference sub-space to collect transitions. This parallelization provides efficient exploration
during training, assuring that there is no bias towards any preference sub-space.
PD-MORL can be employed in any off-policy RL algorithm. We develop a multi-objective version
of the double deep Q-network algorithm with hindsight experience replay buffer (MO-DDQN-
HER) (Schaul et al., 2015) for problems with discrete action spaces and evaluate PD-MORL’s
performance on two commonly used MORL benchmarks: Deep Sea Treasure (Hayes et al., 2022) and
Fruit Tree Navigation Task (Yang et al., 2019). We specifically choose these two benchmarks to make
a fair comparison with the prior approach (Yang et al., 2019) that also aims to achieve a unified policy
network. Additionally, we develop a multi-objective version of the Twin Delayed Deep Deterministic
policy gradient algorithm with hindsight experience replay buffer (MO-TD3-HER) (Fujimoto et al.,
2018a) for problems with continuous action spaces. Using MO-TD3-HER, we evaluate PD-MORL
on the multi-objective continuous control tasks such as MO-Walker2d-v2, MO-HalfCheetah-v2,
MO-Ant-v2, MO-Swimmer-v2, MO-Hopper-v2 that are presented by Xu et al. (2020). With the
combination of the use of the cosine similarity term, the HER, and the parallel exploration, PD-MORL
achieves up to 78% larger hypervolume for simple benchmarks and 25% larger hypervolume for
continuous control tasks and uses an order of magnitude fewer trainable parameters compared to prior
approaches while achieving broad and dense Pareto front solutions. We emphasize that it achieves
these results with a single policy network.


2    R ELATED W ORK
Existing MORL approaches can be classified as single-policy, multi-policy, and meta-policy ap-
proaches. The main difference among them is the number of policies learned during training.
Single-policy approaches transform a multi-objective problem into a single-objective problem by
combining the rewards into a single scalar reward using a scalarization function. Then, they use stan-
dard RL approaches to maximize the scalar reward (Roijers et al., 2013). Most of the previous studies
find the optimal policy for a given preference between the objectives using scalarization (Van Moffaert
et al., 2013). Additionally, recent work takes an orthogonal approach and encodes preferences as
constraints instead of scalarization (Abdolmaleki et al., 2020). These approaches have two primary
drawbacks: they require domain-specific knowledge, and preferences must be set beforehand.
Multi-policy approaches aim to obtain a set of policies that approximates the Pareto front of optimal
solutions. The most widely used approach is to repeatedly perform a single-policy algorithm over
various preferences (Roijers et al., 2014; Mossalam et al., 2016; Zuluaga et al., 2016). However, this
approach suffers from a large number of objectives and dense Pareto solutions for complex control
problems. In contrast, Pirotta et al. (2015) suggest a manifold-based policy search MORL approach
which assumes policies to be sampled from a manifold. This manifold is defined as a parametric
distribution over the policy parameter space. Their approach updates the manifold according to
an indicator function such that sample policies yield an improved Pareto front. Parisi et al. (2017)
extend this method with hypervolume and non-dominance count indicator functions using importance
sampling to increase the sample efficiency of the algorithm. However, the number of parameters
to model the manifold grows quadratically (Chen et al., 2019) as the number of policy parameters
increases. Therefore, these approaches are not scalable for complex problems such as continuous
control robotics tasks to achieve a dense Pareto front where deep neural networks with at least
thousands of parameters are needed.


                                                   2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Abels et al. (2019) and Yang et al. (2019) use a multi-objective Q-learning approach that simultane-
ously learns a set of policies over multiple preferences. These studies use a single network that takes
preferences as inputs and uses vectorized value function updates in contrast to standard scalarized
value function updates. An orthogonal approach by Chen et al. (2019) is the meta-policy approach
that frames MORL as a meta-learning problem using a task distribution given by a distribution over
the preference space. The authors first train a meta-policy to approximate the Pareto front implicitly.
Then, they obtain the Pareto optimal solution of a given preference by only fine-tuning the meta-
policy with a few gradient updates. A more recent study proposes an efficient evolutionary learning
algorithm to update a population of policies simultaneously in each run to improve the approximation
of the Pareto optimal solutions (Xu et al., 2020). All non-dominated policies for each generation of
policies are stored as an external Pareto front archive during the training. Finally, it outputs this Pareto
front archive as approximated Pareto front solutions. However, this approach obtains a policy network
for each solution on the Pareto front. Moreover, there is no specific knowledge of correspondence
between preference vectors and solutions in this Pareto front.
Distinct from the prior work, PD-MORL utilizes the relation between the Q-values and the preferences
and proposes a novel update rule, including the cosine similarity between the Q-values and preferences.
Additionally, PD-MORL increases its sample efficiency by using a novel parallelization approach
with HER and provides efficient exploration. The combination of the cosine similarity term, the HER,
and the parallel exploration achieve up to 25% larger hypervolume for challenging continuous control
tasks compared to prior approaches using an order of magnitude fewer trainable parameters.

3    BACKGROUND
MORL requires learning several tasks with different rewards simultaneously. Each objective has
an associated reward signal, transforming the reward from a scalar to a vector, r = [r1 , r2 , ..., rL ]T ,
where L is the number of objectives. A multi-objective problem can be formulated as a multi-objective
Markov decision process (MOMDP) defined by the tuple ⟨S, A, P, r, Ω, fω ⟩, where S, A, P(s′ |s, a),
r, and Ω represents state space, action space, transition distribution, reward vector, and preference
space, respectively. The function fω (r) = ω T r yields a scalarized reward using a preference of
ω ∈ Ω. If ω is taken as a fixed vector, the MOMDP boils down to a standard MDP, which can be
solved using standard RL techniques. However, if we consider all possible returns from a MOMDP
and all possible preferences in Ω, a set of non-dominated policies called the Pareto front can be
obtained. A policy π is Pareto optimal if there is no other policy π ′ that improves its expected
return for an objective without degrading the expected return of any other objective. For complex
problems, such as continuous control tasks, obtaining an optimal Pareto front using an RL setting is
an NP-hard problem (Xu et al., 2020). Hence, the main goal of the MORL algorithms is to obtain an
approximation of the Pareto front. The quality of the approximated Pareto front is typically measured
by two metrics: (i) hypervolume and (ii) sparsity (Hayes et al., 2022).
Definition 1 (Hypervolume Indicator). Let
                                                                                 Pareto front                      Reference Point
P be a Pareto front approximation in an L-
dimensional objective space and contains N so-            a)                                    b)                      𝑑0
lutions. Let r0 ∈ RL be the reference point.                                                                                  𝑑1
                                                               Objective 2


                                                                                                     Objective 2


Then, the hypervolume indicator is defined as:                                                                                       𝑑2
            IH (P ) := Λ(H(P, r0 ))             (1)                                                                                       𝑑3
where H(P, r0 ) = {z ∈ RL | ∃ 1 ≤ i ≤
N : r0 ⪯ z ⪯ Pi } with Pi being the ith                                      Objective 1                              Objective 1
 solution in P and ⪯ is the relation operator      Figure 1: (a) The hypervolume between a refer-
 of multi-objective dominance. Λ(·) denotes        ence point and solutions in Pareto front is shown
Rthe Lebesgue measure with Λ(H(P, r0 )) =          with the shaded area. (b) The sparsity is the aver-
     1
  RL H(P,r0 )
               (z)dz and 1H(P,r0 ) being the char- age square distance (di , i = {0, . . . , 3}) between
 acteristic function of H(P, r0 ).                 consecutive solutions in the Pareto front.
Definition 2 (Sparsity). For the same P , sparsity is defined as:
                                                  L N −1
                                             1 XX
                              Sp(P ) :=                  (Pij − Pi+1j )2                                                                   (2)
                                           N − 1 j=1 i=1

where Pi is the ith solution in P and Pij is the sorted set for the j th objective.


                                                      3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Improvement in any objective manifests as an increase in the hypervolume, as illustrated in Figure 1.
However, the hypervolume alone is insufficient to assess the quality of the Pareto front. For instance,
hypervolume may increase due to an increase in only one of the objectives which indicates that the
algorithm does not improve other objectives. The sparsity metric is introduced to assess whether the
Pareto front solutions are dense or sparse. A larger hypervolume indicates that a more desired Pareto
front approximation is achieved. Lower sparsity values imply that a dense set of solutions is achieved.

4     PD-MORL: P REFERENCE D RIVEN MORL A LGORITHM
This section introduces the proposed preference-driven MORL algorithm. We first provide a theoreti-
cal analysis of PD-MORL based on the multi-objective version of Q-learning (Watkins & Dayan,
1992) by following the framework provided by Yang et al. (2019). The proofs for this theoretical
analysis are available in Appendix A. We then introduce multi-objective double deep Q-networks with
a preference-driven optimality operator for problems with discrete action space. Finally, we extend
the Twin Delayed Deep Deterministic Policy Gradient (TD3) algorithm (Fujimoto et al., 2018b) to a
multi-objective version utilizing our proposed approach for problems with continuous action space.

4.1   T HEORETICAL A NALYSIS OF PD-MORL

In standard Q-learning, the value space is defined as Q ∈ RS×A , containing all bounded functions
Q(s, a) which are the estimates of the total expected rewards when the agent is at state s, taking
                                                                                               S×A
action a. We extend it to a multi-objective value space by defining the value space as Q ∈ RL      ,
containing all bounded functions Q(s, a, ω) which are the estimates of expected total rewards under
                       PL
preference ω ∈ RL ≥0 :    i=0 ωi = 1. We then define a metric in this value space as:

                     d(Q, Q′ ) :=       sup       |ω T (Q(s, a, ω) − Q′ (s, a, ω))|.                    (3)
                                    s∈S,a∈A,ω∈Ω

This metric gives the distance between Q and Q′ as the supremum norm of the scalarized distance
between these two vectors where the identity of indiscernables (d(Q, Q′ ) = 0 ⇔ Q = Q′ ) does not
hold and thus, makes metric d a pseudo-metric. Further details for the axioms of this pseudo-metric
are given in Appendix A. In the following Theorem, we show that the metric space equipped with
this metric is complete since the limit of the sequence of operators is required to be in this space.
Theorem 1 (Multi-objective Metric Space (Q, d) is Complete). The metric space (Q, d) is complete
and every Cauchy sequence Qn (s, a, ω) is convergent in metric space (Q, d) ∀ s, a, ω ∈ S, A, Ω.

Given a policy π and sampled transition τ , we can define multi-objective Bellman’s evaluation
operator Tπ using the metric space (Q, d) as:
                         (Tπ Q)(s, a, ω) := r(s, a) + γET ∼(P,π) Q(s′ , a′ , ω)                         (4)
where (s′ , a′ , ω) denotes the next state-action-preference pair and γ ∈ (0, 1) is the discount factor.
We define a preference-driven optimality operator T by adding a cosine similarity term between
preference vectors and state-action values to the multi-objective Bellman’s optimality operator as:
 (T Q)(s, a, ω) := r(s, a) + γEs′ ∼P(·|s,a) Q(s′ , sup (Sc (ω, Q(s′ , a′ , ω)) · (ω T Q(s′ , a′ , ω))), ω)
                                                    a′ ∈A
                                                                                                   (5)
where Sc (ω, Q(s′ , a′ , ω)) denotes the cosine similarity between preference vector and Q-value. This
term enables our optimality operator to choose actions that align the preferences with the Q-values
and maximize the target value, as elaborated in Section 4.2 under the preference alignment subtitle.
Theorem 2 (Multi-objective Bellman’s Evaluation Operator is Contraction). Let (Q, d) be a complete
metric space (as in Theorem 1). Let Q and Q′ be any two multi-objective Q-value functions in this
space. The multi-objective Bellman’s evaluation operator is a contraction and d(Tπ Q, Tπ Q′ ) ≤
γd(Q, Q′ ) holds for the Lipschitz constant γ (the discount factor).
Theorem 3 (Preference-driven Multi-objective Bellman’s Optimality Operator is Contraction). Let
(Q, d) be a complete metric space. Let Q and Q′ be any two multi-objective Q-value functions in
this space. The preference-driven multi-objective Bellman’s optimality operator is a contraction and
d(T Q, T Q′ ) ≤ γd(Q, Q′ ) holds for the Lipschitz constant γ (the discount factor).


                                                    4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Theorem 2 and Theorem 3 state that multi-objective evaluation and optimality operators are contrac-
tions. They ensure that we can apply our optimality operator in Equation 5 iteratively to obtain the
optimal multi-objective value function given by Theorem 4 and Theorem 5 below, respectively.
Theorem 4 (Preference-driven Multi-objective Optimality Operator Converges to a Fixed-Point). Let
(Q, d) be a complete metric space which is proved above and let T : Q → Q be a contraction on Q
with modulus γ. Then, T has a unique fixed point Q∗ ∈ Q such that T (Q) = Q∗ .
Theorem 5 (Optimal Fixed Point of Optimality Operator). Let Q∗ ∈ Q be the optimal multi-objective
value function, such that it takes multi-objective Q-value corresponding to the supremum of expected
discounted rewards under a policy π then Q∗ = T (Q∗ ).

These two theorems state that applying our multi-objective optimality operator T iteratively on any
multi-objective Q-value function Q converges to the optimal Q∗ under metric d and the Bellman
equation holds at the same fixed-point. Hence, we use this optimality operator to obtain target values
when optimizing the loss function in Algorithm 1.

4.2   P REFERENCE D RIVEN MO-DDQN-HER AND MO-TD3-HER

The main objective of this work is to obtain a single policy network to approximate the Pareto
front that covers the entire preference space. For this purpose, we extend double deep Q-network
(DDQN) (Van Hasselt et al., 2016) to a multi-objective version (MO-DDQN) with the preference-
                                                                                             S×A
driven optimality operator to obtain a single parameterized function representing the Q ∈ RL
with parameters θ. This network takes s, ω as input and outputs |A| × L Q-values, as described in
Algorithm 1. To pull Q towards T (Q), MO-DDQN minimizes the following loss function at each
step k:
                                                   h                   2 i
                          Lk (θ) = E(s,a,r,s′ ,ω)∼D y − Q(s, a, ω; θ)                         (6)

where D is the experience replay buffer that stores transitions (s, a, r, s′ , ω) for every time step,
y = r + γQ(s′ , supa′ ∈A (Sc (ω, Q(s′ , a′ , ω)) · (ω T Q(s′ , a′ , ω))); θ′ ) denotes the preference-driven
target value which is obtained using target Q-network’s parameters θ′ . Here, Sc (ω, Q(s′ , a′ , ω))
denotes the cosine similarity between the preference vector and the Q-values. Without the cosine
similarity term, the supremum operator yields the action that only maximizes ω T Q(s′ , a′ , ω). This
may pull the target Q-values in the wrong direction, especially when the scales of the objectives
are in different orders of magnitude. For instance, let us assume a multi-objective problem with
percent energy efficiency (∈ [0, 1]) being the first objective and the latency (∈ [1, 10]) in milliseconds
being the second objective. Let us also assume that the preference vector (ω = {0.9, 0.1}) favors
the energy efficiency objective and there are two separate actions (a1 , a2 ) that yields Q-values of
Q1 = {0.9, 1}, Q2 = {0.1, 10} respectively. The supremum operator chooses action, a2 since
ω T Q2 = 1.09 is higher than ω T Q1 = 0.91. Since the scales of these two objectives are in different
orders of magnitudes, supa′ ∈A (ω T Q(s′ , a′ , ω)) always chooses the action that favors the latency
objective. This behavior negatively affects the training since the target Q-values are pulled in the
wrong direction. On the contrary, our novel cosine similarity term enables the optimality operator
to choose actions that align the preferences with the Q-values and maximize the target value at the
same time. The supremum operator now chooses action, a1 since Sc · ω T Q1 = 0.75 × 0.91 = 0.68
is higher than Sc · ω T Q2 = 0.12 × 1.09 = 0.13. With this addition, the algorithm disregards
the large ω T Q(s′ , a′ , ω) where the preference vector and the Q-values are not aligned since the
Sc (ω, Q(s′ , a′ , ω)) takes small values.
                                                                                              PL
For each episode during training, we randomly sample a preference vector (ω ∈ Ω : i=0 ωi = 1)
from a uniform distribution. For example, assume the randomly sampled preference vector (ω) favors
energy efficiency rather than speed in multi-objective continuous control tasks. Increasing energy effi-
ciency (i.e., lower speed) will increase the number of transitions before reaching a terminal condition
since it decreases the risk of reaching a terminal state (e.g., fall). Hence, transitions that favor speed
instead of energy efficiency may be underrepresented in the experience replay buffer in this example.
This behavior may create a bias towards overrepresented preferences, and the network cannot learn to
cover the entire preference space. To overcome this issue, we employ hindsight experience replay
buffer (HER) (Andrychowicz et al., 2017), where every transition is also stored with Nω randomly
                                  PL
sampled preferences (ω ′ ∈ Ω : i=0 ωi′ = 1) different than the original preference of the transition.

                                                     5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


To increase the sample efficiency of
our algorithm, we also divide the pref- Algorithm 1: Preference Driven MO-DDQN-HER
                                          Input: Minibatch size N , Number of time steps N ,
erence space into Cp sub-spaces (Ω̃), Discount factor γ, Targetmnetwork update coefficient τ ,
where Cp denotes the number of child Multi-dimensional interpolator I(ω).
processes. Each child process is re- Q    Initialize: Replay buffer D, Current Qθ and target network
                                                                                     ′
                                              ′ ← Qθ with parameters θ and θ .
sponsible for its own preference sub- forθ n = 0: N do
space. The agent, hence the network, is         // Child Process
                                                Initialize t = 0 and done = F alse.
shared among child processes and the            Reset the environment to randomly initialized state s0 .
main process. In each child process,            Sample a preference vector ω from the subspace Ω̃.
for each episode, we randomly sample            while done = F alse do
a preference vector from child’s prefer-
                                                      Observe (state st and select an action at ϵ-greedily:
                             PL                                a∈A                                      w.p. ϵ
                                                      at =
ence sub-space (ω ∈ Ω̃ : i=0 ωi =                              maxa∈A ωQ(st , a, ω; θ),                 w.p. 1 − ϵ
1). These Cp child processes run in par-              Observe r, s′ , and done.
allel to collect transitions. These tran-             Transfer (st , at , rt , s′ , ω, done) to main process.
sitions are stored inside the HER in the        // Main Process
                                                Sample Nω preferences ω ′
main process. Network architectures             for j = 1: Nω do
and implementation details are avail-                 Store transition (st , at , rt , s′ , ω ′j , done) in D
able Appendix B. This parallelization           Sample Nm transitions from D.
provides efficient exploration during           ω p ← I(ω)
                                                y ← r + γQ(s′ , supa′ ∈A (Sc (ω p , Q(s′ , a′ , ω)) ·
training.                                            T       ′  ′          ′
                                                                                             (ω Q(s , a , ω)); θ )
                                                                                                  2                   h                                    i
Preference alignment: A solution in              Lk (θ) = E(s,a,r,s′ ,ω)∼D y − Q(s, a, ω; θ)
the Pareto front may not align perfectly         Update θk by applying SGD to Lk (θ).
                                                                                   ′                   ′
with its preference vector. This may             Update target network parameters θk ← τ θk + (1 − τ )θk
result in a bias in our updating scheme
due to the cosine similarity term we introduced. To mitigate this adverse effect, we fit a multi-
dimensional interpolator to project the original preference vectors (ω ∈ Ω) to normalized solution
space to align preferences with the multi-objective solutions. We identify the key preferences and
obtain solutions for each of these preferences. We set key preference points as ω j = 1 : j = i, ω j =
0 : j ̸= i ∀ i, j ∈ {0, . . . , L} where ith element corresponds to the objective we try to maximize.
A preference vector of ω = { L1 , . . . , L1 } is also added to this key preference set. For example,
for a two-dimensional objective space, the key preference set becomes {[1, 0], [0.5, 0.5], [0, 1]}.
We first obtain solutions for each preference in this key preference set by training the agent with
a fixed preference vector and without using HER (see Figure 2(a)). We then use these solutions
to obtain a normalized solution space, as shown in Figure 2(b). Here, normalization is the process
of obtaining unit vectors for these solutions. For example, the normalized vector for a solution f
is described as fˆ = |ff | . Then, we use the normalized solution space and key preference point to
fit a multi-dimensional interpolator I(ω) to project the original preference vectors (ω ∈ Ω) to the
normalized solution space. As a result, we obtain projected preference vectors (ω p ) as illustrated
in Figure 2(c). These projected preference vectors are incorporated in the cosine similarity term of
the preference-driven optimality operator. This practical modification extends to theoretical results
as the proof for Theorem 3 is also valid for ω p . The interpolator is also updated during training as
PD-MORL may find new non-dominated solutions for identified key preferences.
Extension to continuous action space: Finally, we extend the TD3 algorithm to a multi-objective
version using PD-MORL for problems with continuous action space. In this case, the target values
are no longer computed using the optimality operator. Instead, the actions for the target Q-value are
                     a)                                       b)                                                          c)
Energy Efficiency


                              𝝎 = {𝟎, 𝟏}
                                                               0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1


                                                                                                                      0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1


                    140
                                           𝝎 = {𝟎. 𝟓, 𝟎. 𝟓}
                    120
                    100
                                                                                                                              𝝎𝟐


                     80
                     60
                     40                                                                  Normalized Solutions                                   Normalized Solutions
                     20                      𝝎 = {𝟏, 𝟎}                                  Preference Vectors                                     Preference Vectors
                          0    50   100 150 200 250                                  0    0.2   0.4 0.6     0.8   1                         0   0.2   0.4 0.6     0.8   1
                                    Forward Speed                                                                                                          𝝎𝟏


Figure 2: Overview of the interpolation scheme for the MO-Swimmer-v2 problem. (a) Obtained
solutions for key preference points. (b) Normalized solution space and corresponding preference
vectors. (c) Interpolated preference space.

                                                                                                 6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


determined by the target actor network. The actor network is updated to obtain a policy that maximizes
the Q-values generated by the critic network. This update rule eventually boils down to obtaining a
policy that maximizes the expected discounted rewards since, by definition, this expectation is the
Q-value itself. To incorporate the relation between preference vectors and Q-values for the multi-
objective version of TD3, we include a directional angle term g(ω, Q(s, a, ω; θ)) to both actor’s and
                                                                                         T
critic’s loss function. This directional angle term g(ω, Q(s, a, ω; θ)) = cos−1 ( ||ωω      Q(s,a,ω;θ)
                                                                                       p || ||Q(s,a,ω;θ)||
                                                                                                           )
denotes the angle between the preference vector (ω) and multi-objective Q-value Q(s, a, ω; θ) and
provides an alignment between preferences and the Q-values. Algorithm, network architectures, and
implementation details are available in Appendix B.1.5 and B.3.

5     E XPERIMENTS
This section extensively evaluates the proposed PD-MORL technique using commonly used MORL
benchmarks with discrete state-action spaces (Section 5.1) and complex MORL environments with
continuous state-action spaces (Section 5.2). Detailed descriptions of these benchmarks are provided
in Appendix B.2. Our results are compared to state-of-the-art techniques in terms of hypervolume,
sparsity, and the Pareto front plots.
5.1   MORL B ENCHMARKS WITH D ISCRETE S TATE -ACTION S PACES

This section illustrates the efficacy of PD-MORL in obtaining a single universal network that covers
the entire preference space in discrete state-action environments. We use the following commonly
used benchmarks to (i) make a fair comparison with prior work (Yang et al., 2019), and (ii) show that
PD-MORL scales to more than two objectives:
Deep Sea Treasure (DST) has discrete state (S ⊆ N2 ) and action spaces (A ⊆ N4 ). It has two
competing objectives: time penalty and treasure value. The treasure values increase as their distance
from the starting point s0 = (0, 0) increases. Agent gets a -1 time penalty for every time step.
Fruit Tree Navigation (FTN) has discrete state (S ⊆ N2 ) and action spaces (A ⊆ N2 ) with six
objectives: different nutrition facts of the fruits on the tree: {Protein, Carbs, Fats, Vitamins, Minerals,
Water}. The goal of the agent is to find a path on the tree to collect the fruit that maximizes the
nutrition facts for a given preference.
Figure 3 illustrates the policies achieved by PD-MORL for three preference vectors capture corner
cases. Although our policy is not specific to any preference, the submarine achieves optimal treasure
values for the given preference. For example, it finds the best trade-off within the shortest time
one step) when we only value the time penalty (w = {0, 1}). As the importance of the treasure
value increases (w ={0.5,0.5}, w = {1, 0}), it spends optimal amount of time (8 steps and 19
steps, respectively) to find a deeper treasure. Figure 4 provides further insights into the progression
of the policies found by PD-MORL. Let the first objective be the treasure value and the second
objective be the time penalty in this figure. At the beginning of the training, each child process starts
collecting transitions within their own preference sub-space Ω̃. Since the agent acts ϵ-greedily at
early phases and cannot reach the higher treasure values due to terminal condition (time limit), we
observe that most of the solutions are stuck in the first-subspace (Ω̃1 ) The transitions collected from
child processes are stored in the hindsight experience replay buffer with different preferences other
than their original preferences. This buffer enables extra exploration for the agent and leads the agent
to different sub-spaces, as illustrated in the middle figure. As the training progresses, HER and our
novel optimality operator with the angle term guide the search to expand the Pareto front and cover
the entire preference space with a single network.
Among existing algorithms that learns a unified policy (Yang et al., 2019; Abels et al.,
2019), the Envelope algorithm (Yang et al., 2019) is the superior and a more recent ap-
proach. Hence, we compare and evaluate PD-MORL and the Envelope algorithm on DST
and FTN by obtaining a set of preference vectors that covers the entire preference space.
           0.7                                                           0.7                                                           0.7
                 8.2                                                           8.2                                                           8.2
                       11.5                                                          11.5                                                          11.5
                              14.0 15.1 16.1                                                14.0 15.1 16.1                                                14.0 15.1 16.1



                                               19.6 20.3                                                     19.6 20.3                                                     19.6 20.3


                                                           22.4                                                          22.4                                                          22.4
                                                                  23.7                                                          23.7                                                          23.7


       Figure 3: Optimal policies obtained by the trained agent for three corner preferences.
                                                7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023



                                                            At the beginning                   Early phases              Consequent progression
PD-MORL achieves both 6.1% larger            "𝟏
                                             𝛀                   "𝟏
                                                                 𝛀                   "𝟏
                                                                                     𝛀
hypervolume and 56% lower sparsity              𝝎𝟏                  𝝎𝟏
                                                    𝛀"𝟐                 𝛀"𝟐                  𝛀"𝟐


                                              Objective 2


                                                                               Objective 2


                                                                                                                Objective 2
than the Envelope algorithm for DST
problem, as shown in Table 1. Simi-                       𝝎𝟐                  𝝎 𝟐

larly, PD-MORL generates up to 78%                            "  HER              "𝟑                "𝟑
                                                             𝛀𝟑                   𝛀     Angle       𝛀
larger hypervolume than the Envelope                                                    Term
algorithm for FTN. Since FTN is a bi-                        𝝎𝟑                   𝝎𝟑

nary tree, the distance between Pareto          Objective 1         Objective 1         Objective 1

solutions is the same, and hence, the           Figure 4: Policy progression during training.
sparsity metric is the same between the two approaches. Our experiments show that the improvement
of PD-MORL compared to the Envelope algorithm increases with the problem complexity (i.e.,
increasing tree depth), as shown in Table 1. PD-MORL provides efficient and robust exploration
using HER and our novel optimality operator together. Further comparisons against the Envelope
algorithm (Yang et al., 2019) are provided in Appendix B.4.
Table 1: Comparison of our approach with prior work (Yang et al., 2019) using two simple MORL
benchmarks in terms of hypervolume and sparsity metrics. Reference point for hypervolume calcula-
tion is set to (0,-19) and (0,0) for DST and FTN, respectively.
                                 Deep Sea Treasure               Fruit Tree Navigation (d=6)              Fruit Tree Navigation (d=7)
                               Hypervolume   Sparsity            Hypervolume                 Sparsity     Hypervolume                Sparsity
Envelope (Yang et al., 2019)     227.89             2.62             8427.51                   N/A             6395.27                 N/A
PD-MORL                          241.73             1.14             9299.15                   N/A            11419.58                 N/A


5.2    MORL B ENCHMARKS WITH C ONTINUOUS C ONTROL TASKS

This section evaluates PD-MORL on popular multi- Table 2: Environment details of continu-
objective continuous control tasks based on MuJoCo ous control benchmarks.
physics engine (Xu et al., 2020; Todorov et al., 2012).                         State Space Action Space
The environment details of these benchmarks are given MO-Walker2d-v2             S⊆R    17
                                                                                              A ⊆ R6
in Table 2. The action and state spaces take continuous MO-HalfCheetah-v2 S ⊆ R17             A ⊆ R6
values and consist of multiple dimensions, making these MO-Ant-v2                S ⊆ R27      A ⊆ R8
                                                                                        8
benchmarks challenging to solve. The goal is to tune the       MO-Swimmer-v2      S ⊆  R      A  ⊆ R2
                                                               MO-Hopper-v2      S ⊆ R11      A ⊆ R3
amount of torque applied on the hinges/rotors for a given
preference ω while satisfying multiple objectives (e.g., forward speed vs. energy efficiency, forward
speed vs. jumping height, etc.). We compare the performance of PD-MORL against two state-of-the-
art approaches (Xu et al., 2020; Chen et al., 2019) that use these continuous control benchmarks. We
emphasize that these approaches must learn a different policy network for every solution in the Pareto
front. In contrast, PD-MORL learns a single universal network that covers the entire preference
space. The Envelope algorithm (Yang et al., 2019) is not included in these comparisons since it
was not evaluated with continuous action spaces, and PD-MORL already outperforms it on simpler
problems. Training details are reported in Appendix B.3.
We first compare PD-MORL to prior work using hypervolume and sparsity metrics. Since
META (Chen et al., 2019) and PG-MORL (Xu et al., 2020) report the average of six runs, we
also ran each benchmark six times with PD-MORL. The average metrics are reported in Table 3,
while the standard deviations and results of individual runs are given in Appendix B.4 Table 8.
The desired Pareto front approximation should have high hypervolume and low sparsity metrics.
PD-MORL outperforms the current state-of-the-art techniques both in terms of hypervolume and
sparsity on every benchmark except MO-Hopper-v2, as summarized in Table 3. We emphasize
that our PD-MORL technique trains only a single network, while the other methods use customized
policies network for each Pareto point. For example, we achieve 12% higher hypervolume and 25%
better sparsity than the most competitive prior work PG-MORL (Xu et al., 2020) on the Walker
environment. They reported 263 Pareto front solutions for this environment. This corresponds to, in
total, 2.8 × 106 trainable parameters since they have different policy network for each solution. In
contrast, PD-MORL achieves better or comparable result using only 3.4 × 105 trainable parameters.
This may enable the deployment of PD-MORL in a real-life scenario where there are dynamic changes
in the design constraints and goals. We also note that PG-MORL achieves better sparsity metric for
MO-HalfCheetah-v2 and MO-Ant-v2 environments. However, PG-MORL also achieves a smaller
hypervolume compared to PD-MORL. This suggests that to determine the quality of a Pareto front,


                                                                 8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Table 3: Performance comparison of the proposed approach and state-of-the-art algorithms on the
continuous control benchmarks in terms of hypervolume and sparsity metrics. Reference point for
hypervolume calculation is set to (0,0) point. HV∗ : Hypervolume
                                       MO-Walker2d-v2                             MO-HalfCheetah-v2              MO-Ant-v2                     MO-Swimmer-v2           MO-Hopper-v2
                                       HV∗        Sparsity                        HV∗         Sparsity        HV∗        Sparsity              HV∗       Sparsity      HV∗       Sparsity
PG-MORL (Xu et al., 2020)           4.82 × 106   0.04 × 104        5.77 × 106                0.44 × 103    6.35 × 106   0.37 × 104        2.57 × 104       9.9      2.02 × 107    0.5 × 104
META (Chen et al., 2019)            2.10 × 106   2.10 × 104        5.18 × 106                2.13 × 103    2.40 × 104   1.56 × 104        1.23 × 104       24.4     1.25 × 107   4.84 × 104
PD-MORL (Ours)                      5.41 × 106   0.03 × 104        5.89 × 106                0.49 × 103    7.48 × 106   0.78 × 104        3.21 × 104       5.7      1.88 × 107   0.3 × 104

these metrics are rather limited and should be further investigated by the existing literature. Therefore,
we also plot Pareto front plots for all algorithms in Figure 5(a)-(e) to have a better understanding of
the quality of the Pareto front. Figure 5 shows that the proposed PD-MORL technique achieves a
broader and denser Pareto front than the state-of-the-art approaches despite using a single unified
network. PD-MORL mostly relies on the interpolation procedure before the actual training. The key
solutions obtained during this period determine the initial convergence of the algorithm. However,
for MO-Hopper-v2, the obtained key solutions for preference vectors {1, 0}, {0.5, 0.5}, {0, 1} are
{1778, 4971}, {1227, 1310}, {3533, 3165} respectively. These key solutions are not a good repre-
sentative of the Pareto front shown in Figure 5(e). To have representative key solutions is a limitation
of PD-MORL; however, it can be solved with hyperparameter tuning.
Finally, Figure 5(f) plots the progression of the hypervolume of the Pareto front for the environ-
ments with similar scales. The plots show that PD-MORL effectively pushes the hypervolume by
discovering new Pareto solutions with the help of efficient and robust exploration. We ensure this by
using HER, our novel directional angle term, and dividing the preference space into sub-spaces to
collect transitions in parallel. The progression of the Pareto front, sparsity, and hypervolume of all
benchmarks are provided in Appendix B.4.
                               a)      MO-Walker2d-v2                                   b)      MO-HalfCheetah-v2                        c)                MO-Ant-v2
           Energy Efficiency


                                                              Energy Efficiency


                                                                                                                         Y-axis Speed



                                                                                             PG-MORL [11]
                                                                                             META [24]
                                                                                             PD-MORL



                                    Forward Speed                                              Forward Speed                                      X-axis Speed
                                                                                                                                        ×106
                               d)       MO-Swimmer-v2                                   e)               MO-Hopper-v2                    f)
          Energy Efficiency


                                                              Jumping Height


                                                                                                                          Hypervolume


                                                                                                                                                                         ×106

                                    Forward Speed                                              Forward Speed                                         Time Steps

Figure 5: Pareto front comparison for continuous control tasks (a)-(e). Results for META and
PG-MORL are obtained from (Xu et al., 2020) and code base of PG-MORL. (f) Progression of
hypervolume of the Pareto front. Results for environments that have similar scales are given.
6      C ONCLUSIONS AND L IMITATIONS
Many real-life applications have multiple conflicting objectives that can change dynamically. Existing
MORL techniques either learn a different policy for each preference or fail to extend to complex
continuous state-action benchmarks. This paper presented a novel MORL technique that addresses
both of these limitations. It trains a universal network to cover the entire preference space using
the preferences as guidance to update the network, hence the name preference-driven MORL (PD-
MORL). We evaluated PD-MORL using both discrete and continuous benchmarks and demonstrated
that PD-MORL outperforms the state-of-the-art approaches.
PD-MORL aims to obtain a generalized network that covers the entire preference space. It updates
its network parameters by sampling transitions from HER. Since these transitions can represent
anywhere in the preference space, the updates should be conservative. Therefore, it may fail to obtain
a dense Pareto front on problems with massive action, state, and preference spaces which is the
primary concern of any MORL algorithm.


                                                                                                      9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This work was supported in part by NSF CAREER award CNS-1651624, and DARPA Young Faculty
Award (YFA) Grant D14AP00068.

E THICS S TATEMENT

This work introduces a novel multi-objective reinforcement learning approach scalable to continuous
control tasks. While reinforcement learning has several ethical consequences, especially in settings
where the automated decision affects humans directly, our algorithmic approach does not address
these concerns specifically. Therefore, we do not expect any ethical issues raised by our work. Instead,
it helps to alleviate these concerns since considering multiple objectives in societal problems enables
various trade-offs.

R EPRODUCIBILITY S TATEMENT

Proofs of all our theoretical results are given in Appendix A. Appendix B provides details of the
implementation of our approach and additional experimental results. The source code is attached
with the rest of the supplementary material, providing a complete description of the multi-objective
RL environments and instructions on reproducing our experiments.

R EFERENCES
Abbas Abdolmaleki, Sandy Huang, Leonard Hasenclever, Michael Neunert, Francis Song, Martina Zambelli,
  Murilo Martins, Nicolas Heess, Raia Hadsell, and Martin Riedmiller. A distributional view on multi-objective
  policy optimization. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 11–22. PMLR, 2020.

Axel Abels, Diederik Roijers, Tom Lenaerts, Ann Nowé, and Denis Steckelmacher. Dynamic weights in
  multi-objective deep reinforcement learning. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 11–20.
  PMLR, 2019.

Marcin Andrychowicz, Filip Wolski, Alex Ray, Jonas Schneider, Rachel Fong, Peter Welinder, Bob McGrew,
 Josh Tobin, OpenAI Pieter Abbeel, and Wojciech Zaremba. Hindsight experience replay. Advances in neural
 information processing systems, 30, 2017.

Xi Chen, Ali Ghadirzadeh, Mårten Björkman, and Patric Jensfelt. Meta-learning for multi-objective reinforce-
  ment learning. In 2019 IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems (IROS), pp.
  977–983. IEEE, 2019.

Scott Fujimoto, Herke Hoof, and David Meger. Addressing function approximation error in actor-critic methods.
  In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 1587–1596. PMLR, 2018a.

Scott Fujimoto, Herke Hoof, and David Meger. Addressing function approximation error in actor-critic methods.
  In International conference on machine learning, pp. 1587–1596. PMLR, 2018b.

Saurabh Gupta, Siddhant Bhambri, Karan Dhingra, Arun Balaji Buduru, and Ponnurangam Kumaraguru.
  Multi-objective reinforcement learning based approach for user-centric power optimization in smart home
  environments. In 2020 IEEE International Conference on Smart Data Services (SMDS), pp. 89–96. IEEE,
  2020.

Conor F Hayes, Roxana Rădulescu, Eugenio Bargiacchi, Johan Källström, Matthew Macfarlane, Mathieu
  Reymond, Timothy Verstraeten, Luisa M Zintgraf, Richard Dazeley, Fredrik Heintz, et al. A practical guide
  to multi-objective reinforcement learning and planning. Autonomous Agents and Multi-Agent Systems, 36(1):
  1–59, 2022.

Chunming Liu, Xin Xu, and Dewen Hu. Multiobjective reinforcement learning: A comprehensive overview.
  IEEE Transactions on Systems, Man, and Cybernetics: Systems, 45(3):385–398, 2014.

Azalia Mirhoseini, Anna Goldie, Mustafa Yazgan, Joe Jiang, Ebrahim Songhori, Shen Wang, Young-Joon Lee,
  Eric Johnson, Omkar Pathak, Sungmin Bae, et al. Chip placement with deep reinforcement learning. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2004.10746, 2020.


                                                     10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Volodymyr Mnih, Koray Kavukcuoglu, David Silver, Andrei A Rusu, Joel Veness, Marc G Bellemare, Alex
  Graves, Martin Riedmiller, Andreas K Fidjeland, Georg Ostrovski, et al. Human-level control through deep
  reinforcement learning. Nature, 518(7540):529–533, 2015.
Hossam Mossalam, Yannis M Assael, Diederik M Roijers, and Shimon Whiteson. Multi-objective deep
  reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:1610.02707, 2016.

Aviv Navon, Aviv Shamsian, Gal Chechik, and Ethan Fetaya. Learning the pareto front with hypernetworks.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2010.04104, 2020.

Hai Nguyen and Hung La. Review of deep reinforcement learning for robot manipulation. In 2019 Third IEEE
  International Conference on Robotic Computing (IRC), pp. 590–595. IEEE, 2019.

Simone Parisi, Matteo Pirotta, and Jan Peters. Manifold-based multi-objective policy search with sample reuse.
  Neurocomputing, 263:3–14, 2017.

Matteo Pirotta, Simone Parisi, and Marcello Restelli. Multi-objective reinforcement learning with continuous
 pareto frontier approximation. In Twenty-ninth AAAI conference on artificial intelligence, 2015.
Diederik M Roijers, Peter Vamplew, Shimon Whiteson, and Richard Dazeley. A survey of multi-objective
  sequential decision-making. Journal of Artificial Intelligence Research, 48:67–113, 2013.

Diederik M Roijers, Shimon Whiteson, Frans A Oliehoek, et al. Linear support for multi-objective coordination
  graphs. In AAMAS’14: Proceedings of the 2014 International Conference on Autonomous Agents & Multiagent
  Systems, pp. 1297–1304, 2014.

Tom Schaul, John Quan, Ioannis Antonoglou, and David Silver. Prioritized experience replay. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:1511.05952, 2015.

Kun Shao, Zhentao Tang, Yuanheng Zhu, Nannan Li, and Dongbin Zhao. A survey of deep reinforcement
  learning in video games. arXiv preprint arXiv:1912.10944, 2019.

David Silver, Aja Huang, Chris J Maddison, Arthur Guez, Laurent Sifre, George Van Den Driessche, Julian
  Schrittwieser, Ioannis Antonoglou, Veda Panneershelvam, Marc Lanctot, et al. Mastering the game of go with
  deep neural networks and tree search. Nature, 529(7587):484–489, 2016.

Emanuel Todorov, Tom Erez, and Yuval Tassa. Mujoco: A physics engine for model-based control. In 2012
  IEEE/RSJ international conference on intelligent robots and systems, pp. 5026–5033. IEEE, 2012.

Hado Van Hasselt, Arthur Guez, and David Silver. Deep reinforcement learning with double q-learning. In
  Proceedings of the AAAI conference on artificial intelligence, volume 30, 2016.
Kristof Van Moffaert, Madalina M Drugan, and Ann Nowé. Scalarized multi-objective reinforcement learning:
  Novel design techniques. In 2013 IEEE Symposium on Adaptive Dynamic Programming and Reinforcement
  Learning (ADPRL), pp. 191–199. IEEE, 2013.
Pauli Virtanen et al. SciPy 1.0: Fundamental Algorithms for Scientific Computing in Python, 2020.
  https://docs.scipy.org/doc/scipy/reference/generated/scipy.interpolate.
  RBFInterpolator.html#scipy.interpolate.RBFInterpolator, accessed 13 November
  2022.

Christopher JCH Watkins and Peter Dayan. Q-learning. Machine learning, 8(3):279–292, 1992.

Jie Xu, Yunsheng Tian, Pingchuan Ma, Daniela Rus, Shinjiro Sueda, and Wojciech Matusik. Prediction-guided
   multi-objective reinforcement learning for continuous robot control. In International Conference on Machine
   Learning, pp. 10607–10616. PMLR, 2020.

Runzhe Yang, Xingyuan Sun, and Karthik Narasimhan. A generalized algorithm for multi-objective reinforce-
  ment learning and policy adaptation. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 32:14636–14647,
  2019.

Liang Yu, Shuqi Qin, Meng Zhang, Chao Shen, Tao Jiang, and Xiaohong Guan. A review of deep reinforcement
   learning for smart building energy management. IEEE Internet of Things Journal, 2021.
Hao Zheng and Ahmed Louri. An energy-efficient network-on-chip design using reinforcement learning. In
  Proceedings of the 56th Annual Design Automation Conference 2019, pp. 1–6, 2019.

Marcela Zuluaga, Andreas Krause, and Markus Püschel. ε-pal: an active learning approach to the multi-objective
  optimization problem. The Journal of Machine Learning Research, 17(1):3619–3650, 2016.


                                                     11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


          Supplementary Material: PD-MORL:
    Preference-Driven Multi-Objective Reinforcement
                  Learning Algorithm


A     T HEORETICAL A NALYSIS OF THE D IRECTIONAL A NGLE G UIDED MORL
      A LGORITHM

This section introduces a theoretical analysis of the proposed PD-MORL algorithm. We follow the
theoretical framework for value-based MORL algorithms proposed by Yang et al. (2019), which
is based on Banach’s Fixed-Point Theorem (also known as Contraction Mapping Theorem). This
theorem states that every contraction on a complete metric space has a unique fixed-point. Considering
this, we define (i) contraction operators and (ii) a metric space to design our value-based MORL
algorithm.

A.1   M ETRIC S PACE

In standard Q-learning, the value space is defined as Q ∈ RS×A , containing all bounded functions
Q(s, a) which are the estimates of the total expected rewards when the agent is at state s, taking
                                                                                               S×A
action a. We extend it to a multi-objective value space by defining the value space as Q ∈ RL      ,
containing all bounded functions Q(s, a, ω) which are the estimates of expected total rewards under
                       PL
preference ω ∈ RL ≥0 :    i=0 ωi = 1. We then define a metric in this value space as:


                     d(Q, Q′ ) :=      sup        |ω T (Q(s, a, ω) − Q′ (s, a, ω))|.                         (7)
                                    s∈S,a∈A,ω∈Ω


This metric gives the distance between Q and Q′ as the supremum norm of the scalarized distance
between these two vectors. Notice that d should satisfy the following axioms to be considered as a
metric:

       • Non-negativity: d(Q, Q′ ) ≥ 0. This axiom holds for our metric d. The definition of
         supremum norm is the largest value of a set of absolute values, and thus, it is greater than or
         equal to zero.
       • Symmetry: d(Q, Q′ ) = d(Q′ , Q). Similarly to above axiom, this axiom also holds for d
         since absolute values are considered in supremum norm.
       • Triangle Inequality: d(Q, Q′ ) ≤ d(Q, Q′′ ) + d(Q′′ , Q′ ). This axiom holds for metric d
         as shown by the following proof:

            sup     |ω T (Q(s, a, ω) − Q′′ (s, a, ω))| +    sup       |ω T (Q′′ (s, a, ω) − Q′ (s, a, ω))|
          s∈S,a∈A                                          s∈S,a∈A
            ω∈Ω                                              ω∈Ω

                            ≥ |ω T (Q(s, a, ω) − Q′′ (s, a, ω))| + |ω T (Q′′ (s, a, ω) − Q′ (s, a, ω))|
                            ≥ |ω T (Q(s, a, ω) − Q′ (s, a, ω))|

         sups∈S,a∈A |ω T (Q(s, a, ω)     −    Q′′ (s, a, ω))|     +     sups∈S,a∈A |ω T (Q′′ (s, a, ω)       −
               ω∈Ω                                                            ω∈Ω
         Q′ (s, a, ω))| is the upper bound on the set |ω T (Q(s, a, ω) − Q′ (s, a, ω))|. Hence,


                                                   12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


         by definition of supremum norm (least upper bound):
              sup     |ω T (Q(s, a, ω) − Q′ (s, a, ω))| ≤      sup     |ω T (Q(s, a, ω) − Q′′ (s, a, ω))|
            s∈S,a∈A                                          s∈S,a∈A
              ω∈Ω                                              ω∈Ω

                                                         +    sup      |ω T (Q′′ (s, a, ω) − Q′ (s, a, ω))|
                                                             s∈S,a∈A
                                                               ω∈Ω

       • Identity of indiscernibles: d(Q, Q′ ) = 0 ⇔ Q = Q′ . This axiom does not hold for metric
         d since the dot product of different Q(s, a, ω) functions may result in same value for a
         specific preference vector ω.

In summary, the metric d is a pseudo-metric since the identity of indiscernibles does not hold for it.
In the following Theorem, we showed that the metric space equipped with this metric is complete
since the limit point of the sequence of operators is required to be in this space.
Theorem 1 (Multi-objective Metric Space (Q, d) is Complete). The metric space (Q, d) is complete
and every Cauchy sequence Qn (s, a, ω) is convergent in metric space (Q, d) ∀ s, a, ω ∈ S, A, Ω.

Proof. Let Qn (s, a, ω) be a Cauchy sequence in Q. Given ϵ > 0, there exist n, m ≥ N > 0 such
that sups∈S,a∈A,ω∈Ω |ω T (Qn (s, a, ω) − Qm (s, a, ω))| < ϵ. Hence,

|ω T (Qn (s, a, ω)−Qm (s, a, ω))| ≤ sup |ω T (Qn (s, a, ω)−Qm (s, a, ω))| < ϵ, ∀ s, a, ω ∈ S, A, Ω
                                        s∈S
                                        a∈A
                                        ω∈Ω

This implies that for each s, a, ω ∈ S, A, Ω, the sequence of L-dimensional real numbers Qn (s, a, ω)
is a Cauchy sequence. Since RL is complete, Qn (s, a, ω) is convergent. Let Q(s, a, ω) =
limn→∞ Qn (s, a, ω). Cauchy sequence in a normed space must be bounded. Let there be an M > 0
such that |ω T (Qn (s, a, ω))| ≤ sups∈S,a∈A,ω∈Ω |ω T (Qn (s, a, ω))| ≤ M, ∀ s ∈ S, a ∈ A, ω ∈ Ω.
Taking n → ∞, we find |ω T (Q(s, a, ω))| = limn→∞ ω T (Qn (s, a, ω)) ≤ M, ∀ s ∈ S, a ∈
A, ω ∈ Ω. This shows that Q(s, a, ω) is a bounded function and thus Q ∈ Q. For all n ≥ N ,
|ω T (Qn (s, a, ω)−Q(s, a, ω))| = lim |ω T (Qn (s, a, ω)−Qm (s, a, ω))| ≤ ϵ, ∀ s, a, ω ∈ S, A, Ω
                                      m→∞

and hence ∀ n ≥ N, sups∈S,a∈A,ω∈Ω |ω T (Qn (s, a, ω) − Q(s, a, ω))| ≤ ϵ. This implies that
Q(s, a, ω) is the limit of Qn (s, a, ω) and proves that Qn (s, a, ω) is convergent in Q.
This completes our proof that the metric space (Q, d) is complete.

A.2    M ULTI -O BJECTIVE B ELLMAN ’ S E VALUATION AND P REFERENCE -D RIVEN O PTIMALITY
       O PERATORS

Given a policy π and sampled transition τ , we can define multi-objective Bellman’s evaluation
operator Tπ using the metric space (Q, d) as:
                          (Tπ Q)(s, a, ω) := r(s, a) + γET ∼(P,π) Q(s′ , a′ , ω)                            (8)
where (s′ , a′ , ω) denotes the next state-action-preference pair and γ ∈ (0, 1) is the discount factor.
Theorem 2 (Multi-objective Bellman’s Evaluation Operator is Contraction). Let (Q, d) be a complete
metric space (as in Theorem 1). Let Q and Q′ be any two multi-objective Q-value functions in this
space. The multi-objective Bellman’s evaluation operator is a contraction and d(Tπ Q, Tπ Q′ ) ≤
γd(Q, Q′ ) holds for the Lipschitz constant γ (the discount factor).

Proof. We start by expanding the expression d(Tπ Q, Tπ Q′ ):

d(Tπ Q, Tπ Q′ ) =     sup     |ω T (Tπ Q(s, a, ω) − Tπ Q′ (s, a, ω))|
                    s∈S,a∈A
                      ω∈Ω

                = sup |γω T ET ∼(P,π) Q(s′ , a′ , ω) − γω T ET ∼(P,π) Q′ (s′ , a′ , ω)|
                    ω∈Ω


                                                    13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                 = γ · sup |ω T ET ∼(P,π) (Q(s′ , a′ , ω) − Q′ (s′ , a′ , ω))|
                       ω∈Ω

                 ≤ γ · sup ω T ET ∼(P,π) |Q(s′ , a′ , ω) − Q′ (s′ , a′ , ω)| (|E[·]| ≤ E[| · |])
                       ω∈Ω

                 = γ · sup ET ∼(P,π) |ω T (Q(s′ , a′ , ω) − Q′ (s′ , a′ , ω))|
                       ω∈Ω

                 ≤ γ · sup sup |ω T (Q(s′ , a′ , ω) − Q′ (s′ , a′ , ω))| (E[| · |] ≤ sup | · |)
                       ω∈Ω s′ ∈S
                           a′ ∈A
                           ω∈Ω

                 = γ · sup |ω (Q(s′ , a′ , ω) − Q′ (s′ , a′ , ω))| = γ · d(Q, Q′ )
                               T
                       s′ ∈S
                       a′ ∈A
                       ω∈Ω
d(Tπ Q, Tπ Q′ ) ≤ γ · d(Q, Q′ )

To avoid confusion, the last step (Step 7) has only one supremum norm since the outside supremum
does not see any variable. The definition of the variables ends with the inside supremum. This
completes our proof that multi-objective Bellman’s evaluation operator, Tπ , is contraction.

We define a preference-driven optimality operator T by adding a cosine similarity term between
preference vectors and state-action values to the multi-objective Bellman’s optimality operator as:
 (T Q)(s, a, ω) := r(s, a) + γEs′ ∼P(·|s,a) Q(s′ , sup (Sc (ω, Q(s′ , a′ , ω)) · (ω T Q(s′ , a′ , ω))), ω)
                                                        a′ ∈A
                                                                                                         (9)
where Sc (ω, Q(s′ , a′ , ω)) denotes the cosine similarity between preference vector and Q-value.
supa′ ∈A (Sc (ω, Q(s′ , a′ , ω)) · (ω T Q(s′ , a′ , ω))) yields the action a′ that maximizes the multiplica-
tion inside the supremum. This term enables our optimality operator to choose actions that align the
preferences with the Q-values and maximize the target value, as elaborated in Section 4.2 under the
preference alignment subtitle.
Theorem 3 (Preference-driven Multi-objective Bellman’s Optimality Operator is Contraction). Let
(Q, d) be a complete metric space. Let Q and Q′ be any two multi-objective Q-value functions in
this space. The preference-driven multi-objective Bellman’s optimality operator is a contraction and
d(T Q, T Q′ ) ≤ γd(Q, Q′ ) holds for the Lipschitz constant γ (the discount factor).

Proof. We use Sc (ω, Q(s′ , a′ , ω)) as Sc and Sc (ω, Q′ (s′ , a′′ , ω)) as Sc′ in the proof for notational
simplicity. We start by expanding the expression d(T Q, T Q′ ):

d(T Q, T Q′ ) =     sup      |ω T (T Q(s, a, ω) − T Q′ (s, a, ω))|
                   s∈S,a∈A
                     ω∈Ω

               =    sup        γω T Es′ ∼P(·|s,a) Q(s′ , sup (Sc ) · (ω T Q(s′ , a′ , ω)), ω)
                   s∈S,a∈A                              a′ ∈A
                     ω∈Ω

               − γω T Es′ ∼P(·|s,a) Q′ (s′ , sup (Sc′ ) · (ω T Q′ (s′ , a′′ , ω)), ω)
                                               a′′ ∈A
                                                h
               =γ·      sup        Es′ ∼P(·|s,a) ω T Q(s′ , sup (Sc ) · (ω T Q(s′ , a′ , ω)), ω)
                      s∈S,a∈A                                   a′ ∈A
                        ω∈Ω
                                                                      i
               − Q′ (s′ , sup (Sc′ ) · (ω T Q′ (s′ , a′′ , ω)), ω)
                          a′′ ∈A
                                                h
               ≤γ·      sup        Es′ ∼P(·|s,a) ω T Q(s′ , sup (Sc ) · (ω T Q(s′ , a′ , ω)), ω)
                      s∈S,a∈A                                   a′ ∈A
                        ω∈Ω
                                                                      i
               − Q′ (s′ , sup (Sc′ ) · (ω T Q′ (s′ , a′′ , ω)), ω)        (|E[·]| ≤ E[| · |])
                          a′′ ∈A

               ≤γ·      sup          sup      ω T Q(s′ , sup (Sc ) · (ω T Q(s′ , a′ , ω)), ω)
                      s∈S,a∈A s′ ∈S,ω∈Ω                  a′ ∈A
                        ω∈Ω


                                                        14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


               − Q′ (s′ , sup (Sc′ ) · (ω T Q′ (s′ , a′′ , ω)), ω)       (E[| · |] ≤ sup | · |)
                         a′′ ∈A

               =γ·       sup      ω T Q(s′ , sup (Sc ) · (ω T Q(s′ , a′ , ω)), ω)
                      s′ ∈S,ω∈Ω                  a′ ∈A

               − Q′ (s′ , sup (Sc′ ) · (ω T Q′ (s′ , a′′ , ω)), ω)       (Rearrange supremums)
                         a′′ ∈A


Let a′ be the action that maximizes (Sc ) · (ω T Q(s′ , a′ , ω)) for state s′ and preference ω, then we
have :

d(T Q, T Q′ ) ≤ γ · sup       ω T Q(s′ , a′ , ω) − Q′ (s′ , sup (Sc′ ) · (ω T Q′ (s′ , a′′ , ω)), ω)
                      s′ ∈S,ω∈Ω                                  a′′ ∈A


W.l.o.g we assume ω T Q(s′ , a′ , ω) − ω T Q′ (s′ , supa′′ ∈A (Sc′ ) · (ω T Q′ (s′ , a′′ , ω)), ω) ≥ 0. Proof
is similar for the other inequality case. Since ω T Q′ (s′ , a′ , ω) ≤ ω T Q′ (s′ , supa′′ ∈A (Sc′ ) ·
(ω T Q′ (s′ , a′′ , ω)), ω), we have:

d(T Q, T Q′ ) ≤ γ · sup           ω T Q(s′ , a′ , ω) − Q′ (s′ , a′ , ω) = γ · d(Q, Q′ )
                      s′ ∈S,a∈A
                          ω∈Ω
d(T Q, T Q′ ) ≤ γ · d(Q, Q )  ′



This completes our proof that preference-driven multi-objective Bellman’s optimality operator, T , is
contraction.

Theorem 2 and Theorem 3 state that multi-objective evaluation and optimality operators are contrac-
tions. They ensure that we can apply our optimality operator in Equation 9 iteratively to obtain the
optimal multi-objective value function given by Theorem 4 and Theorem 5 below, respectively.
Theorem 4 (Preference-driven Multi-objective Optimality Operator Converges to a Fixed-Point). Let
(Q, d) be a complete metric space which is proved above and let T : Q → Q be a contraction on Q
with modulus γ. Then, T has a unique fixed-point Q∗ ∈ Q such that T (Q) = Q∗ .

Proof. Let Q0 ∈ Q and define a sequence (Qn ) where Qn+1 = T (Qn ), n = 1, 2, . . .
                    d(Qn+1 , Qn ) = d(T (Qn ), T (Qn−1 ))
                                  ≤ γd(Qn , Qn−1 ) = γd(T (Qn−1 ), T (Qn−2 ))
                                         ≤ γ 2 d(Qn−1 , Qn−2 )
                                    ..
                                     .
                                         ≤ γ m d(Q1 , Q0 )
Hence, for m > n ∀ m, n ∈ N by the triangle inequality we have

             d(Qm , Qn ) ≤ d(Qm , Qm−1 ) + d(Qm−1 , Qm−2 ) + . . . + d(Qn+1 , Qn )
                           ≤ (γ m−1 + γ m−2 + . . . + γ n )d(Q1 , Q0 )
                               γn
                           ≤       d(Q1 , Q0 )
                             1−γ
                                                                             n
                                                                γ
Therefore, Qn is Cauchy: for ϵ > 0, let N be large enough that 1−γ d(Q1 , Q0 ) < ϵ, which ensures
that n, m > N ⇒ d(Qn , Qm ) < ϵ. Since (Q, d) is complete, Qn converges to Q∗ ∈ Q. Now, we
show that Q∗ is indeed a fixed point since Qn converges to Q∗ and T is continuous.
                   Q∗ = lim Qn = lim T (Qn−1 ) = T ( lim Qn−1 ) = T (Q∗ )
                          n→∞               n→∞                      n→∞


                                                         15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Finally, T cannot have more than one fixed point in (Q, d), since any pair of distinct fixed points Q∗1
and Q∗2 would contradict the contraction of T :
                             d(T (Q∗1 ), T (Q∗2 )) = d(Q∗1 , Q∗2 ) > γd(Q∗1 , Q∗2 )
This completes our proof that multi-objective optimality operator converges to Q∗ .
Theorem 5 (Optimal Fixed Point of Optimality Operator). Let Q∗ ∈ Q be the optimal multi-objective
value function, such that it takes multi-objective Q-value corresponding to the supremum of expected
discounted rewards under a policy π then Q∗ = T (Q∗ ).

Proof. We start by defining the optimal Q-function, Q∗ as:
                                                                                   ∞
                                                                                  hX                       i
                  Q∗ (s, a, ω) = argQ sup ω T ET ∼(P,π)|s0 =s,a0 =a                         γ t r(st , at ) .
                                           π∈Π                                        t=0


From Theorem 4 we observe that limn→∞ d(T n (Q), Q∗ ) = 0 for any Q ∈ Q. This sug-
gests that ω T T (Q∗ )(s, a, ω) = ω T Q∗ (s, a, ω) from the definition of metric d. Expanding the
ω T T (Q∗ )(s, a, ω), we have:
 T      ∗              T              T               ∗   ′                   ∗   ′    ′            T   ∗      ′   ′
ω T (Q )(s, a, ω) = ω r(s, a) + γ · ω Es′ ∼P(·|s,a) Q (s , sup (Sc (ω, Q (s , a , ω)) · (ω Q (s , a , ω))), ω).
                                                               a′ ∈A



Let a′ is the action that maximizes the supa′ ∈A (Sc (ω, Q∗ (s′ , a′ , ω)) · (ω T Q∗ (s′ , a′ , ω)) for state
s′ and preference ω. Then, by substituting Q∗ into T (Q∗ ) we have:
                                                          h                                       ∞
                                                                                                 hX                 ii
ω T T (Q∗ )(s, a, ω) = ω T r(s, a) + γ · ω T Es′ ∼P(·|s,a) argQ sup ω T ET ∼(P,π)|s0 =s′ ,a0 =a′    γ t r(st , at )
                                                                       π∈Π
                                                                                                                       t=0
                                                                                      ∞
                                                                                      X
                     = ω T r(s, a) + γ · ω T argQ sup ω T E T ∼(P,π)                         γ t r(st , at )
                                                       π∈Π             s0 ∼P(·|s,a) t=0


Now, we merge r(s, a) with the summation operation by rearranging the conditions of the expectation
operator and obtain:
                                                                 ∞
                                                                hX                i
                       = ω T argQ sup ω T ET ∼(P,π)|s0 =s,a0 =a    γ t r(st , at ) = ω T Q∗ (s, a, ω)
                                       π∈Π                                    t=0
  T         ∗               T   ∗
ω T (Q )(s, a, ω) = ω Q (s, a, ω)

This completes our proof that optimal multi-objective value function Q∗ is the fixed point of the
preference-driven multi-objective optimality operator T .

B     I MPLEMENTATION -T RAINING D ETAILS AND A DDITIONAL E XPERIMENTAL
      R ESULTS
This section provides details on the Preference-Driven MO-DDQN-HER and MO-TD3-HER algo-
rithms. It expands the explanation of the algorithms with implementation details. Then, it explains
the training details for all benchmarks. Furthermore, we provide additional experimental results for
discrete MORL and multi-objective continuous control benchmarks.

B.1     P REFERENCE -D RIVEN MO-DDQN-HER AND MO-TD3-HER

B.1.1       H INDSIGHT E XPERIENCE R EPLAY
                                                 PL
We randomly sample a preference vector (ω ∈ Ω : i=0 ωi = 1) from a uniform distribution in each
episode during training. Depending on the problem, the number of transitions observed by interacting
with the environment for some preferences may be underrepresented. This behavior creates a bias
towards overrepresented preferences, and the network cannot learn to cover the entire preference


                                                          16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


space. Therefore, we employ hindsight experience replay buffer (HER) (Andrychowicz et al., 2017),
                                                                                               PL
where every transition is also stored with Nω randomly sampled preferences (ω ′ ∈ Ω : i=0 ωi′ = 1)
from a uniform distribution different than the original preference of the transition. Specifically, for
each transition (s, a, r, s′ , ω, done), additional Nω transitions (s, a, r, s′ , ω ′ , done) are also stored
in the experience replay buffer. This strategy provides efficient exploration and generalizability to the
agent. Using HER, the agent learns to recover from undesired states and continue to align itself with
its original preference.

B.1.2    E XPLORATION IN PARALLEL
To further increase the sample efficiency of our algorithm, we equally divide the preference space into
Cp sub-spaces (Ω̃), where Cp denotes the number of child processes. The number of child processes
Cp is set to 10 for all benchmarks. The agent is shared among these child processes and the main
process. In each child process, for each episode, we randomly sample a preference vector from
                                            PL
child’s preference sub-space (ω ∈ Ω̃ : i=0 ωi = 1). These Cp child processes run in parallel to
collect transitions. After collecting a transition, each child process transfers it to the main process and
waits for other child processes. After the main process receives transitions from every child process
and stores them using HER, the child processes continue to collect transitions. Since we collect and
store Cp transitions at every child-main process loop, networks are also updated Cp times. Parallel
exploration and HER together provides efficient exploration.

B.1.3    P REFERENCE A LIGNMENT WITH I NTERPOLATION
A solution in the Pareto front may not align perfectly with its preference vector. To mitigate this
adverse effect, we fit a multi-dimensional interpolator to project the original preference vectors
(ω ∈ Ω) to normalized solution space to align preferences with the multi-objective solutions.
Here, normalization is the process of obtaining unit vectors for these solutions. For example,
the normalized vector for a solution f is described as fˆ = |ff | . We identify the key preferences
and obtain solutions for each of these preferences without HER. We set key preference points as
ω j = 1 : j = i, ω j = 0 : j ̸= i ∀ i, j ∈ {0, . . . , L} where ith element corresponds to the objective
we try to maximize. A preference vector of ω = { L1 , . . . , L1 } is also added to this key preference set.
We first obtain solutions for each preference in this key preference set by training the agent with a
fixed preference vector and without using HER. We use these solutions first to obtain a normalized
solution space. Then, we use the normalized solution space and key preference vectors to fit a multi-
dimensional interpolator I(ω) to project the original preference vectors (ω ∈ Ω) to the normalized
solution space. We use radial basis function interpolation with linear kernel in this work (Virtanen et
al., 2020). As a result, we obtain projected preference vectors (ω p ) that are incorporated in the cosine
similarity term of the preference-driven optimality operator for the MO-DDQN-HER algorithm and
in the directional angle term for the MO-TD3-HER algorithm. The interpolator is also updated during
training as PD-MORL may find new non-dominated solutions for identified key preferences. To this
end, at every episode, we evaluate our agent using the key preference set.

B.1.4    D ETAILS ON MO-DDQN-HER
The main objective of this work is to obtain a single policy network to approximate the Pareto
front that covers the entire preference space. For this purpose, we extend double deep Q-network
(DDQN) (Van Hasselt et al., 2016) to a multi-objective version (MO-DDQN) with the preference-
driven optimality operator. Algorithm 2 describes the training using the proposed MO-DDQN-HER.
We first initialize an empty buffer D, Q-network and target Q-network with parameters θ and θ′ .
The preference space is then equally divided into Cp sub-spaces, where we initialize a child process
for each sub-space. In each child process, for each episode, we randomly sample a preference
                                                            PL
vector from child’s preference sub-space (ω ∈ Ω̃ : i=0 ωi = 1). The agent interacts with the
environment using ϵ-greedy policy and collect transition (s, a, r, s′ , ω, done). This transition is then
transferred to the main process. After main process receives transitions from every child process,
                       PL D. For each transition, we also store Nω transitions where a different
it stores transitions inside
preference (ω ′ ∈ Ω : i=0 ωi′ = 1) is sampled. Specifically, for each transition (s, a, r, s′ , ω, done),
additional Nω transitions (s, a, r, s′ , ω ′ , done) are also stored in D. We then sample a minibatch of


                                                    17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


transitions from D to update the network. To calculate the cosine similarity metric, we first project the
preferences ω to normalized solution space and obtain projected preferences ω p . MO-DDQN-HER
minimizes the following loss function at each step k:
                                                   h                     2 i
                          Lk (θ) = E(s,a,r,s′ ,ω)∼D y − Q(s, a, ω; θ)                               (10)

where y = r + γQ(s′ , supa′ ∈A (Sc (ω, Q(s′ , a′ , ω)) · (ω T Q(s′ , a′ , ω))); θ′ ) denotes the preference-
driven target value which is obtained using target Q-network’s parameters θ′ . Instead of MSE, Smooth
L1 loss may also be used for this loss function. We soft update the target network at every time step k.
Note that each child process runs for N time steps. Hence, in total, we collect N × Cp transitions.
Algorithm 2: Preference Driven MO-DDQN-HER
Input: Minibatch size Nm , Number of time steps N ,
Discount factor γ, Target network update coefficient τ ,
Multi-dimensional interpolator I(ω).
Initialize: Replay buffer D, Current Qθ and target network Qθ′ ← Qθ with parameters θ and θ′ .
for n = 0: N do
    // Child Process
     Initialize t = 0 and done = F alse.
     Reset the environment to randomly initialized state s0 .
     Sample a preference vector ω from the subspace Ω̃.
    while done = F alse do
          Observe( state st and select an action at ϵ-greedily:
                  a∈A                                      w.p. ϵ
          at =
                  maxa∈A ωQ(st , a, ω; θ),                 w.p. 1 − ϵ
                        ′
          Observe r, s , and done.
          Transfer (st , at , rt , s′ , ω, done) to main process.
    // Main Process
     Store the transition (st , at , rt , s′ , ω, done) obtained from every child process in D.
     Sample Nω preferences ω ′
     for j = 1: Nω do
          Store transition (st , at , rt , s′ , ω ′j , done) in D
     Sample Nm transitions from D.
     ω p ← I(ω)
    y ← r + γQ(s′ , supa′ ∈A (Sc (ω p , Q(s′ , a′ , ω)) · (ω T Q(s′ , a′ , ω)); θ′ )
                                    h                          2 i
     Lk (θ) = E(s,a,r,s′ ,ω)∼D y − Q(s, a, ω; θ)
    Update θk by applying SGD to Lk (θ).
    Update target network parameters θk′ ← τ θk + (1 − τ )θk′


B.1.5    D ETAILS ON MO-TD3-HER
We extend the TD3 algorithm to a multi-objective version using PD-MORL for problems with contin-
uous action space. To incorporate the relation between preference vectors and Q-values for the multi-
objective version of TD3, we include a directional angle term g(ω, Q(s, a, ω; θ)) to both actor’s and
                                                                                       T
critic’s loss function. This directional angle term g(ω, Q(s, a, ω; θ)) = cos−1 ( ||ωω    Q(s,a,ω;θ)
                                                                                     p || ||Q(s,a,ω;θ)||
                                                                                                         )
denotes the angle between the preference vector (ω) and multi-objective Q-value Q(s, a, ω; θ) and
provides an alignment between preferences and the Q-values.
Similar to MO-DDQN-HER, we first initialize an empty buffer D, critic networks Qθ1 ,Qθ2 and actor
network πϕ with parameters θ1 , θ2 , and ϕ. We also initialize critic and actor target networks. The
process of initialization of child processes is the same with MO-DDQN-HER. The agent interacts
with the environment to collect transition (s, a, r, s′ , ω, done) by selecting actions according to a
policy with an exploration noise term ϵ. The utilization of HER for collected transitions is also the
same as the MO-DDQN-HER. We then sample a minibatch of transitions from D. The algorithm
computes actions for the next state using the target actor network plus a target smoothing noise. In
the conventional TD3 algorithm, both critics use a single target value to update their parameters
calculated using whichever of the two critics gives a smaller Q-value. In multi-objective version of
TD3, we modified this clipped double-Q-learning approach such that target Q-value is calculated


                                                    18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


using whichever of the two critics gives a smaller ω T Q. To calculate the directional angle term,
similar to MO-DDQN-HER, we project the preferences ω to normalized solution space and obtain
projected preferences ω p . MO-TD3-HER minimizes the following loss function to update both critic
networks at each step k:
                                  h                    2 i             h                        i
 Lcritick (θi ) = E(s,a,r,s′ ,ω)∼D y − Q(s, a, ω; θi )     + E(s,a,ω)∼D g(ω p , Q(s, a, ω; θi )) (11)

where y = r + γ argQ mini=1,2 ω T Q(s′ , ã, ω; θi′ ) denotes the target value which is obtained using
target critic network’s parameters. Instead of MSE, Smooth L1 loss may also be used for this loss
function. One of the essential tricks that TD3 has is that it updates actor and target networks less
frequently than the critics. The actor network is updated every pdelay step by maximizing the ω T Q
while minimizing the directional angle term using the following loss:
                                          h                                                i
         ∇ϕ Lactork (ϕ) = E(s,a,r,s′ ,ω)∼D ∇a ω T Q(s, a, ω; θ1 )|a=π(s,ω;ϕ) ∇ϕ π(s, ω; ϕ) +
                                         h                                                    i   (12)
                           α · E(s,a,ω)∼D ∇a g(ω p , Q(s, a, ω; θ1 )|a=π(s,ω;ϕ) ∇ϕ π(s, ω; ϕ)

where α denotes the loss coefficient to scale up the directional angle term to match the ω T Q term.
Here, we also soft update the target networks at every time step k. Similar to MO-DDQN-HER, each
child process runs for N time steps. Hence, in total, we collect N × Cp transitions during training.

Algorithm 3: Preference-Driven MO-TD3-HER
Input: Minibatch size Nm , Number of time steps N
Discount factor γ, Target network update coefficient τ ,
Multi-dimensional interpolator I(ω),
Policy update delay pdelay , Standard deviation for Gaussian exploration noise added to the policy σ,
Standard deviation for smoothing noise added to target policy σ ′ ,
Limit for absolute value of target policy smoothing noise c.
Initialize: Replay buffer D, Critic networks Qθ1 ,Qθ2 and actor network πϕ with parameters θ1 , θ2 , and ϕ,
Target networks Qθ1′ ← Qθ1 , Qθ2′ ← Qθ2 , πϕ′ ← πϕ ,
for n = 0: N do
    // Child Process
     Initialize t = 0 and done = F alse.
     Reset the environment to randomly initialized state s0 .
     Sample a preference vector ω from the subspace Ω̃
    while done = F alse do
          Observe state st and select an action with exploration noise at ∼ π(st , ω; ϕ) + ϵ : ϵ ∼ N (0, σ)
          Observe reward r, s′ , and done.
          Transfer (st , at , rt , s′ , ω, done) to main process.
    // Main Process
     Store the transition (st , at , rt , s′ , ω, done) obtained from every child process in D
     Sample Nω preferences ω ′
     for j = 1: Nω do
          Store transition (st , at , rt , s′ , ω ′j , done) in D
     Sample Nm transitions from D.
     ã ← π(s′ , ω; ϕ′ ) + ϵ : ϵ ∼ clip(N (0, σ ′ ), −c, c)
     y ← r + γ argQ mini=1,2 ω T Q(s′ , ã, ω; θi′ )
     ω p ← I(ω)
                                           ω T Q(s,a,ω;θi )
    g(ω p , Q(s, a, ω; θi )) ← cos−1 ( ||ωp ||p ||Q(s,a,ω;θi )|| )
                                     h                            2 i             h                        i
    Lcritick (θi ) = E(s,a,r,s′ ,ω)∼D y − Q(s, a, ω; θi )             + E(s,a,ω)∼D g(ω p , Q(s, a, ω; θi ))
    Update θik by applying SGD to Lcritick (θi ).
    if n mod pdelay then                  h                                               i
         ∇ϕ Lactork (ϕ) = E(s,a,r,s′ ,ω)∼D ∇a ω T Q(s, a, ω; θ1 )|a=π(s,ω;ϕ) ∇ϕ π(s, ω; ϕ) +
                        h                                                    i
          α · E(s,a,ω)∼D ∇a g(ω p , Q(s, a, ω; θ1 )|a=π(s,ω;ϕ) ∇ϕ π(s, ω; ϕ)
        Update target critics parameters θi′k ← τ θik + (1 − τ )θi′k
        Update target actor parameters ϕ′k ← τ ϕk + (1 − τ )ϕ′k


                                                          19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


B.2   B ENCHMARKS

We first evaluate PD-MORL’s performance on two commonly used discrete MORL benchmarks:
Deep Sea Treasure and Fruit Tree Navigation. For these benchmarks, we make use of the codebase
provided by Yang et al. (2019). We further evaluate PD-MORL on multi-objective continuous
control tasks such as MO-Walker2d-v2, MO-HalfCheetah-v2, MO-Ant-v2, MO-Swimmer-v2, and
MO-Hopper-v2. These benchmarks are presented by Xu et al. (2020) and are licensed under the
terms of the MIT license. The details for all benchmarks are provided below:
Deep Sea Treasure (DST): A well-studied MORL benchmark(Hayes et al., 2022; Liu et al., 2014)
where an agent is a submarine trying to collect treasures in a 10 × 11 grid-world. The treasure
values increase as their distance from the starting point s0 = (0, 0) increase. The submarine has two
objectives: the time penalty and the treasure value. The actions are navigation in four directions and
are discrete. The reward is a two-element vector. The first element shows the treasure value, and the
second element shows the time penalty.
Fruit Tree Navigation (FTN): A recent MORL benchmark presented by Yang et al. (2019).
It is a binary tree of depth d with randomly assigned reward r ∈ R6 on the leaf nodes.
These rewards show the amounts of six different nutrition facts of the fruits on the tree:
{P rotein, Carbs, F ats, V itamins, M inerals, W ater}. The goal of the agent is to find a path
on the tree to collect the fruit that maximizes the nutrition facts for a given preference.
MO-Walker2d-v2: The state space and action space is defined as S ⊆ R17 , A ⊆ R6 . The agent is
a two-dimensional two-legged figure. It has two objectives to consider: forward speed and energy
efficiency. The goal is to tune the amount of torque applied on the hinges for a given preference ω
while moving in the forward direction.
MO-HalfCheetah-v2: The state space and action space is defined as S ⊆ R17 , A ⊆ R6 . The agent
is a two-dimensional robot that resembles a cheetah. It has two objectives to consider: forward speed
and energy efficiency. The goal is to tune the amount of torque applied on the joints for a given
preference ω while running in the forward direction.
MO-Ant-v2: The state space and action space is defined as S ⊆ R27 , A ⊆ R8 . The agent is a 3D
robot that resembles an ant. It has two objectives to consider: x-axis speed and y-axis speed. The
goal is to tune the amount of torque applied on the hinges connecting the legs and the torso for a
given preference ω.
MO-Swimmer-v2: The state space and action space is defined as S ⊆ R8 , A ⊆ R2 . The agent is a
two-dimensional robot. It has two objectives to consider: forward speed and energy efficiency. The
goal is to tune the amount of torque applied on the rotors for a given preference ω while swimming
in the forward direction inside a two-dimensional pool.
MO-Hopper-v2: The state space and action space is defined as S ⊆ R11 , A ⊆ R3 . The agent is a
two-dimensional one-legged figure. It has two objectives to consider: forward speed and jumping
height. The goal is to tune the amount of torque applied on the hinges for a given preference ω while
moving in the forward direction by making hops.


B.3   T RAINING D ETAILS

We run all our experiments on a local server including Intel Xeon Gold 6242R. We do not use any
GPU in our implementation. For Deep Sea Treasure and Fruit Tree Navigation benchmarks, we
employ the proposed MO-DDQN-HER algorithm. The network here takes state s and preference ω
as inputs and outputs |A| × L Q-values. The number of hidden layers and hidden neurons among
other hyperparameters for MO-DDQN-HER are given in Table 4.
For continuous control benchmarks, we employ the proposed MO-TD3-HER algorithm. The critic
network takes state s, preference ω, and action a as input and outputs L Q-values for each objective.
The actor network takes state s and preference ω as inputs and outputs |A| actions. The number
of hidden layers and hidden neurons among other hyperparameters for MO-TD3-HER for each
continuous benchmark are given in Table 5. The hyperparameters are the same for all benchmarks
except the policy update delay for MO-Hopper-v2, which is set to 20.


                                                 20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


As it is elaborated in Section B.1.3, we first obtain key solutions for each of the preferences in the key
preference set to fit a multi-dimensional interpolator. Since we already know the Pareto front solutions
for discrete benchmarks, we directly use key solutions in the Pareto front to fit this interpolator. For
continuous control benchmarks, we train an agent utilizing the multi-objective version of TD3 with a
fixed key preference vector and without using HER. The number of hidden layers and hidden neurons
among other hyperparameters for this approach on each continuous benchmark are given in Table 6.

                                 Table 4: Hyperparameters for MO-DDQN-HER
                                                                    Deep Sea Treasure       Fruit Tree Navigation
                 Total number of steps (N )                             1 × 105                    1 × 105
                 Minibatch size (Nm )                                      32                         32
                 Discount factor (γ)                                      0.99                       0.99
                 Soft update coefficient (τ )                             0.005                      0.005
                 Buffer size                                            1 × 104                    1 × 104
                 Number of child processes (Cp )                           10                         10
                 Number of preferences sampled for HER (Nω )                3                          3
                 Learning rate                                         3 × 10−4                   3 × 10−4
                 Number of hidden layers                                    3                          3
                 Number of hidden neurons                                  256                        512


                                     Table 5: Hyperparameters for MO-TD3-HER
                                     MO-Walker2d-v2   MO-HalfCheetah-v2        MO-Ant-v2        MO-Swimmer-v2       MO-Hopper-v2
Total number of steps                    1 × 106           1 × 106                1 × 106            1 × 106           1 × 106
Minibatch size                             256               256                    256                256               256
Discount factor                           0.995             0.995                  0.995              0.995             0.995
Soft update coefficient                   0.005             0.005                  0.005              0.005             0.005
Buffer size                              2 × 106           2 × 106                2 × 106            2 × 106           2 × 106
Number of child processes                   10                10                     10                 10                10
Number of preferences
                                           3                    3                   3                   3                 3
sampled for HER
Learning rate-Critic                    3 × 10−4           3 × 10−4             3 × 10−4            3 × 10−4           3 × 10−4
Number of hidden layers - Critic            1                   1                   1                   1                  1
Number of hidden neurons - Critic          400                400                  400                 400                400
Learning rate-Actor                     3 × 10−4           3 × 10−4             3 × 10−4            3 × 10−4           3 × 10−4
Number of hidden layers - Actor              1                  1                    1                   1                  1
Number of hidden neurons - Actor           400                400                  400                 400                400
Policy update delay                         10                 10                   10                  10                 20
Exploration noise std.                     0.1                0.1                  0.1                 0.1                0.1
Target policy smoothing noise std.         0.2                0.2                  0.2                 0.2                0.2
Noise clipping limit                       0.5                0.5                  0.5                 0.5                0.5
Loss coefficient                            10                 10                   10                  10                 10


                 Table 6: Hyperparameters for MO-TD3 algorithm to obtain key solutions
                                     MO-Walker2d-v2   MO-HalfCheetah-v2        MO-Ant-v2        MO-Swimmer-v2       MO-Hopper-v2
Total number of steps                    2 × 106            2 × 106              1 × 106             1 × 106            1 × 106
Minibatch size                             100                100                  100                 100                100
Discount factor                            0.99               0.99                 0.99                0.99               0.99
Soft update coefficient                   0.005              0.005                0.005               0.005              0.005
Buffer size                              5 × 105            5 × 105              5 × 105             1 × 106            1 × 106
Learning rate-Critic                    3 × 10−4           3 × 10−4             3 × 10−4            3 × 10−4           3 × 10−4
Number of hidden layers - Critic             1                  1                    1                   1                  1
Number of hidden neurons - Critic          400                400                  400                 400                400
Learning rate-Actor                     3 × 10−4           3 × 10−4             3 × 10−4            3 × 10−4           3 × 10−4
Number of hidden layers - Actor              1                  1                    1                   1                  1
Number of hidden neurons - Actor           400                400                  400                 400                400
Policy update delay                          2                  2                    2                   5                 10
Exploration noise std.                      0.1                0.1                  0.1                 0.1                0.1
Target policy smoothing noise std.          0.2                0.2                  0.2                 0.2                0.2
Noise clipping limit                        0.5                0.5                  0.5                 0.5                0.5


B.4     A DDITIONAL E XPERIMENTAL R ESULTS

Since the main objective of this work is to obtain a single universal network that covers
the entire preference space, we first obtain a representative set of preference vectors. For
Deep Sea Treasure benchmark, we obtain a preference vector set with a step size of 0.01
({0, 1}, {0.01, 0.99}, . . . , {0.99, 0.01}, {1, 0}) Similarly, we obtain preference vector sets with a
step size of 0.1 and 0.001 for Fruit Tree Navigation and continuous control benchmarks, respectively.
Since the Envelope algorithm (Yang et al., 2019) is the superior and more recent approach that learns a
unified policy, we first compare PD-MORL with this algorithm using discrete MORL benchmarks. For
the Envelope algorithm, we use the authors’ codebase with their default hyperparameters mentioned


                                                               21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


in the paper since we believe that they are already optimized for these two benchmarks. In addition to
hypervolume and sparsity metrics that we provide in Section 5.1, we also compare PD-MORL with
the Envelope algorithm using the coverage ration F1 (CRF1) metric. This metric, which is coined
by Yang et al. (2019), evaluates the agent’s ability to recover optimal solutions in the Pareto front.
It is assumed that we have prior knowledge of the optimal solutions for these benchmarks. Let B
be the set of solutions obtained by the agent for various preferences, and let P be the Pareto front
set of solutions. The intersection between B and P with a tolerance of ϵ is defined as B ∩ P :=
b ∈ B|∃ p ∈ P : ∥b − p∥1 /∥p∥1 ≤ ϵ. The precision in this context is defined as P recision = |B∩P|B|
                                                                                                     |


and recall is defined as Recall = |B∩P   |                                          P recision]×Recall
                                     |P | . Then CRF1 is computed as CRF 1 = 2 P recision+Recall .
Table 7 summarizes the comparison of PD-MORL with the Envelope algorithm in terms of CRF1,
hypervolume, and sparsity metrics on discrete MORL benchmarks. We emphasize that our evaluation
process is more extensive than the work proposed by Yang et al. (2019). In their implementation, they
report an average of 2000 evaluation episodes where a random preference is sampled uniformly in each
episode. In contrast, evaluation of PD-MORL sweeps the entire preference space. The hypervolume
and sparsity values for both approaches are obtained through PD-MORL’s evaluation process and are
discussed in Section 5.1. In this table, we provide the CRF1 values reported in (Yang et al., 2019)
for the Envelope algorithm. PD-MORL achieves larger or the same CRF1 values compared to the
Envelope algorithm for all benchmarks. Specifically, it achieves up to 12% higher CRF1 for the Fruit
Tree Navigation task with a depth of d = 7. Additionally, a comparison with (Abels et al., 2019) is
given in Table 7 which shows the superiority of both the Envelope algorithm and PD-MORL over the
proposed algorithm by Abels et al. (2019) which also learns a unified policy.
Table 7: Comparison of our approach with prior works (Yang et al., 2019; Abels et al., 2019) using
discrete MORL benchmarks in terms CRF1, hypervolume, and sparsity metrics.∗ are the reported
values in (Yang et al., 2019).
                                        Deep Sea Treasure           Fruit Tree Navigation (d=5)            Fruit Tree Navigation (d=6)          Fruit Tree Navigation (d=7)
                               CRF1      Hypervolume    Sparsity   CRF1      Hypervolume   Sparsity     CRF1      Hypervolume      Sparsity   CRF1      Hypervolume    Sparsity
                                    ∗                                                                        ∗
Envelope (Yang et al., 2019)   0.994        227.89          2.62    1          6920.58       N/A        0.995       8427.51          N/A      0.819∗     6395.27         N/A
CN+DER (Abels et al., 2019)    0.989∗         –               –     1             –          N/A        0.9258∗        –             N/A      0.6719∗       –            N/A
Ours                              1         241.73          1.14    1          6920.58       N/A           1        9299.15          N/A        0.92     11419.58        N/A



For the continuous control benchmarks, we provide additional plots on the Pareto front and hypervol-
ume progression. Figure 6(a)-(e) shows the progression of the Pareto front solutions during training.
We plot the Pareto front solutions at early stages, mid stages, and late stages of the training process.
As the training progresses, the Pareto front expands to a broader and denser curve. This behavior is
supported by Figure 7(a)-(e), which shows the progression of the hypervolume for all benchmarks.
This figure shows that PD-MORL effectively pushes the hypervolume by discovering new Pareto
solutions with the help of efficient and robust exploration. For the MO-HalfCheetah-v2 problem, a
broad and dense Pareto front is already achieved at the early stages of the training. Therefore, we do
not observe the progression of the Pareto front and hypervolume for this specific benchmark.

                a)                                                      b)                                                    c)


                        MO-Walker2d-v2                                       MO-HalfCheetah-v2                                             MO-Ant-v2



                                             d)                                                    e)


                                                     MO-Swimmer-v2                                         MO-Hopper-v2



Figure 6: Pareto front progression for (a) MO-Walker-v2, (b) MO-HalfCheetah-v2, (c) MO-Ant-v2,
(d) MO-Swimmer-v2, (e) MO-Hopper-v2.

                                                                                     22
  Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


              ×106                                           ×106                                      ×106
               a)                                             b)                                        c)

Hypervolume


                     MO-Walker2d-v2                                 MO-HalfCheetah-v2                            MO-Ant-v2

                     Time Steps(×106)                                Time Steps(×106)                         Time Steps(×106)
                                         ×104                                   ×107
                                          d)                                     e)
                           Hypervolume


                                                MO-Swimmer-v2                             MO-Hopper-v2


                                                Time Steps(×106)                        Time Steps(×106)

 Figure 7: Hypervolume progression for (a) MO-Walker-v2, (b) MO-HalfCheetah-v2, (c) MO-Ant-v2,
 (d) MO-Swimmer-v2, (e) MO-Hopper-v2.


 We also report standard deviations for all benchmarks. As explained in the main manuscript, since
 META (Chen et al., 2019) and PG-MORL (Xu et al., 2020) report the average of six runs, we also
 ran each benchmark six times with PD-MORL. Table 8 reports average metrics as well as standard
 deviations obtained from these six runs. The standard deviations obtained from six runs are not
 reported in the prior work. This table shows that the individual differences of different runs are mostly
 three orders of magnitudes less than the average of these runs. This also suggests that PD-MORL
 achieves a generalizable network independent of starting state of the agent. We also provide more
 visual results for preferences that captures corner cases for these benchmarks in the supplementary
 video.
 Additionally, we conduct an ablation study to show the effects of the proposed angle term in the loss
 function and the proposed parallel exploration in our algorithm on continuous control benchmarks.
 Table 9 reports average metrics and standard deviations obtained from six runs. Since we fit a
 multi-dimensional interpolator using solutions with key preferences, the interpolator may introduce a
 bias at the beginning of the training depending on how representative these key solutions are. Hence,
 this bias may have a negative effect on the training. For tasks with a broad and more convex Pareto
 front, the probability of this bias increases as we choose key preferences from corner cases.


 Table 8: Performance comparison of the proposed approach and state-of-the-art algorithms on the
 continuous control benchmarks in terms of hypervolume and sparsity metrics. Reference point for
 hypervolume calculation is set to (0,0) point. HV∗ : Hypervolume
                                                    PG-MORL (Xu et al., 2020)    META (Chen et al., 2019)      PD-MORL (Ours)
                                          HV∗              4.82 × 106                     2.10 × 106           5.41 ± 0.004 × 106
  MO-Walker2d-v2
                                         Sparsity          0.04 × 104                     2.10 × 104            0.03 ± 0.005 × 104
                                          HV∗              5.77 × 106                     5.18 × 106            5.89 ± 0.002 × 106
  MO-HalfCheetah-v2
                                         Sparsity          0.44 × 103                     2.13 × 103             0.49 ± 0.041 × 103
                                          HV∗              6.35 × 106                     2.40 × 104            7.48 ± 0.019 × 106
  MO-Ant-v2
                                         Sparsity          0.37 × 104                     1.56 × 104              0.78 ± 0.2 × 104
                                          HV∗              2.57 × 104                     1.23 × 104            3.21 ± 0.001 × 104
  MO-Swimmer-v2
                                         Sparsity              9.9                           24.4                    5.7 ± 0.7
                                          HV∗              2.02 × 107                     1.25 × 107             1.88 ± 0.005 × 107
  MO-Hopper-v2
                                         Sparsity           0.5 × 104                     4.84 × 104             0.3 ± 0.09 × 104



                                                                         23
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Table 9: Ablation study of the proposed approach with and without proposed terms and improvements
on continuous control benchmarks in terms of hypervolume and sparsity metrics. Reference point for
hypervolume calculation is set to (0,0) point. HV∗ : Hypervolume
                                                            PD-MORL w/o            PD-MORL w/o
                               PG-MORL (Xu et al., 2020)                                                   PD-MORL
                                                             Angle Term          Parallel Exploration
                     HV∗              4.82 × 106           5.51 ± 0.004 × 106     2.81 ± 0.009 × 106    5.41 ± 0.004 × 106
MO-Walker2d-v2
                    Sparsity          0.04 × 104           0.02 ± 0.004 × 104     0.22 ± 0.026 × 104     0.03 ± 0.005 × 104
                     HV∗              5.77 × 106           5.61 ± 0.003 × 106     5.84 ± 0.001 × 106    5.89 ± 0.002 × 106
MO-HalfCheetah-v2
                    Sparsity          0.44 × 103           49.73 ± 3.917 × 103   1.218 ± 0.172 × 103     0.49 ± 0.041 × 103
                     HV∗              6.35 × 106           9.12 ± 0.017 × 106     4.98 ± 0.237 × 106    7.48 ± 0.019 × 106
MO-Ant-v2
                    Sparsity          0.37 × 104            0.58 ± 0.09 × 104     0.91 ± 0.25 × 104      0.78 ± 0.2 × 104
                     HV∗              2.57 × 104           2.78 ± 0.001 × 104     3.21 ± 0.001 × 104    3.21 ± 0.001 × 104
MO-Swimmer-v2
                    Sparsity              9.9                   6.3 ± 0.9              9.4 ± 1.1             5.7 ± 0.7
                     HV∗              2.02 × 107           1.92 ± 0.023 × 107     0.63 ± 0.005 × 107    1.88 ± 0.005 × 107
MO-Hopper-v2
                    Sparsity           0.5 × 104            6.1 ± 2.30 × 104     20.53 ± 33.20 × 104    0.3 ± 0.09 × 104



Therefore, by removing the angle term in the loss function and thus, removing the bias, the perfor-
mance of our algorithm slightly degrades due to the convex and broad nature of the Pareto front in
MO-Walker2d-v2 and MO-Ant-v2 problems. However, removing the angle term has a negative effect
for MO-HalfCheetah-v2 and MO-Hopper-v2, where the Pareto front is dense. Figure 8 shows the
obtained Pareto front with and without the directional angle term in the loss function. The solutions
obtained without the directional angle term are sparse. Specifically, for MO-HalfCheetah-v2, Table 9
shows that both the hypervolume and the sparsity metrics are negatively affected. For MO-Hopper-v2,
although the hypervolume metric seems to be increased, the change in the sparsity metric suggests
that the algorithm cannot find a dense Pareto front. This, in fact, supports that the hypervolume alone
is insufficient to assess the quality of the Pareto front. We further investigate the effects of using
parallel exploration. To this end, we collect transitions using a single preference space instead of
dividing them into sub-spaces. Parallel exploration guarantees that obtained transitions are not biased
towards a preference sub-space. Hence, it increases the sample efficiency of the algorithm. Table 9
shows that removing the parallel exploration significantly reduces the performance of the algorithm.
For all tasks, the hypervolume metric decreases, and the sparsity metric increases. We also observe
that both PG-MORL and PD-MORL with proposed novel aspects are superior to PD-MORL without
the novel aspects. This observation is crucial since the prior work uses PPO, whereas PD-MORL
uses TD3 in their algorithm pipeline. Using this observation, we conclude that the superiority of
PD-MORL is due to the proposed novel aspects.


                         MO-HalfCheetah-v2                                      MO-Hopper-v2



Figure 8: Pareto front with and without the directional angle term in the loss function for MO-
HalfCheetah-v2 and MO-Hopper-v2 problems. In the latter case, the solutions are sparse and
represented by few points.


                                                           24
