Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


A DVERSARIAL C OUNTERFACTUAL E NVIRONMENT
M ODEL L EARNING
 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review

                                              A BSTRACT

         A good model for action-effect prediction, i.e., the environment model, is essential
         for sample-efficient policy learning, in which the agent can take numerous free
         trials to find good policies. Currently, the model is commonly learned by fitting
         historical transition data through empirical risk minimization (ERM). However, we
         discover that simple data fitting can lead to a model that will be totally wrong in
         guiding policy learning due to the selection bias in offline dataset collection. In this
         work, we introduce weighted empirical risk minimization (WERM) to handle this
         problem in model learning. A typical WERM method utilizes inverse propensity
         scores to re-weight the training data to approximate the target distribution. However,
         during the policy training, the data distributions of the candidate policies can be
         various and unknown. Thus, we propose an adversarial weighted empirical risk
         minimization (AWRM) objective that learns the model with respect to the worst
         case of the target distributions. We implement AWRM in a sequential decision
         structure, resulting in the GALILEO model learning algorithm. We also discover
         that GALILEO is closely related to adversarial model learning, explaining the
         empirical effectiveness of the latter. We apply GALILEO in synthetic tasks and
         verify that GALILEO makes accurate predictions on counterfactual data. We
         finally applied GALILEO in real-world offline policy learning tasks and found that
         GALILEO significantly improves policy performance in real-world testing.

1    I NTRODUCTION
A good environment model is important for sample-efficient decision-making policy learning tech-
niques like reinforcement learning (RL) (James & Johns, 2016). The agent can take trials with this
model to find better policies, then the costly real-world trial-and-errors can be saved (James & Johns,
2016; Yu et al., 2020) or completely waived (Shi et al., 2019). In this process, the core of the models
is to answer queries on counterfactual data unbiasedly, that is, given states, correctly answer what
might happen if we were to carry out actions unseen in the training data (Levine et al., 2020).
Requiring counterfactual queries makes the environment model learning essentially different from
standard supervised learning (SL) which directly fits the offline dataset. In real-world applications,
the offline data is often collected with selection bias, that is, for each state, each action might be
chosen unfairly. Seeing the example in Fig. 1(a), to keep the ball following a target line, a behavior
policy will use a smaller force when the ball’s location is closer to the target line. When a dataset is
collected with selection bias, the association between the (location) states and (force) actions will
make SL hard to identify the correct causal relationship of the states and actions to the next states
respectively. Then when we query the model with counterfactual data, the predictions might be
catastrophic failures. In Fig. 1(c), it mistakes that smaller forces will increase the ball’s next location.
Generally speaking, the problem corresponds to a challenge of training the model in one dataset but
testing in another dataset with a shifted distribution (i.e., the dataset generated by counterfactual
queries), which is beyond the SL’s capability as it violates the independent and identically distributed
(i.i.d.) assumption. The problem is widely discussed in causal inference for individual treatment
effects (ITEs) estimation in many scenarios like patients’ treatment selection (Imbens, 1999; Alaa
& van der Schaar, 2018). ITEs are the effects of treatments on individuals, which are measured
by treating each individual under a uniform policy and evaluate the effect differences. Practical
solutions use weighted empirical risk minimization (WERM) to handle this problem (Jung et al., 2020;
Shimodaira, 2000; Hassanpour & Greiner, 2019). In particular, they estimate an inverse propensity
score (IPS) to re-weight the training data to approximate the data distribution under a uniform policy.
Then a model is trained under the reweighted data distribution. The distribution-shift problem is
solved as ITEs estimation and model training are under the same distribution.


                                                    1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023
      y                                                                                                                                                                          8


                                                                                                                                                variation of next y prediction
                   (4, 61) a =0.13 (6, 62.5) a =0                            80                                                                                                              real
                                                                                                                                                                                 6


                                                    ball's y-axis location
                                                                             70                                                                                                              AWRM-oracle
     target line                                                             60                                                                                                  4           GALILEO
                                                                                                                                                                                             SL
                    (3, 57) a=0.4                                            50                                                                                                  2
                                     (5, 62.3)                                                                                                                                   0
                                                                             40
              (2, 45) a =1.17        a =0.02                                 30   real                                                                                           2
                                                                             20
                                                                                  AWRM-oracle                                                                                    4
                                                                                  GALILEO
          (1, 10) a =3.5                                                     10   SL                                                                                             6
                                                                              0                                                                                                  8
                                              x                                   0
                                                                                      action
                                                                                                 2                                       4                                           1.0 0.5 0.0 0.5 1.0
                                                                                                                                                                                 variation of action value
            (a) A selection bias example            (b) prediction for training                                                                                                  (c) response curve
Figure 1: An example of selection bias and predictions under counterfactual queries. Subfigure (a)
shows how the data is collected: a ball locates in a 2D plane whose position is (xt , yt ) at time t. The
ball will move to (xt+1 , yt+1 ) according to xt+1 = xt + 1 and yt+1 ∼ N (yt + at , 2). Here, at is
chosen by a control policy at ∼ N ((ϕ − yt )/15, 0.05) parameterized by ϕ, which tries to keep the
ball near the line y = ϕ. In Subfigure (a), ϕ is set to 62.5. Subfigure (b) shows the collected training
data (grey dashed line) and the two learned models’ prediction of the next position of y. All the
models discovered the relation that the corresponding next y will be smaller with a larger action.
However, the truth is not because the larger at causes a smaller yt+1 , but the policy selects a
small at when yt is close to the target line. When we estimate the response curves by fixing yt and
reassigning action at with other actions at + ∆a, where ∆a ∈ [−1, 1] is a variation of action value,
the model of SL will exploit the association and give opposite responses, while in AWRM and its
practical implementation GALILEO, the predictions are closer to the ground truths. The result is in
Subfigure (c), where the darker a region is, the more samples are fallen in.
The selection bias can be regarded as an instance of the problem called “distributional shift” in
offline model-based RL, which has also received great attention (Levine et al., 2020; Yu et al., 2020;
Kidambi et al., 2020; Chen et al., 2021). However, previous methods, where naive supervised
learning is used for environment model learning, ignore the problem in environment model learning                                                                                                            to Reviewer rQ79
but handling the problem by suppressing the policy explo-
                                                                                          mean square error (MSE) in the dataset
                                                                                 AWRM-oracle
ration and learning in risky regions. Although these methods     200             GALILEO
                                                                 175             SL
have made great progress in many tasks, so far, how to learn
                                                                 150
a better environment model that can alleviate the problem for
                                                                 125
faithful offline policy optimization has rarely been discussed.
                                                                                                                                   100
In this work, for faithful offline policy optimization, we in-                                                                      75

troduce WERM to environment model learning. The extra                                                                               50
                                                                                                                                    25
challenge of model learning for policy optimization is that we
                                                                                                                                     0
have to query numerous different policies’ feedback besides                                                                              0.0 12.5 25.0 37.5 50.0 62.5 75.0 87.5 100.0 112.5 125.0
                                                                                                                 adversarial policy's parameter of the counterfactual dataset
the uniform policy for finding a good policy. Thus the target
data distribution to reweight can be various and unknown. To
solve the problem, we propose an objective called adversar-   Figure 2: An illustration of the predic-
ial weighted empirical risk minimization (AWRM). AWRM         tion error in counterfactual datasets.
introduces adversarial policies, of which the corresponding   The prediction risks is measured with
counterfactual dataset has the maximal prediction error of    mean square error (MSE). The error of
the model. For each iteration, the model is learned to be     SL is small only in training data (ϕ =
as small prediction risks as possible under the adversarial   62.5) but becomes much larger in the
counterfactual dataset. However, the adversarial counterfac-  dataset “far away from” the training
tual dataset cannot be obtained in the offline setting, thus  data. AWRM-oracle selects the oracle
we derive an approximation of the counterfactual data dis-    worst counterfactual dataset for train-
tribution queried by the optimal adversarial policy and use   ing for each iteration (pseudocode is
a variational representation to give a tractable solution to  in Alg. 1) which reaches small MSE in
learn a model from the approximated data distribution. As     all datasets and gives correct response
a result, we derive a practical approach named Generative     curves (Fig. 1(c)). GALILEO approxi-
Adversarial offLIne counterfactuaL Environment mOdel          mates the optimal adversarial counter-
learning (GALILEO) for AWRM. Fig. 2 shows the differ-         factual data distribution based on the
ence in the prediction errors learned by these algorithms. We training data and model. Although the
also discover that GALILEO is closely related to existing     MSE of GALILEO is a bit larger than
generative-adversarial model learning techniques, explaining  SL in the training data, in the coun-
the effectiveness of the latter.                              terfactual datasets, the MSE is on the
                                                              same scale as AWRM-oracle.
Experiments are conducted in two synthetic and two realistic environments. The results in the
synthetic environments show that GALILEO can reconstruct correct responses for counterfactual
queries. The evaluation results in two realistic environments also demonstrate that GALILEO has


                                                               2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


better ability in counterfactual query compared with baselines. We finally search for a policy based
on the learned model in a real-world online platform. The policy significantly improves performance
in concerned business indicators.

2     R ELATED W ORK
We give related adversarial algorithms for model learning in the following and leave other related
work in Appx. F. GANTIE (Yoon et al., 2018) uses a generator to fill counterfactual outcomes for
each data pair and a discriminator to judge the source (treatment group or control group) of the
filled data pair. The generator is trained to minimize the output of the discriminator. GANITE is
trained until the discriminator cannot determine which of the components is the factual outcome. Bica
et al. (2020) propose SCIGAN to extend GANITE to continuous treatment effect estimation (a.k.a.,
dosage-response estimation) via a hierarchical discriminator architecture. In real-world applications,
environment model learning based on Generative Adversarial Imitation Learning (GAIL) has also
been adopted for sequential decision-making problems (Ho & Ermon, 2016). GAIL is first proposed
for policy imitation (Ho & Ermon, 2016), which uses the imitated policy to generate trajectories
by interacting with the environment. The policy is learned with the trajectories through RL which
maximizes the cumulative rewards given by the discriminator. Shi et al. (2019); Chen et al. (2019);
Shang et al. (2019) use GAIL for environment model learning by regarding the environment model
as the generator and the behavior policy as the “environment” in standard GAIL. These studies
empirically demonstrate that adversarial model learning algorithms have better generalization ability
for counterfactual queries, while our study reveals the connection between adversarial model learning
and the WERM through IPS. Our derived practical algorithm GALILEO is closely related to the
existing adversarial model learning algorithms, explaining the effectiveness of the latter.

3     P RELIMINARIES
3.1   S INGLE - STEP I NDIVIDUALIZED T REATMENT E FFECTS E STIMATION AND W EIGHTED
      E MPIRICAL R ISKS M INIMIZATION
We first introduce individualized treatment effects (ITEs) estimation (Rosenbaum & Rubin, 1983),
which can be regarded as the scenario in which the environment model has only a single step. ITEs
are typically defined as ITE(x) := E[M ∗ (y|x, 1)|A = 1, X = x] − E[M ∗ (y|x, 0)|A = 0, X = x],
where y is the feedback of the environment M ∗ (y|x, a), X denotes the state vector containing
pre-treatment covariates (such as age and weight), A denotes the treatment variable which is the
action intervening to the state X, and A should be sampled from a uniform policy. In the two-
treatment scenario, A is in {0, 1} where 1 is the action to intervene and 0 is the action to do
nothing. A correct ITEs estimation should be done in Randomized Controlled Trials (RCT) in
which we have the same probability of samples of A = 1 and A = 0 for each X. Here we
use lowercase x, a and y to denote samples of random variables X, A and Y , and use X , A and
Y to denote space of the samples. In practice, we prefer to estimate ITEs under observational
studies. In observational studies, datasets are pre-collected from the real world by a behavior
policy such as a human-expert policy. In this case, a common approach for estimating the ITEs
          ˆ i ) = ai (yiF − M (xi , 1 − ai )) + (1 − ai )(M (xi , 1 − ai ) − yiF ) (Shalit et al., 2017)
can be ITE(x
in deterministic prediction, where xi and yiF denote the covariate and factual feedback of the i-th
sample, and M ∈ M denotes an approximated feedback model. M is the space of the model. In
this formulation, the training set is an empirical factual data distribution PF = {(xi , ai )}ni and
the testing set is an empirical counterfactual data distribution PCF = {(xi , 1 − ai )}ni . If a does
not sample from a discrete uniform policy, i.e., the policy has selection bias, PF and PCF will be
two different distributions, which violate the i.i.d. assumption of standard supervised learning. In
                        ˆ
stochastic prediction, ITE(x)   = E[M (y|x, 1)] − E[M (y|x, 0)] and the counterfactual distribution for
testing is the dataset with action sampling from a uniform policy.
Generally speaking, in ITEs estimation, the risks of queries under counterfactual data are caused
by the gap between the policy in training and testing data distributions. Without further processing,
minimizing the empirical risks cannot guarantee the counterfactual-query risks being minimized.
Assuming that the policy in training data µ satisfies µ(a|x) > 0, ∀a ∈ A, ∀x ∈ X (often named
overlap assumption), a classical solution to handle the above problem is weighted empirical risk
minimization (WERM) through an inverse propensity scoring (IPS) term ω (Shimodaira, 2000;
Assaad et al., 2021; Hassanpour & Greiner, 2019; Jung et al., 2020):


                                                   3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Definition 3.1. The learning objective of WERM through IPS is formulated as
                      min L(M ) = min Ex,a,y∼pµM ∗ [ω(x, a)ℓ(M (y|x, a), y)],
                      M ∈M                M ∈M
                                                       β(a|x)                                            (1)
                                   s.t.    ω(x, a) =          ,
                                                       µ(a|x)
where β and µ denote the policies in testing and training domains, and pµM ∗ is the joint probability
pµM ∗ (x, a, y) := ρ0 (x)µ(a|x)M ∗ (y|x, a) in which ρ0 (x) is the distribution of state. M is the model
space. ℓ is a loss function for model learning.

The ω is also known as importance sampling (IS) weight, which corrects the sampling bias. In this
objective, ω is to align the training data distribution to the testing data. By selecting different ω̂
to approximate ω to learn the model M , current environment model learning algorithms for ITEs
estimation are fallen into the framework. In standard supervised learning and some works for ITEs
estimation (Wager & Athey, 2018; Weiss et al., 2015), ω̂(x, a) = 1 as the distribution-shift problem
is ignored. In Shimodaira (2000); Assaad et al. (2021); Hassanpour & Greiner (2019), ω = µ̂1 (i.e., β
a uniform policy) for balancing treatment and control group, where µ̂ is an approximation of behavior
policy µ. Note that it is a reasonable weight in ITEs estimation: ITEs are defined to evaluate the
effect of each state between treatment and control behavior under a uniform policy.
3.2 S EQUENTIAL D ECISION - MAKING S ETTING
Decision-making processes in a sequential environment are often formulated into Markov Decision
Process (MDP) (Sutton & Barto, 1998). MDP depicts an agent interacting with the environment
through actions. In the first step, states are sampled from an initial state distribution x0 ∼ ρ0 (x). Then
at each time-step t ∈ {0, 1, 2, ...}, the agent takes an action at ∈ A through a policy π(at |xt ) ∈ Π
based on the state xt ∈ X , then the agent receives a reward rt from a reward function r(xt , at ) ∈
R and transits to the next state xt+1 given by a transition function M ∗ (xt+1 |xt , at ) built in the
environment. Π, X , and A denote the policy, state, and action spaces.

4     M ETHOD
In this section, we first propose a new offline model-learning objective based on Def. 3.1 for policy
optimization tasks in Sec. 4.1; In Sec. 4.2, we derive a tractable solution to the proposed objective;
Finally, we give a practical implementation in Sec. 4.3.
4.1   P ROBLEM F ORMULATION
For offline policy optimization, we require the environment model to have generalization ability in
counterfactual queries since we need to query numerous different policies’ correct feedback from M .
Referring to the formulation of WERM through IPS in Def. 3.1, policy optimization requires M to
minimize counterfactual-query risks under numerous unknown different policies rather than a specific
target policy β. More specifically, the question is: If β is unknown and can be varied, how should
we reduce the risks in counterfactual queries? In this article, we call the model learning problem in
this setting “counterfactual environment model learning” and propose a new objective to handle the
problem. To be compatible with multi-step environment model learning, we first define a generalized
WERM through IPS based on Def. 3.1.
Definition 4.1. Given the MDP transition function M ∗ that satisfies M ∗ (x′ |x, a) > 0, ∀x ∈ X , ∀a ∈
A, ∀x′ ∈ X and µ satisfies µ(a|x) > 0, ∀a ∈ A, ∀x ∈ X , the learning objective of generalized
WERM through IPS is formulated as
                      min L(M ) = min Ex,a,x′ ∼ρµM ∗ [ω(x, a, x′ )ℓM (x, a, x′ )],
                     M ∈M              M ∈M

                                                            ρβM ∗ (x, a, x′ )                            (2)
                                   s.t.    ω(x, a, x′ ) =                     ,
                                                            ρµM ∗ (x, a, x′ )
where ρµM ∗ is the training data distribution (collected by policy µ), ρβM ∗ is the testing data distribution
(collected by policy β). We define ℓM (x, a, x′ ) := ℓ(M (x′ |x, a), x′ ) for brevity.

In an MDP, given any policy π, ρπM ∗ (x, a, x′ ) = ρπM ∗ (x)π(a|x)M ∗ (x′ |x, a) where ρπM ∗ (x)
                P∞ t measure of x for
denotes the occupancy                      policy π, which can be defined as ρπM ∗ (x) :=
                                       ∗
(1 − γ)Ex0 ∼ρ0 [ t=0 γ Pr(xt = x|x0 , M )] (Sutton & Barto, 1998; Ho & Ermon, 2016) where


                                                       4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Prπ [xt = x|x0 , M ∗ ] is the state visitation probability that the policy π visits x at time-step t by
executing in the environment M ∗ and starting at the state x0 , and γ ∈ [0, 1] is the discount factor.
Here we also define ρπM ∗ (x, a) := ρπM ∗ (x)π(a|x) for simplicity. In this definition, ω can be rewritten
                   ρβ     (x)β(a|x)M ∗ (x′ |x,a)     ρβ   (x,a)
as: ω(x, a, x′ ) = ρM
                    µ
                      ∗
                                  ∗  ′
                      ∗ (x)µ(a|x)M (x |x,a)
                                            = ρM
                                               µ
                                                 ∗
                                                 ∗ (x,a)
                                                         . In single-step environments, for any policy π,
                    M                                 M

ρπM ∗ (x) = ρ0 (x). Then we have ω(x, a, x′ ) = ρρ00 (x)β(a|x)   β(a|x)
                                                     (x)µ(a|x) = µ(a|x) , and the objective is degraded to
Eq. 1. Therefore, Def. 3.1 is a special case of this generalized form.
Since β for counterfactual queries is unknown and can be varied in policy optimization, to reduce the
risks in counterfactual queries in this scenario, we introduce adversarial policies which can induce the
worst performance of the model predictions and propose to optimize WERM under the adversarial
policies. In particular, we propose Adversarial Weighted empirical Risk Minimization (AWRM)
based on Def. 4.1 to handle this problem.
Definition 4.2. Given the MDP transition function M ∗ , the learning objective of adversarial Weighted
empirical risk minimization through IPS is formulated as
       M̂ ∗ = min max L(ρβM ∗ , M ) = min max Ex,a,x′ ∼ρµM ∗ [ω(x, a|ρβM ∗ )ℓM (x, a, x′ )],
               M ∈M β∈Π                            M ∈M β∈Π
                                                                                                   (3)
                                   ρβ ∗ (x, a)
            s.t. ω(x, a|ρβM ∗ ) = µM           ,
                                   ρM ∗ (x, a)
where the re-weighting term ω(x, a|ρβM ∗ ) is conditioned on the data distribution ρβM ∗ of the adver-
sarial policy β. In the following, we will ignore ρβM ∗ and use ω(x, a) for brevity.
According to the definition of MDP, ω(x, a, x′ ) = ω(x, a) since the transition probability in the
ratio can be canceled. Eq. 3 minimizes the maximum model loss under all counterfactual data
distributions ρβM ∗ (x, a, x′ ), β ∈ Π to guarantee the generalization ability for counterfactual data
queried by policies in Π.
4.2   T RACTABLE AWRM S OLUTION
In this section, we propose a tractable solution to optimize Eq. 3. The full derivations can be found in
the Appx. A. We choose ℓM to be the negative log-likelihood loss and derive the solution to Eq. 3:
                                             h                                       i
                  L(ρβM ∗ , M ) = Ex,a∼ρµM ∗ ω(x, a|ρβM ∗ )EM ∗ (− log M (x′ |x, a)) ,
where EM ∗ [·] denotes Ex′ ∼M ∗ (x′ |x,a) [·]. The core problem is how to construct the data distribution
   ∗
ρβM ∗ of the best-response policy β ∗ in M ∗ as it is costly to get extra data from M ∗ in real-world
applications. Instead of deriving the optimal β ∗ , our solution is to offline estimate the optimal
                              ∗
adversarial distribution ρβM ∗ with respect to M , then we can construct a surrogate objective to
optimize M without directly querying the real environment M ∗ .
4.2.1 O PTIMAL A DVERSARIAL DATA D ISTRIBUTION A PPROXIMATION
Ideally, given any M , it is obvious that the optimal β is the one that makes ρβM ∗ (x, a) assign all
densities to the point that has the largest negative log-likelihood. However, searching for the maximum
is impractical, especially in continuous space. To give a relaxed but tractable solution, we add an L2
regularizer to the original objective Eq. 3:
                                                       h                                i α
 min max L̄(ρβM ∗ , M ) = min max Ex,a∼ρµM ∗ ω(x, a)EM ∗ [− log M (x′ |x, a)] − ∥ρβM ∗ (·, ·)∥22 ,
M ∈M β∈Π                      M ∈M β∈Π                                                       2
                                                                                                       (4)
where α denotes the regularization coefficient of ρβM ∗ and ∥ρβM ∗ (·, ·)∥22 = X ,A (ρβM ∗ (x, a))2 dadx.
                                                                                R
                                                                  ∗
Then we can approximate the optimal distribution ρβ̄M ∗ via Lemma. 4.3.
Lemma 4.3. Given any M in L̄(ρβM ∗ , M ), the distribution of the ideal best-response policy β̄ ∗
satisfies:
                          ∗                1
                        ρβ̄M ∗ (x, a) =      (DKL (M ∗ (·|x, a), M (·|x, a)) + HM ∗ (x, a)),           (5)
                                          αM
 where DKL (M ∗ (·|x, a), M (·|x, a)) is the Kullback-Leibler (KL) divergence between M ∗ (·|x, a)
and M (·|x, a), HM ∗ (x, a) denotes the entropy of M ∗ (·|x, a), and αM is the regularization coefficient
α in Eq. 4 and also as a normalizer of Eq. 5.


                                                           5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023



                    ∗
Intuitively, ρβ̄M ∗ has larger densities on the data where the divergence between the approximation
model and the real model (i.e., DKL (M ∗ (·|x, a), M (·|x, a))) is larger or the stochasticity of the real
model (i.e., HM ∗ ) is larger. However, the integral process of DKL in Eq. 5 is intractable in the offline
setting as it explicitly requires the conditional probability function of M ∗ . Our solution to solve
the problem is utilizing the offline dataset Dreal as the empirical joint distribution ρµM ∗ (x, a, x′ ) and
adopting practical techniques for distance estimation on two joint distributions, like GAN (Goodfellow
et al., 2014; Nowozin et al., 2016), to approximate Eq. 5. To adopt that solution, we should first
transform Eq. 5 into a form under joint distributions. Without loss of generality, we introduce an
intermediary policy κ, of which µ can be regarded as a specific instance. Then we have M (x′ |x, a) =                                                  to Reviewer bcJS
ρκM (x, a, x′ )/ρκM (x, a) for any M if ρκM (x, a) > 0. Assuming ∀x ∈ X , ∀a ∈ A, ρκM ∗ (x, a) > 0 if
    ∗
ρβ̄M ∗ (x, a) > 0, which will hold when κ overlaps with µ, then Eq. 5 can transform to:
                                                                                                                                       !
                                               ρκ ∗ (x, a, x′ ) ′                                    ρκ ∗ (x, a)
                    Z
          1
                          ρκM ∗ (x, a, x′ ) log M               dx − ρκM ∗ (x, a)                 log M          − HM ∗ (x, a)             ,
      α0 (x, a)         X                       ρκM (x, a, x′ )                                       ρκM (x, a)
                                                                                                       ρκ
 where α0 (x, a) = αM ρκM ∗ (x, a). We notice that the form ρκM ∗ log ρMκ ∗ is the integrated function
                                                                        M
in reverse KL divergence, which is an instance of f function in f -divergence (Ali & Silvey, 1966).
                                                                                     ∗
Replacing that form with f function, we obtain a generalized representation of ρβ̄M ∗ :
                                                                                                                                        !
                                                            ρκM (x, a, x′ )
                              Z                                                                           κ
  ∗             1                                                                                        ρM (x, a)
  β̄
ρ̄M  ∗ :=                          ρκM ∗ (x, a, x′ )f                               dx′ − ρκM ∗ (x, a) f                − H M ∗ (x, a)    ,
            α0 (x, a)          X                            ρκM ∗ (x, a, x′ )                            ρκM ∗ (x, a)
                                                                                                                                  (6)
                                                                                                                  ∗
 where f : R+ → R is a convex and lower semi-continuous (l.s.c.) function. ρ̄β̄M ∗ gives a generalized
representation of the optimal adversarial data distribution to maximize the error of the model. Based
                                                                                                    ∗
on Eq. 6, we have a surrogate objective of AWRM which can avoid querying M ∗ to construct ρβM ∗ :
                                   ∗
Theorem 4.4. Let ρ̄β̄M ∗ as the data distribution of the best-response policy β̄ ∗ in Eq. 4 under model
Mθ parameterized by θ, then we can find the optimal θ∗ of minθ maxβ∈Π L̄(ρβM ∗ , Mθ ) (Eq. 4)
                                                             ∗                     ∗
via iteratively optimizing the objective θt+1 = minθ L̄(ρ̄β̄M ∗ , Mθ ), where ρ̄β̄M ∗ is approximated via
the last-iteration model Mθt . Based on Corollary A.7, we derive an upper bound objective for
             ∗
minθ L̄(ρ̄β̄M ∗ , Mθ ):
                                                                        ρκMθ (x, a, x′ )                ρκMθ (x, a)
                          "                                                                  !                            !                   !#
                                 −1
θt+1 = min EρκM ∗                       log Mθ (x′ |x, a) f                     t
                                                                                                 −f          t
                                                                                                                              + HM ∗ (x, a)        ,
                θ             α0 (x, a)                                  ρκM ∗ (x, a, x′ )               ρκM ∗ (x, a)
                                                         |                                             {z                                      }
                                                                                                   W (x,a,x′ )

 where EρκM ∗ [·] denotes Ex,a,x′ ∼ρκM ∗ [·], f is a l.s.c function satisfying f ′ (x) ≤ 0, ∀x ∈ X , and
α0 (x, a) = αMθt ρκM ∗ (x, a).

Thm. 4.4 approximately achieve AWRM by using κ and a pseudo-reweighting module W . W assigns
learning propensities for data points with larger differences between distributions ρκMθ and ρκM ∗ . By
                                                                                         t
adjusting the weights, the learning process will exploit subtle errors in any data point, whatever how
many proportions it contributes, to correct potential generalization errors on counterfactual data.

4.2.2       T RACTABLE S OLUTION TO T HM . 4.4
                                       ρκ
                                        M   (x,a,x′ )             ρκ
                                                                   M    (x,a)
In Thm. 4.4, the term f ( ρκ θ∗t(x,a,x′ ) ) − f ( ρκ θ∗t(x,a) ) is still intractable. To solve the problem, first,
                            M                      M
we resort to the first-order approximation of f . Given some u ∈ (1 − ξ, 1 + ξ), ξ > 0, we have
                                                   f (u) ≈ f (1) + f ′ (u)(u − 1),                                                             (7)
            ′                                                                                                         ′
where f is the first-order derivative of f . By Taylor’s formula and the fact that f (u) of the generator
function f is bounded in (1 − ξ, 1 + ξ), the approximation error is no more than O(ξ 2 ). Let
u = p(x)                            p(x)                                      ′ p(x) p(x)
     q(x) in Eq. 7, the pattern f ( q(x) ) in Thm. 4.4 can be converted to f ( q(x) )( q(x) − 1) + f (1).
p(x)                                                    ′ p(x)
q(x) can be approximated by sampling from datasets and f ( q(x) ) can be approximated by the
corresponding variational representation Tφ∗ according to Lemma A.9 (Nowozin et al., 2016) (see


                                                                          6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Appendix for details). Based on any specific f -function, we can represent Tφ with a discriminator
Dφ . However, Thm. 4.4 holds only when ∀x ∈ X , f ′ (x) ≤ 0. It can be verified that the instance
f (u) = u log u − (u + 1) log(u + 1), Tφ (u) = log Dφ (u) satisfy this condition (see Tab. 2 in the
Appendix). We select that instance for the tractable solution. In summary, by computing f (·) with
first-order approximation (Eq. 7) and leveraging the variational representation Tφ∗ = log Dφ∗ to
                        ρκ
                         M
approximate f ′ ( ρκ θ∗t ), we can optimize the surrogate objective in Thm. 4.4 via:
                         M

                          Aφ∗0 ,φ∗1 (x, a, x′ ) log Mθ (x′ |x, a) + EρκM ∗ (HM ∗ (x, a) − Aφ∗0 ,φ∗1 (x, a, x′ )) log Mθ (x′ |x, a)

θt+1 = max EρκM
              θ      θt

           φ∗0 = arg max EρκM ∗ log Dφ0 (x, a, x′ ) + EρκM               log(1 − Dφ0 (x, a, x′ ))

 s.t.                                                                                                                 (8)
                      φ0                                            θt

           φ∗1 = arg max EρκM ∗ [log Dφ1 (x, a)] + EρκM [log(1 − Dφ1 (x, a))] ,
                      φ1                                       θt


 where Aφ∗0 ,φ∗1 (x, a, x′ ) = log Dφ∗0 (x, a, x′ ) − log Dφ∗1 (x, a), EρκM [·] is a simplification of
Ex,a,x′ ∼ρκM [·] and φ0 and φ1 are the parameters of Tφ0 and Tφ1 . Based on Lemma A.9, we have
      ρκ
       M    (x,a,x′ )                                    ρκ
                                                          M    (x,a)
f ′ ( ρκ θ∗t(x,a,x′ ) ) ≈ log Dφ∗0 (x, a, x′ ) and f ′ ( ρκ θ∗t(x,a) ) ≈ log Dφ∗1 (x, a). Note that in the process,
       M                                                  M
we ignore the term α0 (x, a) for simplifying the objective. The discussion on the impacts of removing
α0 (x, a) is left in App. B. In Eq. 8, the pseudo-reweighting module W in Thm. 4.4 is split into
two terms in the RHS of the equation. The first term is a generative adversarial training objective
regarding Mθ as the generator, while the second term is WERM through HM ∗ − Aφ∗0 ,φ∗1 .
4.3       P RACTICAL I MPLEMENTATION
To give a practical implementation of the solution, extra two assumptions introduced in the process
of modeling should be handled:
First, the approximation of Eq. 7 holds only when p(x)
                                                     q(x) is close to 1, which might not be satisfied. To
handle the problem, we inject a naive supervised learning loss and replace the second term of the
objective Eq. 8 when the expectation of Dφ0 in ρκMθ is far away from 0.5 (f ′ (1) = log 0.5);
                                                       t
Second, the overlap assumption of κ. In practice, we need to use the real-world data to construct
the distribution ρκM ∗ and the generative data to construct ρκMθ . In the offline model-learning setting,
                                                                 t
we only have a real-world dataset D collected by the behavior policy µ. We can learn a policy
µ̂ ≈ µ via behavior cloning based on D (Pomerleau, 1991; Ho & Ermon, 2016) and let µ̂ be the
policy κ. Then we can regard D as the empirical data distribution of ρκM ∗ and the trajectories to Reviewer bcJS
collected by µ̂ in the model Mθt as the empirical data distribution of ρκMθ . But the assumption
                                                                                  t
∀x ∈ X , ∀a ∈ A, µ(a|x) > 0 might not be satisfied. To handle the problem, in behavior cloning,
we model µ̂ with a Gaussian distribution and constrain the lower bound of the variance with a small
value ϵµ > 0 to keep the assumption holding. Besides, we add small Gaussian noises N (0, ϵD ) to
the inputs of Dφ to handle the mismatch between ρµM ∗ and ρµ̂M ∗ due to ϵµ .
In Eq. 8, HM ∗ is unknown in advance. In practice, we use HMθ to estimate it. More specifically, the
neural network of Mθ can be modeled with a Gaussian distribution. The variance of the Gaussian
distribution is modeled with global variables Σ for each dimension of output. We estimate HM ∗ with
the closed-form solution of Gaussian entropy through Σ.                                                                       to Reviewer bcJS
Based on the above techniques, we propose Generative Adversarial offLIne counterfactuaL
Environment mOdel learning (GALILEO) for environment model learning. GALILEO can be
adopted in both single-step and sequential environment model learning. The detailed implementation
and comparison to previous adversarial methods are in Appx. E.
5       E XPERIMENTS
In this section, we first conduct experiments in synthetic environments (Bica et al., 2020)
to verify GALILEO on counterfactual queries 1 and the compatibility of GALILEO in se-
quential
  hR      and single-step environments.
                                      i     We select Mean Integrated Square Error MISE =
           ∗                     2
E A (M (y|x, a) − M (y|x, a)) da as the metric, which is a commonly used metric to mea-
sure the accuracy in counterfactual queries by considering the prediction errors in the whole action
space. Then we analyze the benefits of the implementation techniques described in Sec. 4.3 and
    1
        the code will be released after the paper is published.


                                                              7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023
                           GALILEO                                                                      7                                                                        GALILEO
               35          SL                                                                           6                                                                        SL
               30          IPW                                                                                                                                                   IPW
                                                                                                        5


   root MISE
                           SCIGAN


                                                                                            root MISE
               25                                                                                                                                                                SCIGAN
                                                                                                        4
               20
                                                                                                        3
               15
                                                                                                        2
               10
                                                                                                        1
                5
                                                                                                        0
                        1      2      5     1       2        5      1       2       5
                    e1_p e1_p0.e1_p0.0e0.2_pe0.2_p0.0.2_p0.e00.05_p0.05_p0..05_p0.0                               s2 s20 s50 s2               s6     s8     s2     s6      s8
                                                  e               e     e0                                  t0_bia t0_bia t0_bia t1_bia t1_bia t1_bia t2_bia t2_bia t2_bia

                                         (a) GNFC                                                                                            (b) TCGA
Figure 3: Illustration of the performance in GNFC and TCGA. The grey bar denotes the standard
error (×0.3 for brevity) of 3 random seeds.
the problems without them. Finally, we deploy GALILEO in two complex environments: MuJoCo
in Gym (Todorov et al., 2012) and a real-world food-delivery platform to test the performance of
GALILEO in difficult tasks. The algorithms compared are: (1) Supervised Learning (SL): us-
ing standard empirical risk minimization for model learning; (2) Inverse Propensity Weighting
(IPW) (Spirtes, 2010): a standard implementation of WERM based IPS; (3) eStimating the effects
of Continuous Interventions using GANs (SCIGAN) (Bica et al., 2020): an adversarial algorithms
for model learning used for causal effect estimation, which can be roughly regarded as a partial
implementation of GALILEO (Refer to Appx. E.2). We give a detailed description in Appx. G.2.     to Reviewer rQ79

5.1            T EST IN S YNTHETIC E NVIRONMENTS
Test in sequential environments Since there does not exist a task specifically designed for se-
quential environment model learning with selection bias, we construct a task, General Negative
Feedback Control (GNFC), which can represent a classic type of task with policies having selection
bias. Fig. 1(a) is also an example of GNFC. We give detailed motivation, the effect of selection
bias, and other details in Appx. G.1.1. We construct tasks on GNFC by adding behavior policies
µ with different scales of uniform noise U (−e, e) with different probabilities p. In particular, with
e ∈ {1.0, 0.2, 0.05} and p ∈ {1.0, 0.2, 0.05}, we construct 9 tasks and name them with the format of
“e*_p*”. For example, e1_p0.2 is the task with behavior policy injecting with U (−1, 1) with 0.2
probability. The results of GNFC tasks are summarized in Fig. 3(a) and the detailed results can be
found in Tab. 8. The results show that the property of the behavior policy (i.e., e and p) dominates
the generalization ability of the baseline algorithms. When e = 0.05, almost all of the baselines fail
and give a completely opposite response curve (see Fig. 4(a) and Appx. H.2). IPW still perform well
when 0.2 ≤ e ≤ 1.0 but fails when e = 0.05, p <= 0.2. We also found that SCIGAN can reach
a better performance than other baselines when e = 0.05, p <= 0.2, but the results in other tasks
are unstable. GALILEO is the only algorithm that is robust to the selection bias and outputs correct
response curves in all of the tasks. Based on the experiment, we also indicate that the commonly used
overlap assumption is unreasonable to a certain extent especially in real-world applications since it is
impractical to inject noises into the whole action space. The problem of overlap assumption being
violated should be taken into consideration otherwise the algorithm will be hard to use in practice if
it is sensitive to the noise range.
                                                                                                                                        65    real                                  real
                                                                                                                                              GALILEO                       18      GALILEO
                                                                                                                                        60
                                                                                                                    averaged response


                                                                                                                                                        averaged response


Test in single-step environments Previous experiments                       SL            16         SL
                                                               55           IPW                      IPW
on counterfactual environment model learning are based         50           SCIGAN        14         SCIGAN
on single-step semi-synthetic data simulation (Bica et al.,    45
                                                                                          12
                                                               40
2020). Since GALILEO is compatible with single-step en-        35                         10
vironment model learning, we select the same task named        30                          8
TCGA in Bica et al. (2020) to test GALILEO. Based on              0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0    0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0
                                                                    normalized action        normalized action
three synthetic response functions in TCGA, we construct
9 tasks by choosing different parameters of selection bias      (a) e0.05_p0.2             (b) t0_bias20
on µ which is constructed with beta distribution, and de-
sign a coefficient c to control the selection bias of the Figure 4: Illustration of the averaged re-
beta distribution. We name the tasks with the format of sponse curves.
“t?_bias?”. For example, t1_bias2 is the task with the first response functions and c = 2. The
detail of TCGA is in Appx. G.1.2. The results of TCGA tasks are summarized in Fig. 3(b) and the
detailed results can be found in Tab. 9 in Appendix. We found the phenomenon in this experiment
is similar to the one in GNFC, which demonstrates the compatibility of GALILEO to single-step
environments. We also found that the results of IPW are unstable in this experiment. It might be
because the behavior policy is modeled with beta distribution while the propensity score µ̂ is modeled
with Gaussian distribution. Since IPW directly reweight loss function with µ̂1 , the results are sensitive


                                                                                        8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023

Table 1: Results of policy performance directly optimized through standard SAC (Haarnoja et al.,
2018) using the learned dynamics models and deployed in MuJoCo environments. MAX-RETURN
is the policy performance of SAC in the MuJoCo environments, and “avg. norm.” is the averaged
normalized return of the policies in the 9 tasks, where the returns are normalized to lie between 0 and
100, where a score of 0 corresponds to the worst policy, and 100 corresponds to MAX-RETURN.
 Task                       Hopper                                 Walker2d                               HalfCheetah                 avg. norm.
 Horizon        H=10         H=20         H=40         H=10         H=20          H=40         H=10         H=20          H=40            /
 GALILEO      13.0 ± 0.1   33.2 ± 0.1   53.5 ± 1.2   11.7 ± 0.2    29.9 ± 0.3    61.2 ± 3.4   0.7 ± 0.2   -1.1 ± 0.2    -14.2 ± 1.4           51.1
 SL            4.8 ± 0.5    3.0 ± 0.2    4.6 ± 0.2   10.7 ± 0.2    20.1 ± 0.8    37.5 ± 6.7   0.4 ± 0.5   -1.1 ± 0.6    -13.2 ± 0.3           21.1
 IPW           5.9 ± 0.7    4.1 ± 0.6    5.9 ± 0.2    4.7 ± 1.1     2.8 ± 3.9    14.5 ± 1.4   1.6 ± 0.2    0.5 ± 0.8    -11.3 ± 0.9           19.7
 SCIGAN       12.7 ± 0.1   29.2 ± 0.6   46.2 ± 5.2    8.4 ± 0.5     9.1 ± 1.7     1.0 ± 5.8   1.2 ± 0.3   -0.3 ± 1.0    -11.4 ± 0.3           41.8
 MAX-RETURN   13.2 ± 0.0   33.3 ± 0.2   71.0 ± 0.5   14.9 ± 1.3   60.7 ± 11.1   221.1 ± 8.9   2.6 ± 0.1   13.3 ± 1.1    49.1 ± 2.3        100.0


to the error on µ̂. GALILEO also models µ̂ with Gaussian distribution but the results are more stable
since GALILEO does not re-weight through µ̂ explicitly.
Response curve visualization We plot the averaged response curves which are constructed by
equidistantly sampling action from the action space and averaging the feedback of the states in the
dataset as the averaged response. Parts of the results in Fig. 4 (all curves can be seen in Appx. H.2).
For those tasks where baselines fail in reconstructing response curves, GALILEO not only reaches a
better MISE score but reconstructs almost exact responses.
Ablation studies In Sec. 4.3, we introduce several techniques to develop a practical GALILEO
algorithm. Based on task e0.2_p0.05 of GNFC, we give the ablation studies to investigate the
effects of these techniques. As the main-body space is limited, we leave the results in Appx. H.3.
5.2 T EST IN C OMPLEX E NVIRONMENTS
In MuJoCo tasks MuJoCo is a benchmark task in Gym (Todorov et al., 2012; Brockman et al.,
2016) where we need to control a robot with specific dynamics to complete some tasks (e.g., standing
or running). We select 3 environment from D4RL (Fu et al., 2020) to construct our model learning
tasks. We compare it with a standard transition model learning algorithm used in the previous
offline model-based RL algorithms (Yu et al., 2020; Kidambi et al., 2020), which is a variant of
supervised learning. We name the method OFF-SL. Besides, we also implement IPW and SCIGAN
as the baselines. In D4RL benchmark, only the “medium” tasks is collected with a fixed policy, i.e.,
the behavior policy is with 1/3 performance to the expert policy), which is most matching to our
proposed problem. So we train models in datasets HalfCheetah-medium, Walker2d-medium, and
Hopper-medium. We trained the models with the same gradient steps and saved the models.                    to Reviewer bcJS,
                                                                                                           j5p5, and rQ79
We first verify the generalization ability of the models by adopting them into offline model-based
RL. Instead of designing sophisticated tricks to suppress policy exploration and learning in risky
regions as current offline model-based RL algorithms (Yu et al., 2020; Kidambi et al., 2020) do, we
just use the standard SAC algorithm Haarnoja et al. (2018) to exploit the models for policy learning
to strictly verify the ability of the models. Unfortunately, we found that the compounding error will
still be inevitably large in the 1,000-step rollout, which is the standard horizon in MuJoCo tasks,
leading all models to fail to derive a reasonable policy. To better verify the effects of models on policy
optimization, we learn and evaluate the policies with three smaller horizons: H ∈ {10, 20, 40}.
The results are listed in Tab. 1. We first averaged the normalized return (refer to “avg. norm.”)
under each task, and we can see that the policy obtained by GALILEO is significantly higher than
other models (the improvements are 24% to 161%). At the same time, we found that SCIGAN
performed better in policy learning, while IPW performed similarly to SL. This is in line with
our expectations, since IPW only considers the uniform policy as the target policy for debiasing,
while policy optimization requires querying a wide variety of policies. Minimizing the prediction
risks only under a uniform policy cannot yield a good environment model for policy optimization.
Besides, in IPW, the cumulative effects of policy on the state distribution are ignored. On the
other hand, SCIGAN, as a partial implementation of GALILEO (refer to Appx. E.2), also roughly
achieves AWRM and considers the cumulative effects of policy on the state distribution, so its overall
performance is better; In addition, we find that GALILEO achieves significant improvement in 6 of
the 9 tasks. But in HalfCheetah, IPW works slightly better. However, compared with MAX-RETURN,
it can be found that all methods fail to derive reasonable policies because their policies’ performances
are far away from the optimal policy. By further visualizing the trajectories, we found that all the
learned policies just keep the cheetah standing in the same place or even going backward. This
phenomenon is also similar to the results in MOPO (Yu et al., 2020). In MOPO’s experiment in
the medium datasets, the truncated-rollout horizon used in Walker and Hopper for policy training
is set to 5, while HalfCheetah has to be set to the minimal value: 1. These phenomena indicate
that HalfCheetah may still have unknown problems, resulting in the generalization bottleneck of


                                                                    9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                                                                rescaled cumulative treatment effects


                                                                                                                                                                      rescaled five-minute order-taken rate
                                 1.00                                 GALILEO                                           1.0         random                                                                    1.00


    rescaled averaged response
                                                                      SL                                                            GALILEO
                                                                                                                                    SL                                                                        0.98
                                 0.98                                                                                   0.5                                                                                   0.96
                                 0.96                                                                                                                                                                         0.94
                                                                                                                        0.0                                                                                   0.92
                                 0.94                                                                                                                                                                         0.90
                                                                                                                        0.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                              0.88
                                 0.92                                                                                                                                                                                               treatment group (GALILEO)
                                                                                                                        1.0                                                                                   0.86                  control group
                                 0.90                                                                                                                                                                         0.84                  the day starting A/B test
                                        0.0   0.2   0.4   0.6   0.8       1.0                                                 0.0      0.2    0.4   0.6   0.8   1.0                                                  0   5     10      15          20
                                         normalized allocated allowances                                                      cumulative samples (rescaled to 1)                                                             day number
                            (a) response curves in City A                                                                           (b) AUUC curves                                                             (c) A/B test in the City A
Figure 5: An illustration of the performance in BAT tasks. In Fig. 5(a) demonstrate the averaged
response curves of the SL and GALILEO model in City A. It is expected to be monotonically
increasing through our prior knowledge. In Fig. 5(b), the model with larger areas above the “random”
line makes better predictions in randomized-controlled-trials data (Betlei et al., 2020). Fig. 5(c)
shows the daily responses in the A/B test in City A. The complete results are in Appx. H.6.
the models. Besides, we also test the prediction error of the learned model in corresponding unseen
“expert” and “medium-replay” datasets. The detailed results are in Appx. H.5.
In a real-world platform We finally deploy GALILEO in a real-world large-scale food-delivery
platform. The goal of the platform is to balance the demand from take-out food orders and the supply
of delivery clerks, i.e., helping delivery clerks fulfill more orders by giving reasonable strategies. We
focus on a Budget Allocation task to the Time period (BAT) in the platform (see Appx. G.1.3 for
details). The goal of the BAT task is to handle the imbalance problem between the demanded orders
from customers and the supply of delivery clerks in different time periods by allocating reasonable
allowances to those time periods. The core challenge of the environment model learning in BAT tasks
is similar to the challenge in Fig. 1. Specifically, the behavior policy in BAT tasks is a human-expert
policy, which tends to increase the budget of allowance in the time periods with a lower supply of
delivery clerks, otherwise tends to decrease the budget (Fig. 12 gives a real-data instance of this
phenomenon).
We first learn a model to predict the supply of delivery clerks (measured by fulfilled order amount)
on given allowances. Although the SL model can efficiently fit the offline data, the tendency of the
response curve is easily to be incorrect. As can be seen in Fig. 5(a), with a larger budget of allowance,
the prediction of the supply is decreased in SL, which obviously goes against our prior knowledge.
This is because, in the offline dataset, the corresponding supply will be smaller when the allowance
is larger. It is conceivable that if we learn a policy through the model of SL, the optimal solution
is canceling all of the allowances, which is obviously incorrect in practice. On the other hand, the
tendency of GALILEO’s response is correct. Fig. 13 plots all the results in 6 cities.                     to Reviewer rQ79
                                                                                                          and j5p5
Second, we conduct randomized controlled trials (RCT) in one of the testing cities. Using the RCT
samples, we can evaluate the generalization ability of the model predictions via Area Under the Uplift
Curve (AUUC) (Betlei et al., 2020), which measure the correctness of the sort order of the model
prediction in RCT samples. The AUUC further show that GALILEO gives a reasonable sort order on
the supply prediction (see Fig. 5(b)) while the standard SL technique fails to complete this task.
Finally, we search for the optimal policy via the cross-entropy method planner (Hafner et al., 2019)
based on the learned model and deploy the policy in a real-world platform. The results of A/B test in
City A is shown in Fig. 5(c). It can be seen that after the day of the A/B test, the treatment group
(deploying our policy) significant improve the five-minute order-taken rate than the baseline policy
(the same as the behavior policy). In summary, the policy improves the supply from 0.14 to 1.63
percentage points to the behavior policies in the 6 cities. The details of these results are in Appx. H.6.

6                                D ISCUSSION AND F UTURE W ORK
In this work, we propose AWRM which handles the generalization challenges of the counterfactual
environment model learning. By theoretical modeling, we give a tractable solution to handle AWRM
and propose GALILEO. GALILEO is verified in synthetic environments, complex robot control tasks,
and a real-world platform, and shows great generalization ability on counterfactual queries.
Giving correct answers to counterfactual queries is important for policy learning. We hope the work
can inspire researchers to develop more powerful tools for counterfactual environment model learning.
The current limitation lies in: There are several simplifications in the theoretical modeling process
(further discussion is in Appx. B), which can be modeled more elaborately . Besides, experiments on
MuJoCo indicate that these tasks are still challenging to give correct predictions on counterfactual
data. These should also be further investigated in future work.


                                                                                                                                              10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


R EFERENCES
Ahmed M. Alaa and Mihaela van der Schaar. Limits of estimating heterogeneous treatment effects:
  Guidelines for practical algorithm design. In Proceedings of the 35th International Conference on
 Machine Learning, volume 80, pp. 129–138, Stockholm, Sweden, 2018.

Syed Mumtaz Ali and Samuel D Silvey. A general class of coefficients of divergence of one
  distribution from another. Journal of the Royal Statistical Society: Series B (Methodological), 28
  (1):131–142, 1966.

Serge Assaad, Shuxi Zeng, Chenyang Tao, Shounak Datta, Nikhil Mehta, Ricardo Henao, Fan Li,
  and Lawrence Carin. Counterfactual representation learning with balancing weights. In Arindam
  Banerjee and Kenji Fukumizu (eds.), The 24th International Conference on Artificial Intelligence
  and Statistics, volume 130 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pp. 1972–1980, Virtual
  Event, 2021. PMLR.

Shai Ben-David, John Blitzer, Koby Crammer, and Fernando Pereira. Analysis of representations for
  domain adaptation. In Bernhard Schölkopf, John C. Platt, and Thomas Hofmann (eds.), Advances
  in Neural Information Processing Systems 19, pp. 137–144, British Columbia, Canada, 2006. MIT
  Press.

Shai Ben-David, John Blitzer, Koby Crammer, Alex Kulesza, Fernando Pereira, and Jennifer Wortman
  Vaughan. A theory of learning from different domains. Mach. Learn., 79(1-2):151–175, 2010.

Artem Betlei, Eustache Diemert, and Massih-Reza Amini. Treatment targeting by AUUC maximiza-
  tion with generalization guarantees. CoRR, abs/2012.09897, 2020.

Ioana Bica, James Jordon, and Mihaela van der Schaar. Estimating the effects of continuous-valued
  interventions using generative adversarial networks. In Advances in Neural Information Processing
  Systems 33, virtual event, 2020.

Greg Brockman, Vicki Cheung, Ludwig Pettersson, Jonas Schneider, John Schulman, Jie Tang, and
  Wojciech Zaremba. Openai gym. CoRR, abs/1606.01540, 2016.

Lars Buesing, Theophane Weber, Yori Zwols, Nicolas Heess, Sébastien Racanière, Arthur Guez, and
  Jean-Baptiste Lespiau. Woulda, coulda, shoulda: Counterfactually-guided policy search. In 7th
  International Conference on Learning Representations, New Orleans, LA, 2019.

Jonathon Byrd and Zachary Chase Lipton. What is the effect of importance weighting in deep
  learning? In Kamalika Chaudhuri and Ruslan Salakhutdinov (eds.), Proceedings of the 36th
  International Conference on Machine Learning, volume 97 of Proceedings of Machine Learning
  Research, pp. 872–881, Long Beach, CA, 2019. PMLR.

Xinshi Chen, Shuang Li, Hui Li, Shaohua Jiang, Yuan Qi, and Le Song. Generative adversarial
  user model for reinforcement learning based recommendation system. In Proceedings of the 36th
  International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 1052–1061, Long Beach, CA, 2019.

Xiong-Hui Chen, Yang Yu, Qingyang Li, Fan-Ming Luo, Zhiwei Tony Qin, Shang Wenjie, and
  Jieping Ye. Offline model-based adaptable policy learning. In Advances in Neural Information
  Processing Systems 34 (NeurIPS’21), Virtual Conference, 2021.

Corinna Cortes, Yishay Mansour, and Mehryar Mohri. Learning bounds for importance weighting.
  In John D. Lafferty, Christopher K. I. Williams, John Shawe-Taylor, Richard S. Zemel, and Aron
  Culotta (eds.), Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 23, pp. 442–450, British
  Columbia, Canada, 2010. Curran Associates, Inc.

Justin Fu, Aviral Kumar, Ofir Nachum, George Tucker, and Sergey Levine. D4RL: datasets for deep
  data-driven reinforcement learning. CoRR, abs/2004.07219, 2020.

Ian J. Goodfellow, Jean Pouget-Abadie, Mehdi Mirza, Bing Xu, David Warde-Farley, Sherjil Ozair,
  Aaron C. Courville, and Yoshua Bengio. Generative adversarial nets. In Advances in Neural
  Information Processing Systems 27, pp. 2672–2680, Montréal, Canada, 2014.


                                                11
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Tuomas Haarnoja, Aurick Zhou, Pieter Abbeel, and Sergey Levine. Soft Actor-Critic: Off-policy
  maximum entropy deep reinforcement learning with a stochastic actor. In Proceedings of the
  35th International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 1856–1865, Stockholmsmässan, Sweden,
  2018.
Danijar Hafner, Timothy P. Lillicrap, Ian Fischer, Ruben Villegas, David Ha, Honglak Lee, and James
  Davidson. Learning latent dynamics for planning from pixels. In Kamalika Chaudhuri and Ruslan
  Salakhutdinov (eds.), Proceedings of the 36th International Conference on Machine Learning,
  volume 97 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pp. 2555–2565, Long Beach, CA, 2019.
  PMLR.
Negar Hassanpour and Russell Greiner. Counterfactual regression with importance sampling weights.
  In Proceedings of the 28th International Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence, pp. 5880–5887,
  Macao, China, 2019.
J.B. Hiriart-Urruty and C. Lemaréchal.       Fundamentals of Convex Analysis.         2001.    ISBN
   9783642564680.
Jonathan Ho and Stefano Ermon. Generative adversarial imitation learning. In Advances in Neural
  Information Processing Systems 29, pp. 4565–4573, Barcelona, Spain, 2016.
Guido Imbens. The role of the propensity score in estimating dose-response functions. Econometrics
  eJournal, 1999.
Edward L Ionides. Truncated importance sampling. Journal of Computational and Graphical
  Statistics, 17(2):295–311, 2008.
Stephen James and Edward Johns. 3D simulation for robot arm control with deep Q-learning. CoRR,
  abs/1609.03759, 2016.
Fredrik D Johansson, Nathan Kallus, Uri Shalit, and David Sontag. Learning weighted representations
  for generalization across designs. arXiv preprint arXiv:1802.08598, 2018.
Yonghan Jung, Jin Tian, and Elias Bareinboim. Learning causal effects via weighted empirical risk
  minimization. In Hugo Larochelle, Marc’Aurelio Ranzato, Raia Hadsell, Maria-Florina Balcan,
  and Hsuan-Tien Lin (eds.), Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 33, Virtual Event,
  2020.
Rahul Kidambi, Aravind Rajeswaran, Praneeth Netrapalli, and Thorsten Joachims. MOReL : Model-
  based offline reinforcement learning. CoRR, abs/2005.05951, 2020.
Sergey Levine, Aviral Kumar, George Tucker, and Justin Fu. Offline reinforcement learning: Tutorial,
  review, and perspectives on open problems. CoRR, abs/2005.01643, 2020.
Yao Liu, Adith Swaminathan, Alekh Agarwal, and Emma Brunskill. Provably good batch off-policy
  reinforcement learning without great exploration. In Advances in Neural Information Processing
  Systems 33, virtual event, 2020.
XuanLong Nguyen, Martin J. Wainwright, and Michael I. Jordan. Estimating divergence functionals
  and the likelihood ratio by convex risk minimization. IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, 56(11):5847–5861,
  2010.
Sebastian Nowozin, Botond Cseke, and Ryota Tomioka. f-GAN: Training generative neural samplers
  using variational divergence minimization. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems
  29, pp. 271–279, Barcelona, Spain, 2016.
Silviu Pitis, Elliot Creager, and Animesh Garg. Counterfactual data augmentation using locally
   factored dynamics. In Hugo Larochelle, Marc’Aurelio Ranzato, Raia Hadsell, Maria-Florina
   Balcan, and Hsuan-Tien Lin (eds.), Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 33, virtual,
   2020.
Dean Pomerleau. Efficient training of artificial neural networks for autonomous navigation. Neural
  Computation, 3(1):88–97, 1991.


                                                 12
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Joaquin Quinonero-Candela, Masashi Sugiyama, Anton Schwaighofer, and Neil D Lawrence. Dataset
  shift in machine learning. Mit Press, 2008.
Paul R. Rosenbaum and Donald B. Rubin. The central role of the propensity score in observational
  studies for causal effects. Biometrika, 70:41–55, 1983.
John Schulman, Sergey Levine, Pieter Abbeel, Michael I. Jordan, and Philipp Moritz. Trust region
  policy optimization. In Proceedings of the 32nd International Conference on Machine Learning,
  volume 37, pp. 1889–1897, Lille, France, 2015.
John Schulman, Filip Wolski, Prafulla Dhariwal, Alec Radford, and Oleg Klimov. Proximal policy
  optimization algorithms. CoRR, abs/1707.06347, 2017.
Uri Shalit, Fredrik D. Johansson, and David A. Sontag. Estimating individual treatment effect:
  generalization bounds and algorithms. In Proceedings of the 34th International Conference on
  Machine Learning, volume 70, pp. 3076–3085, Sydney, Australia, 2017.
Wenjie Shang, Yang Yu, Qingyang Li, Zhiwei (Tony) Qin, Yiping Meng, and Jieping Ye. Environment
 reconstruction with hidden confounders for reinforcement learning based recommendation. In
 Proceedings of the 25th ACM SIGKDD International Conference on Knowledge Discovery & Data
 Mining, pp. 566–576, Anchorage, AK, 2019.
Jing-Cheng Shi, Yang Yu, Qing Da, Shi-Yong Chen, and Anxiang Zeng. Virtual-taobao: Virtualizing
   real-world online retail environment for reinforcement learning. In The 33th AAAI Conference on
   Artificial Intelligence, pp. 4902–4909, Honolulu, Hawaii, 2019.
Hidetoshi Shimodaira. Improving predictive inference under covariate shift by weighting the log-
  likelihood function. Journal of statistical planning and inference, 90(2):227–244, 2000.
Sumedh A. Sontakke, Arash Mehrjou, Laurent Itti, and Bernhard Schölkopf. Causal curiosity: RL
  agents discovering self-supervised experiments for causal representation learning. In Marina Meila
  and Tong Zhang (eds.), Proceedings of the 38th International Conference on Machine Learning,
  volume 139 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pp. 9848–9858, Virtual Event, 2021.
  PMLR.
Peter Spirtes. Introduction to causal inference. J. Mach. Learn. Res., 11:1643–1662, aug 2010. ISSN
  1532-4435.
Richard S. Sutton and Andrew G. Barto. Reinforcement learning - an introduction. Adaptive
  computation and machine learning. MIT Press, 1998.
Emanuel Todorov, Tom Erez, and Yuval Tassa. MuJoCo: A physics engine for model-based control.
  In Proceedings of the 24th IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems,
  pp. 5026–5033, Vilamoura, Portugal, 2012.
Stefan Wager and Susan Athey. Estimation and inference of heterogeneous treatment effects using
  random forests. Journal of the American Statistical Association, 113(523):1228–1242, 2018.
Jeremy C. Weiss, Finn Kuusisto, Kendrick Boyd, Jie Liu, and David Page. Machine learning for
  treatment assignment: Improving individualized risk attribution. In American Medical Informatics
  Association Annual Symposium, San Francisco, CA, 2015.
Jinsung Yoon, James Jordon, and Mihaela van der Schaar. GANITE: estimation of individualized
   treatment effects using generative adversarial nets. In 6th International Conference on Learning
   Representations, 2018.
Tianhe Yu, Garrett Thomas, Lantao Yu, Stefano Ermon, James Y. Zou, Sergey Levine, Chelsea
  Finn, and Tengyu Ma. MOPO: model-based offline policy optimization. In Advances in Neural
  Information Processing Systems 33, virtual event, 2020.


                                                13
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Appendix
Table of Contents
      A Proof of Theoretical Results                                                                14
        A.1 Proof of Lemma 4.3 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .      15
        A.2 Proof of Eq. 6 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    16
        A.3 Proof of Thm. 4.4 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     17
        A.4 Proof of the Tractable Solution . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     20

      B Discussion of the Theoretical Results                                                       22

      C Societal Impact                                                                             22

      D AWRM-oracle Pseudocode                                                                      23

      E Implementation                                                                              23
        E.1 Details of the GALILEO Implementation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .         23
        E.2 Connection with Previous Adversarial Algorithms . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .         25

      F Additional Related Work                                                                     26

      G Experiment Details                                                                          27
        G.1 Settings . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    27
        G.2 Baseline Algorithms . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     29
        G.3 Hyper-parameters . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .      30
        G.4 Computation Resources . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .       30

      H Additional Results                                                                          31
        H.1 All of the Result Table . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   31
        H.2 Averaged Response Curves . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .        31
        H.3 Ablation Studies . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    31
        H.4 Worst-Case Prediction Error . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     32
        H.5 Detailed Results in the MuJoCo Tasks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .      32
        H.6 Detailed Results in the BAT Task . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .      34



A    P ROOF OF T HEORETICAL R ESULTS
The overall pipeline to model the tractable solution to AWRM is given in Fig. 6.
In the proof section, we replace the notation of E with an integral for brevity. Now we rewrite the
original objective L̄(ρβM ∗ , M ) as:
            Z                         Z
                   µ                                                                   α
 min max          ρM ∗ (x, a)ω(x, a)     M ∗ (x′ |x, a) (− log M (x′ |x, a)) dx′ dadx − ∥ρβM ∗ (·, ·)∥22 ,
M ∈M β∈Π X ,A                          X                                               2
                                                                                                     (9)

                   ρβ (x,a)
where ω(x, a) = ρµM ∗∗ (x,a) and ∥ρβM ∗ (·, ·)∥22 = X ,A ρβM ∗ (x, a)2 dadx, which is the squared l2 -norm.
                                                   R
                     M
In an MDP, given any policy π, ρπM ∗ (x, a, x′ ) = ρπM ∗ (x)π(a|x)M ∗ (x′ |x, a) where ρπM ∗ (x) denotes
the occupancy measure of x for policy π,  P∞  which can be defined (Sutton & Barto, 1998; Ho & Ermon,
2016) as ρπM ∗ (x) := (1 − γ)Ex0 ∼ρ0 [ t=0 γ t Pr(xt = x|x0 , M ∗ )] where Prπ [xt = x|x0 , M ∗ ] is
the state visitation probability that π starts at state x0 in model M ∗ and receive x at timestep t and
γ ∈ [0, 1] is the discount factor.


                                                     14
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                                                minM ∈M maxβ∈Π L(ρβM ∗ , M )


                              estimate the optimal adversarial
                                            ∗
                           distribution ρβ̄M ∗ given M (Sec. A.1)
                                                                                   model an easy-to-
                  intermediary policy κ                 generator function f       estimate distribution of
                                                                                   the best-response policy
                                       ∗                                           β̄ ∗
                             derive ρ̄β̄M ∗ as a generalized rep-
                                                  ∗
                              resentation of ρβ̄M ∗ (Sec. A.2)

                                                            ∗
                                                   Let ρβ̄M ∗ as the distribution of the best-response
                                                  policy arg maxβ∈Π L(ρβM ∗ , M ), we have the sur-
                                                                                     ∗
                                                  rogate objective minM ∈M L(ρ̄β̄M ∗ , M ) (Sec. A.3)
                                                                                                   ∗
                                                                                   approximate ρ̄β̄M ∗ with
                                                                                   variational representation

                                                                tractable solution. (Sec. A.4)


Figure 6: The overall pipeline to model the tractable solution to AWRM. f is a generator function
defined by f -divergence (Nowozin et al., 2016). κ is an intermediary policy introduced in the
estimation.


A.1    P ROOF OF L EMMA 4.3

For better readability, we first rewrite Lemma 4.3 as follows:
Lemma A.1. Given any M in L̄(ρβM ∗ , M ), the distribution of the ideal best-response policy β̄ ∗
satisfies:
                 ∗            1
             ρβ̄M ∗ (x, a) =    (DKL (M ∗ (·|x, a), M (·|x, a)) + HM ∗ (x, a)),             (10)
                             αM
where DKL (M ∗ (·|x, a), M (·|x, a)) is the Kullback-Leibler (KL) divergence between M ∗ (·|x, a)
and M (·|x, a), HM ∗ (x, a) denotes the entropy of M ∗ (·|x, a), where DKL (M ∗ (·|x, a), M (·|x, a))
is the Kullback-Leibler (KL) divergence between M ∗ (·|x, a) and M (·|x, a), HM ∗ (x, a) denotes the
entropy of M ∗ (·|x, a), and αM is the regularization coefficient α in Eq. 9 and also as a normalizer.


Proof. Given a transition function M of an MDP, the distribution of the best-response policy β ∗
satisfies:

                  Z                                 Z
   ∗                                                                                                                α β
ρβM ∗ = arg max           ρµM ∗ (x, a)ω(x, a)             M ∗ (x′ |x, a) (− log M (x′ |x, a)) dx′ dadx −             ∥ρ ∗ (·, ·)∥22
            ρβ
             M∗    X ,A                              X                                                              2 M
                  Z                        Z
                                                                                            α
      = arg max           ρβM ∗ (x, a)        M ∗ (x′ |x, a) (− log M (x′ |x, a)) dx′ dadx − ∥ρβM ∗ (·, ·)∥22
            ρβ     X ,A                                                                     2
             M∗                            |X                  {z                   }
                                                                   g(x,a)
                      Z
                 2
      = arg max              ρβM ∗ (x, a)g(x, a)dadx − ∥ρβM ∗ (·, ·)∥22
             β
            ρM ∗ α    X ,A

                                                                                         ∥g(·, ·)∥22
                      Z
                2
      = arg max              ρβM ∗ (x, a)g(x, a)dadx − ∥ρβM ∗ (·, ·)∥22 −
            ρβ
             M∗
                α     X ,A                                                                  α2
                                                                                      ∥g(·, ·)∥22
                            Z
                                                    g(x, a)
      = arg max − −2                 ρβM ∗ (x, a)           dadx + ∥ρβM ∗ (·, ·)∥22 +
            ρβ
             M∗               X ,A                    α                                  α2
                                       g(·, ·) 2
      = arg max −∥ρβM ∗ (·, ·) −              ∥ .
            ρβ
             M∗
                                         α 2


                                                                 15
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


We know that the occupancy measure ρβM ∗ is a density function with a constraint
R R β
      ρ (x, a)dadx = 1. Assuming the occupancy measure ρβM ∗ has an upper bound c, that
 X A M∗
        β
R 0R ≤ ρM ∗ (x,∗a) ≤ c, ∀a ∈ A, ∀x ∈ X , constructing a regularization coefficient αM =
is
 X A
     (DKL (M (·|x, a), M (·|x, a)) + HM ∗ (x, a))dxda as a constant value given any M , then
we have

          ∗             g(x, a)
       ρβM ∗ (x, a) =
                          αM
                                                 ∗
                                                   (x′ |x,a)
                            M ∗ (x′ |x, a) log M                   ∗ ′             ∗ ′
                        R                                      R
                          X                    M (x′ |x,a) dx − X M (x |x, a) log M (x |x, a)dx
                   =
                                                     αM
                                 ∗
                     DKL (M (·|x, a), M (·|x, a)) + HM ∗ (x, a)
                   =
                                       αM

                            ∗
                   ∝ DKL (M (·|x, a), M (·|x, a)) + HM ∗ (x, a) ,


which is the optimal density function of Eq. 9 with α = αM .
Note that in some particular M ∗ , we still cannot construct a β that can generate an occupancy
specified by g(x, a)/αM for any M . We can only claim the distribution of the ideal best-response
policy β̄ ∗ satisfies:

                        ∗             1
                   ρβ̄M ∗ (x, a) =      (DKL (M ∗ (·|x, a), M (·|x, a)) + HM ∗ (x, a)),                 (11)
                                     αM

where αM is a normalizer that αM = X A (DKL (M ∗ (·|x, a), M (·|x, a)) + HM ∗ (x, a))dxda. We
                                       R R

give a discussion of the rationality of the ideal best-response policy β̄ ∗ as a replacement of the real
best-response policy β ∗ in Remark A.2.


Remark A.2. The optimal solution Eq. 11 relies on g(x, a). In some particular M ∗ , it is intractable
to derive a β that can generate an occupancy specified by g(x, a)/αM . Consider the following
case: a state x1 in M ∗ might be harder to reach than another state x2 , e.g., M ∗ (x1 |x, a) <
M ∗ (x2 |x, a), ∀x ∈ X , ∀a ∈ A, then it is impossible to find a β that the occupancy satisfies
ρβM ∗ (x1 , a) > ρβM ∗ (x2 , a). In this case, Eq. 11 can be a sub-optimal solution. Since this work
focuses on task-agnostic solution derivation while the solution to the above problem should rely on
the specific description of M ∗ , we leave it as future work. However, we point out that Eq. 11 is a
                                                             ∗
reasonable re-weighting term even as a sub-optimum: ρβ̄M ∗ gives larger densities on the data where
the distribution distance between the approximation model and the real model (i.e., DKL (M ∗ , M ))
is larger or the stochasticity of the real model (i.e., HM ∗ ) is larger.


A.2    P ROOF OF E Q . 6

The integral process of DKL in Eq. 5 is intractable in the offline setting as it explicitly requires the
conditional probability function of M ∗ . Our motivation for the tractable solution is utilizing the
offline dataset Dreal as the empirical joint distribution ρµM ∗ (x, a, x′ ) and adopting practical techniques
for distance estimation on two joint distributions, like GAN (Goodfellow et al., 2014; Nowozin et al.,
2016), to approximate Eq. 5. To adopt that solution, we should first transform Eq. 5 into a form under
joint distributions. Without loss of generality, we introduce an intermediary policy κ, of which µ can
be regarded as a specific instance. Then we have M (x′ |x, a) = ρκM (x, a, x′ )/ρκM (x, a) for any M if
                                                                        ∗
ρκM (x, a) > 0. Assuming ∀x ∈ X , ∀a ∈ A, ρκM ∗ (x, a) > 0 if ρβ̄M ∗ (x, a) > 0, which will hold when
κ overlaps with µ, then Eq. 5 can transform to:


                                                     16
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


   ∗              DKL (M ∗ (·|x, a), M (·|x, a)) + HM ∗ (x, a)
ρβ̄M ∗ (x, a) =
                                        αM
                                                 M ∗ (x′ |x, a)
                       Z
                   1           ∗ ′
                =           M (x |x, a) log                     − log M (x |x, a) dx′
                                                                          ∗ ′
                  αM X                           M (x′ |x, a)
                                                                        M ∗ (x′ |x, a)
                                  Z
                          1                            ∗ ′
                =                       κ
                                      ρ ∗ (x, a)M (x |x, a) log                        − log M (x |x, a) dx′
                                                                                                 ∗ ′
                  αM ρκM ∗ (x, a) X M                                    M (x′ |x, a)
                                                                                                            (12)
                                                                κ           ′          κ
                                  Z
                          1                          ′        ρM ∗ (x, a, x )         ρM (x, a)
                =                       κ
                                      ρ ∗ (x, a, x ) log κ                     + log κ            − log M (x |x, a) dx′
                                                                                                         ∗ ′
                  αM ρκM ∗ (x, a) X M                          ρM (x, a, x′ )        ρM ∗ (x, a)
                                                              ρκ ∗ (x, a, x′ ) ′
                                    Z
                          1
                =       κ                ρκM ∗ (x, a, x′ ) log M               dx −
                  αM ρM ∗ (x, a)     X                         ρκM (x, a, x′ )
                                                                                                                        !
                                 ρκM ∗ (x, a)
                                               Z                                    Z
                   κ                                   ∗ ′           ′    κ                ∗ ′             ∗ ′        ′
                  ρM ∗ (x, a) log κ                M (x |x, a)dx −ρM ∗ (x, a)           M (x |x, a) log M (x |x, a)dx
                                  ρM (x, a) X                                         X
                                               |          {z        }
                                                                  =1
                                                                                                                                            !
                                                          ρκ ∗ (x, a, x′ ) ′                     ρκM ∗ (x, a)
                                 Z
                      1
                =                    ρκM ∗ (x, a, x′ ) log M               dx − ρ κ
                                                                                  M ∗ (x, a) log              + ρκM ∗ (x, a)HM ∗ (x, a)
                  α0 (x, a)        X                       ρκM (x, a, x′ )                       ρκM (x, a)
                                                                                                                               (13)
where α0 (x, a) = αM ρκM ∗ (x, a).
Definition A.3 (f -divergence). Given two distributions P and Q, two absolutely continuous density
functions p and q with respect to a base measure dx defined on the domain X , we define the
f -divergence (Nowozin et al., 2016),
                                             Z
                                                         p(x)
                                Df (P ∥Q) =      q(x)f          dx,                           (14)
                                              X          q(x)
where the generator function f : R+ → R is a convex, lower-semicontinuous function.
                                                            ρκ   (x,a,x′ )                              ρκ   (x,a)
We notice that the terms ρκM ∗ (x, a, x′ ) log ρMκ ∗(x,a,x′ ) and ρκM ∗ (x, a) log ρMκ ∗(x,a) are the integrated
                                                 M                                   M
functions in reverse KL divergence, which is an instance of f function in f -divergence (See Reverse-
KL divergence of Tab.1 in (Nowozin et al., 2016) for more details). Replacing that form q log pq with
                                                                           ∗
qf ( pq ), we obtain a generalized representation of ρβ̄M ∗ :
                                                                                                                                      !
                                                       ρκM (x, a, x′ )
                         Z                                                                               κ
     ∗           1                                                                                      ρM (x, a)
ρ̄β̄M ∗ :=                    ρκM ∗ (x, a, x′ )f                                ′
                                                                               dx   − ρκM ∗ (x, a)    f                − HM ∗ (x, a)    ,
             α0 (x, a)   X                             ρκM ∗ (x, a, x′ )                                ρκM ∗ (x, a)
                                                                                                                               (15)

A.3      P ROOF OF T HM . 4.4

We first introduce several useful lemmas for the proof.
Lemma A.4. Rearrangement inequality The rearrangement inequality states that, for two sequences
a1 ≥ a2 ≥ . . . ≥ an and b1 ≥ b2 ≥ . . . ≥ bn , the inequalities
 a1 b1 + a2 b2 + · · · + an bn ≥ a1 bπ(1) + a2 bπ(2) + · · · + an bπ(n) ≥ a1 bn + a2 bn−1 + · · · + an b1
hold, where π(1), π(2), . . . , π(n) is any permutation of 1, 2, . . . , n.
Lemma A.5. For two sequences a1 ≥ a2 ≥ . . . ≥ an and b1 ≥ b2 ≥ . . . ≥ bn , the inequalities
                                              n                      n
                                              X 1                    X 1            X1
                                                           ai bi ≥             ai           bi
                                              i=1
                                                       n             i=1
                                                                           n            n

hold.


                                                                     17
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Proof. By rearrangement inequality, we have
                           Xn
                               ai bi ≥ a1 b1 + a2 b2 + · · · + an bn
                                     i=1
                                     n
                                     X
                                           ai bi ≥ a1 b2 + a2 b3 + · · · + an b1
                                     i=1
                                     Xn
                                           ai bi ≥ a1 b3 + a2 b4 + · · · + an b2
                                     i=1
                                                ..
                                                 .
                                     n
                                     X
                                           ai bi ≥ a1 bn + a2 b1 + · · · + an bn−1
                                     i=1
Then we have
                                                n
                                                X               n
                                                                X           n
                                                                            X
                                            n         ai bi ≥          ai         bi
                                             i=1                i=1         i=1
                                            n                    n
                                            X   1             1 X1
                                                                X
                                                  ai bi ≥       ai   bi
                                            i=1
                                                n         i=1
                                                              n    n



Now we extend Lemma A.5 into the continuous integral scenario:
Lemma A.6. Given X ⊂ R, for two functions f : X → R and g : X → R that f (x) ≥ f (y) if and
only if g(x) ≥ g(y), ∀x, y ∈ X , the inequality
                     Z                        Z               Z
                         p(x)f (x)g(x)dx ≥        p(x)f (x)dx    p(x)g(x)dx
                      X                         X              X
                                                     R
holds, where p : X → R and p(x) > 0, ∀x ∈ X and X p(x)dx = 1.

Proof. Since (f (x) − f (y))(g(x) − g(y)) ≥ 0, ∀x, y ∈ X , we have

 Z         Z
                     p(x)p(y)(f (x) − f (y))(g(x) − g(y))dydx ≥ 0
  x∈X      y∈X
 Z         Z
                     p(x)p(y)f (x)g(x) + p(x)p(y)f (y)g(y) − p(x)p(y)f (x)g(y) − p(x)p(y)f (y)g(x)dydx ≥ 0
  x∈X      y∈X
 Z         Z                                                      Z     Z
                     p(x)p(y)f (x)g(x) + p(x)p(y)f (y)g(y)dydx ≥             p(x)p(y)f (x)g(y) + p(x)p(y)f (y)g(x)dydx
  x∈X          y∈X                                                                x∈X      y∈X
 Z          Z                                   Z                                                Z         Z
                      p(x)p(y)f (x)g(x)dy +                p(x)p(y)f (y)g(y)dy dx ≥                                  p(x)p(y)f (x)g(y) + p(x)p(y)f (y)g(x)dydx
  x∈X           y∈X                                  y∈X                                             x∈X       y∈X
 Z                        Z                                  Z     Z
          p(x)f (x)g(x) +        p(x)p(y)f (y)g(y)dy dx ≥                p(x)p(y)f (x)g(y) + p(x)p(y)f (y)g(x)dydx
    x∈X                    y∈X                                 x∈X y∈X
  Z                        Z      Z                               Z    Z
        p(x)f (x)g(x)dx +               p(x)p(y)f (y)g(y)dydx ≥               p(x)p(y)f (x)g(y) + p(x)p(y)f (y)g(x)dydx
    x∈X                      x∈X y∈X                                x∈X y∈X
  Z                        Z                         Z    Z
        p(x)f (x)g(x)dx +         p(y)f (y)g(y)dy ≥              p(x)p(y)f (x)g(y) + p(x)p(y)f (y)g(x)dydx
    x∈X                      y∈X                       x∈X y∈X
  Z                           Z     Z
2       p(x)f (x)g(x)dx ≥ 2               p(x)p(y)f (x)g(y)dydx
    x∈X                         y∈X x∈X
  Z                           Z                 Z
2       p(x)f (x)g(x)dx ≥ 2         p(x)f (x)dx       p(x)g(x)dx
    x∈X                         x∈X               x∈X
  Z                        Z                  Z
        p(x)f (x)g(x)dx ≥         p(x)f (x)dx       p(x)g(x)dx
     x∈X                           x∈X                      x∈X



                                                                  18
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Corollary A.7. Let g( p(x)               p(x)
                        q(x) ) = − log q(x) where p(x) > 0, ∀x ∈ X and q(x) > 0, ∀x ∈ X , for
υ > 0, the inequality
             Z                                Z                    Z
                         p(x)      p(x)                   p(x)               p(x)
                q(x)f (υ       )g(      )dx ≥    q(x)f (υ      )dx    q(x)g(      )dx,
              X          q(x)      q(x)        X          q(x)      X        q(x)
holds if f ′ (x) ≤ 0, ∀x ∈ X . It is not always satisfied for f functions of f -divergence. We list a
comparison of f on that condition in Tab. 2.

Proof. g ′ (x) = − log x = − x1 < 0, ∀x ∈ X . Suppose f ′ (x) ≤ 0, ∀x ∈ X , we have f (x) ≥ f (y)
if and only if g(x) ≥ g(y), ∀x, y ∈ X holds. Thus f (υ p(x)          p(y)                     p(x)
                                                       q(x) ) ≥ f (υ q(y) ) if and only if g( q(x) ) ≥
g( p(y)                                                            p(x)                  p(x)
   q(y) ), ∀x, y ∈ X holds for all υ > 0. By defining F (x) = f (υ q(x) )) and G(x) = g( q(x) ) and
using Lemma A.6, we have:
                     Z                       Z               Z
                        q(x)F (x)G(x)dx ≥        q(x)F (x)dx     q(x)G(x)dx.
                        X                             X                  X

Then we know
           Z                                          Z                         Z
                                p(x)     p(x)                        p(x)                     p(x)
                   q(x)f (υ          )g(      )dx ≥       q(x)f (υ        )dx        q(x)g(        )dx
               X                q(x)     q(x)         X              q(x)       X             q(x)
holds.


                 Table 2: Properties of f ′ (x) ≤ 0, ∀x ∈ X for f -divergences.
            Name              Generator function f (x)          If f ′ (x) ≤ 0, ∀x ∈ X
            Kullback-Leibler           x log x                               False
            Reverse KL                 − log x                               True
            Pearson χ2                  √− 1) 2
                                       (x      2
                                                                             False
            Squared Hellinger          ( x − 1)                              False
            Jensen-Shannon             −(x + 1) log 1+x
                                                      2 + x log x            False
            GAN                        x log x − (x + 1) log(x + 1)          True

Now, we prove Thm. 4.4. For better readability, we first rewrite Thm. 4.4 as follows:
                            ∗
Theorem A.8. Let ρ̄β̄M ∗ as the data distribution of the best-response policy β̄ ∗ in Eq. 4 under
model Mθ parameterized by θ, then we can find the optimal θ∗ of minθ maxβ∈Π L̄(ρβM ∗ , Mθ ) (Eq. 4)
                                                                 ∗                  ∗
via iteratively optimizing the objective θt+1 = minθ L̄(ρ̄β̄M ∗ , Mθ ), where ρ̄β̄M ∗ is approximated
via the last-iteration model Mθt . Based on Corollary A.7, we have an upper bound objective for
             ∗
minθ L̄(ρ̄β̄M ∗ , Mθ ) and derive the following objective
                                                            κ             ′           κ
                          "                                                   !                    !              !#
                                1                         ρ M    (x, a, x   )       ρ M     (x, a)
                                      log Mθ (x′ |x, a) f
                                                              θ                         θ
θt+1 = arg max EρκM ∗                                          t
                                                                                −f        t
                                                                                                     + HM ∗ (x, a)   ,
                 θ          α0 (x, a)                     ρκM ∗ (x, a, x′ )         ρκM ∗ (x, a)
                                                       |                           {z                              }
                                                                                        W (x,a,x′ )

where α0 (x, a) = αMθt ρκM ∗ (x, a), EρκM ∗ [·] denotes Ex,a,x′ ∼ρκM ∗ [·], f is the generator function in
f -divergence which satisfies f ′ (x) ≤ 0, ∀x ∈ X , and θ is the parameters of M . Mθt denotes a
probability function with the same parameters as the learned model (i.e., θ̄ = θ) but the parameter is
fixed and only used for sampling.

               ∗
Proof. Let ρ̄β̄M ∗ as the data distribution of the best-response policy β̄ ∗ in Eq. 4 under model Mθ
parameterized by θ, then we can find the optimal θt+1 of minθ maxβ∈Π L̄(ρβM ∗ , Mθ ) (Eq. 4) via


                                                          19
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023



                                                                                             ∗                                ∗
iteratively optimizing the objective θt+1 = minθ L̄(ρ̄β̄M ∗ , Mθ ), where ρ̄β̄M ∗ is approximated via the
last-iteration model Mθt :
              Z                           Z
                            ∗
                         ρ̄β̄M ∗ (x, a)           M ∗ (x′ |x, a) − log Mθ (x′ |x, a) dx′ dadx

θt+1 = min                                                                                                                                                         (16)
          θ       X ,A                        X

                                                                            ρκMθ (x, a, x′ )
              Z                           Z                                                  !                    Z
                           1
      = min                                       ρκM ∗ (x, a, x′ )f                 t
                                                                                                  M ∗ (x′ |x, a)(− log Mθ (x′ |x, a))dx′
                                                                                                            dx′
          θ       X ,A α0 (x, a)              X                     ρκM ∗ (x, a, x′ )          X

                                                                 ρκMθ (x, a)
                                                                               !                    !Z                                              !
                                              κ                        t                                      ∗   ′                      ′        ′
                                          − ρM ∗ (x, a) f                         − HM ∗ (x, a)           M (x |x, a)(− log Mθ (x |x, a))dx dadx
                                                                 ρκM ∗ (x, a)                          X

                                                                    ρκMθ (x, a, x′ )
                                                                                       !
                                                                                                                            Mθ (x′ |x, a)
              Z                           Z                                                    Z
                             1
      = min                                   ρκM ∗ (x, a, x′ )f         t
                                                                                         dx ′
                                                                                                    M  ∗
                                                                                                         (x′
                                                                                                             |x, a)(−  log                 )dx′
                                                                                                                                                + H M ∗ (x, a)
          θ       X ,A α0 (x, a)            X                       ρκM ∗ (x, a, x′ )             X                         M ∗ (x′ |x, a)
                                                                 ρκMθ (x, a)
                                                                               !                    ! Z                                             !
                                          − ρκM ∗ (x, a) f             t
                                                                                  −    H M ∗ (x, a)       M ∗ (x′ |x, a)(− log Mθ (x′ |x, a))dx′ dadx
                                                                 ρκM ∗ (x, a)                          X

                                                                               ρκMθ (x, a, x′ )
                                                                                                  !
                                                                                                              Mθ (x′ |x, a)
              Z                                       Z
                           1                                   ∗  ′
      ≤ min                                 κ
                                          ρM ∗ (x, a)      M (x |x, a)f              t
                                                                                                    (−  log                  )dx′
          θ       X ,A α0 (x, a)                        X                      ρκM ∗ (x, a, x′ )              M ∗ (x′ |x, a)
                                          |                                          {z                                         }
                                                                                         based on Corollary A.7

                                                                       ρκMθ (x, a)
                                                                                                !                       !Z                                                          !
                                                                                                                                        ∗   ′                             ′     ′
                                          − ρκM ∗ (x, a)           f             t
                                                                                                    − HM ∗ (x, a)                     M (x |x, a)(− log Mθ (x |x, a))dx                 dadx
                                                                           ρκM ∗ (x, a)                                           X

                                                                                                 ρκMθ (x, a, x′ )
              Z                                            Z                                                            !                                  !
                     1                                                 ∗     ′
      = min                ρκM ∗ (x, a)                            M (x |x, a)f                         t
                                                                                                                            (− log Mθ (x |x, a)) dx′
                                                                                                                                                  ′
         θ  X ,A α0 (x, a)                                     X                                    ρκM ∗ (x, a, x′ )
                                                                       ρκMθ (x, a)
                                                                                                !                       !Z                                                          !
                                          − ρκM ∗ (x, a) f                       t
                                                                                                    − HM ∗ (x, a)                     M ∗ (x′ |x, a)(− log Mθ (x′ |x, a))dx′ dadx
                                                                           ρκM ∗ (x, a)                                           X

                                                                                                       ρκMθ (x, a, x′ )                     ρκMθ (x, a)
              Z                                                                                                               !                                !               !
                    1
   = max                  ρκM ∗ (x, a, x′ ) log Mθ (x′ |x, a) f                                            t
                                                                                                                                      −f              t
                                                                                                                                                                   + HM ∗ (x, a) dx′ dadx,
      θ  X ,A,X α0 (x, a)                                                                               ρκM ∗ (x, a, x′ )                       ρκM ∗ (x, a)
                                                                                                                                                                   (17)

                                                                                            ∗
where Mθt is introduced to approximate the term ρ̄β̄M ∗ and fixed when optimizing θ. In Eq. 16,
∥ρβM ∗ (·, ·)∥22 for Eq. 9 is eliminated as it does not contribute to the gradient of θ. Assume f ′ (x) ≤
                                          ρκ
                                           M       (x,a)
0, ∀x ∈ X , let υ(x, a) := ρκ θ∗t(x,a) > 0, p(x′ |x, a) = Mθ (x′ |x, a), and q(x′ |x, a) = M ∗ (x′ |x, a),
                              M
the first inequality can be derived by adopting Corollary A.7 and eliminating the first HM ∗ since it
does not contribute to the gradient of θ.



A.4     P ROOF OF THE T RACTABLE S OLUTION

Now we are ready to prove the tractable solution:


                                                                           ρκ
                                                                            M        (x,a,x′ )               ρκ
                                                                                                              M       (x,a)
Proof. The core challenge is that the term f ( ρκ θ∗t(x,a,x′ ) ) − f ( ρκ θ∗t(x,a) ) is still intractable. In the
                                                M                       M
following, we give a tractable solution to Thm. 4.4. First, we resort to the first-order approximation.
Given some u ∈ (1 − ξ, 1 + ξ), ξ > 0, we have

                                                       f (u) ≈ f (1) + f ′ (u)(u − 1),                                                                             (18)

where f ′ is the first-order derivative of f . By Taylor’s formula and the fact that f ′ (u) of the generator
function f is bounded in (1 − ξ, 1 + ξ), the approximation error is no more than O(ξ 2 ). Substituting u
with p(x)                             p(x)                                p(x) ′ p(x)         ′ p(x)
     q(x) in Eq. 18, the pattern f ( q(x) ) in Eq. 17 can be converted to q(x) f ( q(x) ) − f ( q(x) ) + f (1),


                                                                                 20
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


then we have:
                                                                                                                    ρκMθ (x, a, x′ )
                                     Z                                Z                                                                          !
                   1                                                                  ∗   ′
θt+1 = arg max                                   ρκM ∗ (x, a)                    M (x |x, a)f                              t
                                                                                                                                                       log Mθ (x′ |x, a)dx′ −
            θ  α0 (x, a)                 X ,A                            X                                          ρκM ∗ (x, a, x′ )
                                                             ρκMθ (x, a)
                                                                                       !Z
                                    ρκM ∗ (x, a)f                   M ∗ (x′ |x, a) log Mθ (x′ |x, a)dx′ +
                                                                     t
                                                  ρκM ∗ (x, a)    X
                                                           Z                                      !
                                     κ                          ∗   ′                 ′         ′
                                    ρM ∗ (x, a)HM ∗ (x, a)     M (x |x, a) log Mθ (x |x, a)dx dadx
                                                                                  X

                                                                                                      ρκMθ (x, a, x′ )
                      Z                                  Z                                                                         !
                                                                             ′                ′
      ≈ arg max                     ρκMθt (x, a)                 Mθt (x |x, a)f                             t
                                                                                                                                       log Mθ (x′ |x, a)dx′ −
                  θ        X ,A                          X                                            ρκM ∗ (x, a, x′ )
                                                                                                        ρκMθ (x, a, x′ )
                                                     Z                                                                                 !                 !
                                    ρκM ∗ (x, a)             M ∗ (x′ |x, a) f ′                                 t
                                                                                                                                           − f (1) log Mθ (x′ |x, a)dx′ −
                                                         X                                              ρκM ∗ (x, a, x′ )
                                                                 ρκMθ (x, a)
                                                                                          !Z
                                    ρκMθt (x, a)f ′                      t
                                                                                                      M ∗ (x′ |x, a) log Mθ (x′ |x, a)dx′ +
                                                                  ρκM ∗ (x, a)                    X

                                                                     ρκMθ (x, a)
                                                                                            !                   !Z
                                                             ′
                                    ρκM ∗ (x, a)         f        − f (1)    t
                                                                               M ∗ (x′ |x, a) log Mθ (x′ |x, a)dx′ +
                                                    ρκM ∗ (x, a)             X
                                                         Z                                     !
                                     κ                          ∗ ′               ′          ′
                                    ρM ∗ (x, a)HM (x, a)
                                                 ∗           M (x |x, a) log Mθ (x |x, a)dx dadx
                                                                                  X

                                                                                              ρκMθ (x, a, x′ )                                    ρκMθ (x, a)
                          Z                                                                                                    !                                   !!
                             1
      = arg max                    ρκMθt (x, a, x) f ′                                                 t
                                                                                                                                   −f      ′             t
                                                                                                                                                                        log Mθ (x′ |x, a)dx′ dadx+
             θ    X ,A,X α0 (x, a)                                                            ρκM ∗ (x, a, x′ )                                   ρκM ∗ (x, a)
                                                                                              ρκMθ (x, a)                                  ρκMθ (x, a, x′ )
                Z                                                                                          !                                                       !                  !
                             1
                                   ρκM ∗ (x, a, x′ ) f ′                                                t
                                                                                                                            −f     ′               t
                                                                                                                                                                       + HM ∗ (x, a) log Mθ (x′ |x, a)dx′ dadx.
                  X ,A,X α0 (x, a)                                                                ρκM ∗ (x, a)                                 ρκM ∗ (x, a, x′ )
 Note that the part ρκM ∗ (x, a) in ρκM ∗ (x, a, x′ ) can be canceled because of α0 (x, a) = αMθt ρκM ∗ (x, a),
but we choose to keep it and ignore α0 (x, a). The benefit is that we can estimate ρκM ∗ (x, a, x′ ) from
an empirical data distribution through data collected by κ in M ∗ directly, rather than from a uniform
distribution which is harder to be generated. Although keeping ρκM ∗ (x, a) incurs extra bias in theory,
the results in our experiments show that it has not made significant negative effects in practice. We
leave this part of modeling in future work. In particular, by ignoring α0 (x, a), we have:
                                                                      ρκMθ (x, a, x′ )                                      ρκMθ (x, a)
                      Z                                                                                !                                           !!
                                                                 ′                                                   ′
θt+1 = arg max                     ρκMθt (x, a, x)           f                    t
                                                                                                            −f                     t
                                                                                                                                                             log Mθ (x′ |x, a)dx′ dadx+
              θ           X ,A,X                                         ρκM ∗ (x, a, x′ )                                     ρκM ∗ (x, a)
                                                                                                                                                                               (19)
                                                                         ρκMθ (x, a)                                 ρκMθ (x, a, x′ )
                      Z                                                                           !                                                !                     !
                                   ρκM ∗ (x, a, x′ ) f ′                     t
                                                                                                      − f′               t
                                                                                                                                                        + HM ∗ (x, a) log Mθ (x′ |x, a)dx′ dadx.
                          X ,A,X                                         ρκM ∗ (x, a)                                    ρκM ∗ (x, a, x′ )
                                                                                                                                                                               (20)
                                                                                                  ′
                                κ                                      κ
                               ρM        (x,a)                           ρM           (x,a,x )
We can estimate f ′               ρκ
                                    θt
                                      (x,a)          and f ′             ρκ
                                                                                 θt
                                                                             (x,a,x′ )                  through Lemma A.9.
                                   M∗                                     M∗


Lemma A.9 (f ′ ( pq ) estimation (Nguyen et al., 2010)). Given a function Tφ : X → R parameterized
by φ ∈ Φ, if f is convex and lower semi-continuous, by finding the maximum point of φ in the
following objective:
                       φ∗ = arg max Ex∼p(x) [Tφ (x)] − Ex∼q(x) [f ∗ (Tφ (x))] ,
                                                     φ

we have f ′ ( p(x)              ∗
              q(x) ) = Tφ (x). f is Fenchel conjugate of f (Hiriart-Urruty & Lemaréchal, 2001).
                         ∗


In particular,
           φ∗0 = arg max Ex,a,x′ ∼ρκM ∗ [Tφ0 (x, a, x′ )] − Ex,a,x′ ∼ρκM [f ∗ (Tφ0 (x, a, x′ ))]
                     φ0                                         θt

            ∗                                                ∗
           φ1 = arg max Ex,a∼ρκM ∗ [Tφ1 (x, a)] − Ex,a∼ρκM [f (Tφ1 (x, a))] ,
                     φ1                                   θt


                                                                                       21
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                     (x,a,x′ )
                           κ                                                          κ
                          ρM                                                         ρM        (x,a)
                     ′                                           ′              ′
then we have f                ρκ
                                θt
                                  (x,a,x′ )          ≈ T (x, a, x ) and f
                                                        φ∗
                                                         0                           ρκ
                                                                                          θt
                                                                                         (x,a)             ≈ Tφ∗1 (x, a). Given φ∗0 and
                               M∗                                                     M∗

φ∗1 , let Aφ∗0 ,φ∗1 (x, a, x′ ) = Tφ∗0 (x, a, x′ ) − Tφ∗1 (x, a), then we can optimize θ via:
                      Z
                                ρκMθt (x, a, x) Tφ∗0 (x, a, x′ ) − Tφ∗1 (x, a) log Mθ (x′ |x, a)dx′ dadx+

θt+1 = arg max
                  θ     X ,A,X
                      Z
                                ρκM ∗ (x, a, x′ ) Tφ∗1 (x, a) − Tφ∗0 (x, a, x′ ) + HM ∗ (x, a) log Mθ (x′ |x, a)dx′ dadx

                        X ,A,X
                      Z
       = arg max                ρκMθt (x, a, x)Aφ∗0 ,φ∗1 (x, a, x′ ) log Mθ (x′ |x, a)dx′ dadx+
                  θ     X ,A,X
                      Z
                                ρκM ∗ (x, a, x′ )(−Aφ∗0 ,φ∗1 (x, a, x′ ) + HM ∗ (x, a)) log Mθ (x′ |x, a)dx′ dadx.
                          X ,A,X


Based on the specific f -divergence, we can represent T and f ∗ (T ) with a discriminator Dφ . It
can be verified that f (u) = u log u − (u + 1) log(u + 1), Tφ (u) = log Dφ (u), and f ∗ (Tφ (u)) =
− log(1 − Dφ (u)) proposed in Nowozin et al. (2016) satisfies the condition f ′ (x) ≤ 0, ∀x ∈ X (see
Tab. 2). We select the former in the implementation and convert the tractable solution to:
                        Aφ∗0 ,φ∗1 (x, a, x′ ) log Mθ (x′ |x, a) + EρκM ∗ (HM ∗ (x, a) − Aφ∗0 ,φ∗1 (x, a, x′ )) log Mθ (x′ |x, a)

θt+1 = arg max EρκM
                 θ             θt

         φ∗0 = arg max EρκM ∗ log Dφ0 (x, a, x′ ) + EρκM         log(1 − Dφ0 (x, a, x′ ))

s.t.
                         φ0                                                θt

        φ∗1 = arg max EρκM ∗ [log Dφ1 (x, a)] + EρκM                      [log(1 − Dφ1 (x, a))] ,
                         φ1                                          θt

                                                                                                                                   (21)

 where Aφ∗0 ,φ∗1 (x, a, x′ ) = log Dφ∗0 (x, a, x′ ) − log Dφ∗1 (x, a), EρκM [·] is a simplification of
                                                                                                           θt
Ex,a,x′ ∼ρκM [·].
            θt


B      D ISCUSSION OF THE T HEORETICAL R ESULTS
We summarize the limitations of current theoretical results and future work as follows:

       1. As discussed in Remark A.2, the solution Eq. 11 relies on ρβM ∗ (x, a) ∈ [0, c], ∀a ∈ A, ∀x ∈
          X . In some particular M ∗ , it is intractable to derive a β that can generate an occupancy
          specified by g(x, a)/αM . If more knowledge of M ∗ or β ∗ is provided or some mild
          assumptions can be made on the properties of M ∗ or β ∗ , we may model ρ in a more
          sophisticated approach to alleviating the above problem.
       2. In the tractable solution derivation, we ignore the term α0 (x, a) = αMθt ρκM ∗ (x, a) (See
          Eq. 20). The benefit is that ρκM ∗ (x, a, x′ ) in the tractable solution can be estimated through
          offline datasets directly. Although the results in our experiments show that it does not
          produce significant negative effects in these tasks, ignoring ρκM ∗ (x, a) indeed incurs extra
          bias in theory. In future work, techniques for estimating ρκM ∗ (x, a) (Liu et al., 2020) can
          be incorporated to correct the bias. On the other hand, αMθt is also ignored in the process.
          αMθt can be regarded as a global rescaling term of the final objective Eq. 20. Intuitively, it
          constructs an adaptive learning rate for Eq. 20, which increases the step size when the model
          is better fitted and decreases the step size otherwise. It can be considered to further improve
          the learning process in future work, e.g., cooperating with empirical risk minimization by
          balancing the weights of the two objectives through αMθt .

C      S OCIETAL I MPACT
This work studies a method toward counterfactual environment model learning. Reconstructing an
accurate environment of the real world will promote the wide adoption of decision-making policy
optimization methods in real life, enhancing our daily experience. We are aware that decision-making


                                                                     22
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


policy in some domains like recommendation systems that interact with customers may have risks of
causing price discrimination and misleading customers if inappropriately used. A promising way to
reduce the risk is to introduce fairness into policy optimization and rules to constrain the actions (Also
see our policy design in Sec. G.1.3). We are involved in and advocating research in such directions.
We believe that business organizations would like to embrace fair systems that can ultimately bring
long-term financial benefits by providing a better user experience.

D     AWRM- ORACLE P SEUDOCODE
We list the pseudocode of AWRM-oracle in Alg. 1.

Algorithm 1 AWRM with Oracle Counterfactual Datasets
Input:
Φ: policy space; N : total iterations
Process:
 1: Generate counterfactual datasets {Dπϕ } for all adversarial policies πϕ , ϕ ∈ Φ
 2: Initialize an environment model Mθ
 3: for i = 1:N do
 4:     Select Dπϕ with worst prediction errors through Mθ from {Dπϕ }
 5:     Optimize Mθ with standard supervised learning based on Dπϕ
 6: end for



E     I MPLEMENTATION
E.1   D ETAILS OF THE GALILEO I MPLEMENTATION

The approximation of Eq. 18 holds only when p(x)q(x) is close to 1, which might not be satisfied. To
handle the problem, we inject a standard supervised learning loss
                                        arg max EρκM ∗ [log Mθ (x′ |x, a)]                                                   (22)
                                              θ

to replace the second term of the above objective when the output probability of D is far away from
0.5 (f ′ (1) = log 0.5).
In the offline model-learning setting, we only have a real-world dataset D collected by the behavior
policy µ. We learn a policy µ̂ ≈ µ via behavior cloning with D (Pomerleau, 1991; Ho & Ermon,
2016) and let µ̂ be the policy κ. We regard D as the empirical data distribution of ρκM ∗ and the
trajectories collected by µ̂ in the model Mθt as the empirical data distribution of ρκMθ . But the
                                                                                             t
assumption ∀x ∈ X , ∀a ∈ A, µ(a|x) > 0 might not be satisfied. In behavior cloning, we model µ̂
with a Gaussian distribution and constrain the lower bound of the variance with a small value ϵµ > 0
to keep the assumption holding. Besides, we add small Gaussian noises u ∼ N (0, ϵD ) to the inputs
of Dφ to handle the mismatch between ρµM ∗ and ρµ̂M ∗ due to ϵµ . In particular, for φ0 and φ1 learning,
we have:
φ∗0 = arg max EρκM ∗ ,u log Dφ0 (x + ux , a + ua , x′ + ux′ ) + EρκM                           log(1 − Dφ0 (x + ux , a + ua , x′ + ux′ ))

                                                                                      ,u
           φ0                                                                    θt

φ∗1 = arg max EρκM ∗ ,u [log Dφ1 (x + ux , a + ua )] + EρκM              ,u [log(1 − Dφ1 (x + ux , a + ua ))] ,
           φ1                                                       θt


where EρκM        ,u [·] is a simplification of Ex,a,x′ ∼ρκ
                                                          M        ,u∼N (0,ϵD ) [·] and u = [ux , ua , ux′ ].
             θt                                               θt


On the other hand, we notice that the first term in Eq. 21 is similar to the objective of
GAIL (Ho & Ermon, 2016) by regarding Mθ as the policy to learn and κ as the environ-
ment to generate data. For better capability in sequential environment model learning, here
we introduce some practical tricks inspired by GAIL for model learning (Shi et al., 2019;
Shang et al., 2019): we introduce an MDP for κ and Mθ , where the reward is defined by
the discriminator D, i.e., r(x, a, x′ ) = log D(x, a, x′ ). Mθ is learned to maximize the cu-
mulative rewards. With advanced   policy gradient methods (Schulman           et al., 2015; 2017), the
objective is converted to maxθ Aφ∗0 ,φ∗1 (x, a, x′ ) log Mθ (x, a, x′ ) , where A = QκMθ − VM
                                                                                                   κ
                                                                                                     θ
                                                                                                       ,
                                                                                                                      t         t


                                                         23
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Algorithm 2 GALILEO pseudocode
Input:
Dreal : offline dataset sampled from ρµM ∗ where µ is the behavior policy;
N : total iterations;
Process:
 1: Approximate a behavior policy µ̂ via behavior cloning
 2: Initialize an environment model Mθ1
 3: for t = 1 : N do
 4:     Use µ̂ to generate a dataset Dgen with the model Mθt
 5:     Update the discriminators Dφ0 and Dφ1 via Eq. 26 and Eq. 27 respectively, where ρµ̂Mθ is
                                                                                             t
    estimated by Dgen and ρµM ∗ is estimated by Dreal
 6:     Update Q and V via Eq. 24 and Eq. 25 through Dgen , Dφ0 , and Dφ1
 7:     Update the model Mθt via the first term of Eq. 23, which is implemented with a standard
    policy gradient method like TRPO (Schulman et al., 2015) or PPO (Schulman et al., 2017).
    Record the policy gradient gpg
 8:     if p0 < EDgen [Dφ0 (xt , at , xt+1 )] < p1 then
 9:         Compute the gradient of Mθt via the second term of Eq. 23 and record it as gsl
10:     else
11:         Compute the gradient of Mθt via Eq. 22 and record it as gsl
12:     end if
13:     Rescale gsl via Eq. 28
14:     Update the model Mθt via the gradient gsl and obtain Mθt+1
15: end for


                       P∞
QκMθ̄ (x, a, x′ ) = E [ t=0 γ t r(xt , at , xt+1 ) | (xt , at , xt+1 ) = (x, a, x′ ), κ, Mθt ], and VM
                                                                                                     κ
                                                                                                       θ̄
                                                                                                          (x, a) =
       h               i
         κ           ′
EMθ̄ QMθ̄ (x, a, x ) . A in Eq. 21 can also be constructed similarly. Although it looks unnecessary in
theory since the one-step optimal model Mθ is the global optimal model in this setting, the technique
is helpful in practice as it makes A more sensitive to the compounding effect of one-step prediction
errors: we would consider the cumulative effects of prediction errors induced by multi-step transitions
in environments. In particular, to consider the cumulative effects of prediction errors induced by
multi-step of transitions in environments, we overwrite function Aφ∗0 ,φ∗1 as Aφ∗0 ,φ∗1 = QκMθ − VM            κ
                                                                                                                  ,
          κ            ′
                                P∞ t                                                              ′
                                                                                                       t       θt
where QMθ (x, a, x ) = E           t γ log Dφ0 (xt , at , xt+1 )|(xt , at , xt+1 ) = (x, a, x ), κ, Mθt and
                                                   ∗
              t     P∞ t
   κ
VMθ (x, a) = E         t γ log Dφ1 (xt , at )|(xt , at ) = (x, a), κ, Mθt . To give an algorithm for single-
                                   ∗
     t
step environment model learning, we can just set γ in Q and V to 0.



                                                                    fake dataset
                                                                        𝒟&"'
                    (1) generate a dataset (line 4)



                                  (3) approximate the AWRM through Eq. 23
                                        to update the dynamics model
                                                                                  discriminators and value functions    (2) update the discriminators
  behavior policy       dynamics model           (line 7 to 14)
                                                                                        𝐷(" (𝑠, 𝑎, 𝑠′), 𝐷(# 𝑠, 𝑎 ,         and the value functions
     𝜇(𝑎|𝑠)
      "                        𝑀%!                                                                                               (line 5 to 6)
                                                                                                𝑄 and 𝑉



                      pretrain: approximated the behavior
                                  policy (line 1)                    offline dataset
                                                                           𝒟!"#$

                                 neural networks                            fake dataset                           offline dataset


                         Figure 7: Illustration of the workflow of the GALILEO algorithm.


                                                                     24
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


By adopting the above implementation techniques, we convert the objective into the following
formulation

                                   Aφ∗0 ,φ∗1 (x, a, x′ ) log Mθ (x′ |x, a) + EρκM ∗ (HM ∗ (x, a) − Aφ∗0 ,φ∗1 (x, a, x′ )) log Mθ (x′ |x, a)

   θt+1 = arg max EρκM
                 θ        θt

                                                                                                                                      (23)
                                           "∞                                                                                 #
                                            X
s.t.      QκMθt (x, a, x′ ) = E                 γ t log Dφ∗0 (xt , at , xt+1 )|(xt , at , xt+1 ) = (x, a, x′ ), κ, Mθt                (24)
                                            t
                               "∞                                                                #
           κ
                                X
          VM θt
                (x, a) = E                 γ t log Dφ∗1 (xt , at )|(xt , at ) = (x, a), κ, Mθt                                        (25)
                                       t

          φ∗0 = arg max EρκM ∗ ,u log Dφ0 (x + ux , a + ua , x′ + ux′ ) + EρκM                                     log(1 − Dφ0 (x + ux , a + ua , x′ + ux′ ))

                                                                                                          ,u
                     φ0                                                                              θt

                                                                                                                                      (26)
          φ∗1 = arg max EρκM ∗ ,u [log Dφ1 (x + ux , a + ua )] + EρκM ,u [log(1 − Dφ1 (x + ux , a + ua ))] ,
                     φ1                                              θt

                                                                                                                                      (27)

 where Aφ∗0 ,φ∗1 (x, a, x′ ) = QκMθ (x, a, x′ ) − VM
                                                   κ
                                                     θ
                                                       (x, a). In practice, GALILEO optimizes the first
term of Eq. 23 with conservative policy gradient algorithms (e.g., PPO (Schulman et al., 2017)
or TRPO (Schulman et al., 2015)) to avoid unreliable gradients for model improvements. Eq. 26
and Eq. 27 are optimized with supervised learning. The second term of Eq. 23 is optimized with
supervised learning with a re-weighting term −Aφ∗0 ,φ∗1 + HM ∗ . Since HM ∗ is unknown, we use
HMθ to estimate it. When the mean output probability of a batch of data is larger than 0.6 or
small than 0.4, we replace the second term of Eq. 23 with a standard supervised learning in Eq. 22.
Besides, unreliable gradients also exist in the process of optimizing the second term of Eq. 23. In
our implementation, we use the scale of policy gradients to constrain the gradients of the second
term of Eq. 23. In particular, we first compute the l2 -norm of the gradient of the first term of Eq. 23
via conservative policy gradient algorithms, named ||gpg ||2 . Then we compute the l2 -norm of the
gradient of the second term of Eq. 23, name ||gsl ||2 . Finally, we rescale the gradients of the second
term gsl by

                                                                  ||gpg ||2
                                                gsl ← gsl                               .                                             (28)
                                                            max{||gpg ||2 , ||gsl ||2 }

For each iteration, Eq. 23, Eq. 26, and Eq. 27 are trained with certain steps (See Tab. 5) following
the same framework as GAIL. Based on the above techniques, we summarize the pseudocode of
GALILEO in Alg. 2, where p0 and p1 are set to 0.4 and 0.6 in all of our experiments. The overall
architecture is shown in Fig. 7.                                                                                                             to Reviewer bcJS

E.2    C ONNECTION WITH P REVIOUS A DVERSARIAL A LGORITHMS

Standard GAN (Goodfellow et al., 2014) can be regarded as a partial implementation including the
first term of Eq. 23 and Eq. 26 by degrading them into the single-step scenario. In the context of
GALILEO, the objective of GAN is

             θt+1 = arg max EρκM [Aφ∗ (x, a, x′ ) log Mθ (x′ |x, a)]
                                   θ             θt

          s.t.   φ∗ = arg max EρκM ∗ [log Dφ (x, a, x′ )] + EρκM [log(1 − Dφ (x, a, x′ ))] ,
                                    φ                                               θt



where Aφ∗ (x, a, x′ ) = log Dφ∗ (x, a, x′ ). In the single-step scenario, ρκMθ (x, a, x′ ) =
                                                                                t
ρ0 (x)κ(a|x)Mθt (x′ |a, x). The term EρκM [Aφ∗ (x, a, x′ ) log Mθ (x′ |x, a)] can convert to
                                                                 θt
EρκM [log Dφ∗ (x, a, x′ )] by replacing the gradient of Mθt (x′ |x, a)∇θ log Mθ (x′ |x, a) with
    θ
∇θ Mθ (x′ |x, a) (Sutton & Barto, 1998). Previous algorithms like GANITE (Yoon et al., 2018)
and SCIGAN (Bica et al., 2020) can be regarded as variants of the above training framework.
The first term of Eq. 23 and Eq. 26 are similar to the objective of GAIL by regarding Mθ as the
“policy” to imitate and µ̂ as the “environment” to collect data. In the context of GALILEO, the


                                                                  25
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


objective of GAIL is:

                                            Aφ∗ (x, a, x′ ) log Mθ (x′ |x, a)

          θt+1 = arg max EρκM
                         θ         θt
                                      "∞                                                                             #
                                       X
       s.t.   QκMθt (x, a, x′ ) = E              t                                                          ′
                                                γ log Dφ∗ (xt , at , xt+1 )|(xt , at , xt+1 ) = (x, a, x ), κ, Mθt
                                            t

                   φ∗ = arg max EρκM ∗ log Dφ (x, a, x′ ) + EρκM                        log(1 − Dφ (x, a, x′ )) ,

                               φ                                             θt



where Aφ∗ (x, a, x′ ) = QκMθ (x, a, x′ ) − VM
                                            κ
                                              θ
                                                            κ
                                                (x, a) and VM θ
                                                                (x, a) = EMθt (x,a) [Qκ (x, a, x′ )].
                                                                             t


F    A DDITIONAL R ELATED W ORK
                                                                                                                         to Reviewer j5p5
                                                                                                                         and rQ79
Our primitive objective is inspired by weighted empirical risk minimization (WERM) based on
inverse propensity score (IPS). WERM is originally proposed to solve the generalization problem of
domain adaptation in machine learning literature. For instance, we would like to train a predictor
M (y|x) in a domain with distribution Ptrain (x) to minimize the prediction risks in the domain with
distribution Ptest (x), where Ptest ̸= Ptest . To solve the problem, we can train a weighted objective
with maxM Ex∼Ptrain [ PPtrain
                           test (x)
                                 (x) log M (y|x)], which is called weighted empirical risk minimization
methods (Ben-David et al., 2006; 2010; Cortes et al., 2010; Byrd & Lipton, 2019; Quinonero-Candela
et al., 2008). These results have been extended and applied to causal inference, where the predictor
is required to be generalized from the data distribution in observational studies (source domain)
to the data distribution in randomized controlled trials (target domain) (Shimodaira, 2000; Assaad
et al., 2021; Hassanpour & Greiner, 2019; Jung et al., 2020; Johansson et al., 2018). In this case,
the input features include a state x (a.k.a. covariates) and an action a (a.k.a. treatment variable)
which is sampled from a policy. We often assume the distribution of x, P (x) is consistent between
the source domain and the test domain, then we have PPtrain  test (x)    P (x)β(a|x)   β(a|x)
                                                                   (x) = P (x)µ(a|x) = µ(a|x) , where µ and
β are the policies in source and target domains respectively. In Shimodaira (2000); Assaad et al.
(2021); Hassanpour & Greiner (2019), the policy in randomized controlled trials is modeled as a
uniform policy, then PPtrain
                          test (x)      P (x)β(a|x)   β(a|x)          1      1
                                (x) = P (x)µ(a|x) = µ(a|x) ∝ µ(a|x) . µ(a|x) is also known as inverse
propensity score (IPS). In Johansson et al. (2018), it assumes that the policy in the target domain is
predefined as β(a|x) before environment model learning, then it uses βµ as the IPS. The differences
between AWRM and previous works are fallen in two aspects: (1) We consider the distribution-shift
problem in the sequential decision-making scenario. In this scenario, we not only consider the action
distribution mismatching between the behavior policy µ and the policy to evaluation β, but also the
follow-up effects of policies to the state distribution; (2) For faithful offline policy optimization, we
require the environment model to have generalization ability in numerous different policies. The
objective of AWRM is proposed to guarantee the generalization ability of M in numerous different
policies instead of a specific policy.
On a different thread, there are also studies that bring counterfactual inference techniques of causal
inference into model-based RL (Buesing et al., 2019; Pitis et al., 2020; Sontakke et al., 2021).
These works consider that the transition function is relevant to some hidden noise variables and
use Pearl-style structural causal models (SCMs), which is a directed acyclic graphs to define the
causality of nodes in an environment, to handle the problem. SCMs can help RL in different ways:
Buesing et al. (2019) approximate the posterior of the noise variables based on the observation of
data, and environment models are learned based on the inferred noises. The generalization ability is
improved if we can infer the correct value of the noise variables. Pitis et al. (2020) discover several
local causal structural models of a global environment model, then data augmentation strategies
by leveraging these local structures to generate counterfactual experiences. Sontakke et al. (2021)
proposes a representation learning technique for causal factors, which is an instance of the hidden
noise variables, in partially observable Markov decision processes (POMDPs). With the learned
representation of causal factors, the performance of policy learning and transfer in downstream
tasks will be improved. Instead of considering the hidden noise variables in the environments, our to Reviewer j5p5
study considers the environment model learning problem in the fully observed setting and focuses
on unbiased causal effect estimation in the offline dataset under behavior policies collected with
selection bias.


                                                              26
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


In offline model-based RL, the problem is called distribution shift (Yu et al., 2020; Levine et al.,
2020; Chen et al., 2021) which has received great attentions. However, previous algorithms do not
handle the model learning challenge directly but propose techniques to suppress policy sampling and
learning in risky regions (Yu et al., 2020; Kidambi et al., 2020). Although these algorithms have made
great progress in offline policy optimization in many tasks, so far, how to learn a better environment
model in this scenario has rarely been discussed.

G     E XPERIMENT D ETAILS
G.1     S ETTINGS

G.1.1    G ENERAL N EGATIVE F EEDBACK C ONTROL (GNFC)
The design of GNFC is inspired by a classic type of scenario that behavior policies µ have selection
bias and easily lead to counterfactual risks: For some internet platforms, we would like to allocate
budgets to a set of targets (e.g., customers or cities) to increase the engagement of the targets in the
platforms. Our task is to train a model to predict targets’ feedback on engagement given targets’
features and allocated budgets.
In these tasks, for better benefits, the online working policy (i.e., the behavior policy) will tend to cut
down the budgets if targets have better engagement, otherwise, the budgets might be increased. The
risk of counterfactual environment model learning in the task is that: the object with better historical
engagement will be sent to smaller budgets because of the selection bias of the behavior policies, then
the model might exploit this correlation for learning and get a conclusion that: increasing budgets
will reduce the targets’ engagement, which violates the real causality. We construct an environment
and a behavior policy to mimic the above process. In particular, the behavior policy µGN F C is
                                             (62.5 − mean(x))
                                µGN F C (x) =                    + ϵ,
                                                      15
where ϵ is a sample noise, which will be discussed later. The environment includes two parts:
(1) response function M1 (y|x, a):
                                  M1 (y|x, a) = N (mean(x) + a, 2)

(2) mapping function M2 (x′ |x, y):
                                  M2 (x′ |x, a, y) = y − mean(x) + x
The transition function M ∗ is a composite of M ∗ (x′ |x, a) = M2 (x′ |x, a, M1 (y|x, a)). The behavior
policies have selection bias: the actions taken are negatively correlated with the states, as illustrated
in Fig. 8(a) and Fig. 8(b). We control the difficulty of distinguishing the correct causality of x, a, and
y by designing different strategies of noise sampling on ϵ. In principle, with a larger number or more
pronounced disturbances, there are more samples violating the correlation between x and a, then
more samples can be used to find the correct causality. Therefore, we can control the difficulty of
counterfactual environment model learning by controlling the strength of disturbance. In particular,
we sample ϵ from a uniform distribution U (−e, e) with probability p. That is, ϵ = 0 with probability
1 − p and ϵ ∼ U (−e, e) with probability p. Then with larger p, there are more samples in the dataset
violating the negative correlation (i.e., µGN F C ), and with larger e, the difference of the feedback
will be more obvious. By selecting different e and p, we can construct different tasks to verify the
effectiveness and ability of the counterfactual environment model learning algorithm.

G.1.2    T HE C ANCER G ENOMIC ATLAS (TCGA)
The Cancer Genomic Atlas (TCGA) is a project that has profiled and analyzed large numbers of
human tumors to discover molecular aberrations at the DNA, RNA, protein, and epigenetic levels. The
resulting rich data provide a significant opportunity to accelerate our understanding of the molecular
basis of cancer. We obtain features, x, from the TCGA dataset and consider three continuous
treatments as done in SCIGAN (Bica et al., 2020). Each treatment, a, is associated with a set of
parameters, v1 , v2 , v3 , that are sampled randomly by sampling a vector from a standard normal
distribution and scaling it with its norm. We assign interventions by sampling a treatment, a, from


                                                    27
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                                                                            4
                    60
                    50                                                                      3


         response


                                                                                   action
                    40                                                                      2
                    30
                                                                                            1
                    20
                    10                                                                      0
                         0       10     20          30        40         50                     0    10        20        30    40       50
                                        timestep                                                              timestep
                         (a) y in collected trajectories.                                       (b) a in collected trajectories.

Figure 8: Illustration of information about the collected dataset in GNFC. Each color of the line
denotes one of the collected trajectories. The X-axis denotes the timestep of a trajectory.


a beta distribution, a | x ∼ Beta (α, β). α ≥ 1 controls the sampling bias and β = α−1 a∗ + 2 − α,
where a∗ is the optimal treatment. This setting of β ensures that the mode of Beta (α, β) is a∗ .
The calculation of treatment response and optimal treatment are shown in Table 3.


Table 3: Treatment response used to generate semi-synthetic outcomes for patient features x. In the
experiments, we set C = 10.
 Treatment                                             Treatment Response                                                     Optimal treatment
                                                                                                                                             T
                                                                                                                                        (v21 ) x
                                                        T            T          T
     1                       f1 (x, a1 ) = C        v11 x + 12 v21 xa1 − 12 v31 xa21                                            a∗1 =        T
                                                                                                                                        2(v31 ) x
                                                                                                                                             T
                                                                                                                                        (v32 ) x
                                                                    T              2T
                                                                                  v x
     2                            f2 (x, a2 ) = C            v12        x + sin π v22T x a2                                     a∗2 =        T
                                                                                       3                                                2(v22 ) x
                                                                                                              T

                                                                                                          (v23 ) x
                                                    T                                                                     3
     3               f3 (x, a3 ) = C         v13        x + 12a3 (a3 − b)2 , where b = 0.75                     T         b if b ≥ 0.75, 1 if b < 0.75
                                                                                                          (v33 ) x


We conduct experiments on three different treatments separately and change the value of bias α to
assess the robustness of different methods to treatment bias. When the bias of treatment is large,
which means α is large, the training set contains data with a strong bias on treatment so it would be
difficult for models to appropriately predict the treatment responses out of the distribution of training
data.

G.1.3    B UDGET A LLOCATION TASK TO THE T IME PERIOD (BAT)

We deploy GALILEO in a real-world large-scale food-delivery platform. The platform contains
various food stores, and food delivery clerks. The overall workflow is as follows: the platform
presents the nearby food stores to the customers and the customers make orders, i.e., purchase
take-out foods from some stores on the platform. The food delivery clerks can select orders from
the platform to fulfill. After an order is selected to fulfill, the delivery clerks will take the ordered
take-out foods from the stores and then send the food to the customers. The platform will pay the
delivery clerks (mainly in proportion to the distance between the store and the customers’ location)
once the orders are fulfilled. An illustration of the workflow can be found in Fig. 9.
However, there is an imbalance problem between the demanded orders from customers and the supply
of delivery clerks to fulfill these orders. For example, at peak times like lunchtime, there will be
many more demanded orders than at other times, and the existed delivery clerks might not be able to
fulfill all of these orders timely. The goal of the Budget Allocation task to the Time period (BAT) is
to handle the imbalance problem in time periods by sending reasonable allowances to different time
periods. More precisely, the goal of BAT is to make all orders (i.e., the demand) sent in different time
periods can be fulfilled (i.e., the supply) timely.


                                                                              28
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                   1. customers send
                             take-out food orders remotely
                                 based on the platform                                         2. stores make food


                                                                       stores


                                                                                                          3. delivery clerks
                                        4. delivery clerks                                                    take food
                                         send the food                                                     from the stores
                 customers
                                        to the customers



                                                                                    delivery
                                                                                     clerk


                                                                             5. The platform will pay
                                                                              the delivery clerks for
                                                     platform                   fulfilling the order



                 Figure 9: Illustration of the workflow of the food-delivery platform.


To handle the imbalance problem in different time periods, in the platform, the orders in different
time periods t ∈ [0, 1, 2..., 23] will be allocated with different allowances c ∈ N + . For example, at
10 A.M. (i.e., t = 10), we add 0.5$ (i.e., c = 0.5) allowances to all of the demanded orders. From
10 A.M. to 11 A.M., the delivery clerks who take orders and send food to customers will receive
extra allowances. Specifically, if the platform pays the delivery clerks 2$ for fulfilling the order, now
he/she will receive 2.5$. For each day, the budget of allowance C is fixed. We should find the best
budget allocation policy π ∗ (c|t) of the limited budget C to make as many orders as possible can be
taken timely.
To find the policy, we first learn a model to reconstruct the response of allowance for each delivery
clerk M̂ (yt+1 |st , pt , ct ), where yt+1 is the taken orders of the delivery clerks in state st , ct is the
allowances, pt denotes static features of the time period t. In particular, the state st includes historical
order-taken information of the delivery clerks, current orders information, the feature of weather,
city information, and so on. Then we use a rule-based mapping function f to fill the complete next
time-period states, i.e., st+1 = f (st , pt , ct , yt+1 ). Here we define the composition of the above
functions M̂ and f as M̂f . Finally, we learn a budget allocation policy based on the learned model.
For each day, the policy we would like to find is:
                                                     " 23             #
                                                      X
                                        max Es0 ∼S         yt |M̂f , π ,
                                             π
                                                                 t=0
                                                                     X
                                                             s.t.,           ct yt ≤ C
                                                                     t,s∈S

In our experiment, we evaluate the degree of balancing between demand and supply by computing the
averaged five-minute order-taken rate, that is the percentage of orders picked up within five minutes.
Note that the behavior policy is fixed for the long term in this application. So we directly use the data
replay with a small scale of noise (See Tab. 5) to reconstruct the behavior policy for model learning
in GALILEO.
Also note that although we model the response for each delivery clerk, for fairness, the budget
allocation policy is just determining the allowance of each time period t and keeps the allowance
to each delivery clerk s the same.

G.2    BASELINE A LGORITHMS

The algorithm we compared are: (1) Supervised Learning (SL): training a environment model
to minimize the expectation of prediction error, without considering the counterfactual risks; (2)
inverse propensity weighting (IPW) (Spirtes, 2010): a practical way to balance the selection bias
by re-weighting. It can be regarded as ω = µ̂1 , where µ̂ is another model learned to approximate


                                                                 29
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


the behavior policy; (3) SCIGAN: a recent proposed adversarial algorithm for model learning for
continuous-valued interventions (Bica et al., 2020). All of the baselines algorithms are implemented
with the same capacity of neural networks (See Tab. 5).

G.2.1    S UPERVISED L EARNING (SL)

As a baseline, we train a multilayer perceptron model to directly predict the response of different
treatments, without considering the counterfactual risks. We use mean square error to estimate the
                                                                                     Pn              2
performance of our model so that the loss function can be expressed as M SE = n1 i=1 (yi − ŷi ) ,
where n is the number of samples, y is the true value of response and ŷ is the predicted response. In
practice, we train our SL models using Adam optimizer and the initial learning rate 3e−4 on both
datasets TCGA and GNFC. The architecture of the neural networks is listed in Tab. 5.

G.2.2    I NVERSE P ROPENSITY W EIGHTING (IPW)

Inverse propensity weighting (Spirtes, 2010) is an approach where the treatment outcome model
uses sample weights to balance the selection bias by re-weighting. The weights are defined as the
                                                                                     1
inverse propensity of actually getting the treatment, which can be expressed as µ̂(a|x)  , where x stands
for the feature vectors in a dataset, a is the corresponding action and µ̂(a|x) indicates the action
taken probability of a given the features x within the dataset. µ̂ is learned with standard supervised
learning. Standard IPW leads to large weights for the points with small sampling probabilities and
finally makes the learning process unstable. We solve the problem by clipping the propensity score:
µ̂ ← min(µ̂, 0.05), which is common used in existing studies (Ionides, 2008). The loss function can
                        Pn                         2
thus be expressed as n1 i=1 µ̂(ai1|xi ) (yi − ŷi ) . The architecture of the neural networks is listed in
Tab. 5.

G.2.3    SCIGAN

SCIGAN (Bica et al., 2020) is a model that uses generative adversarial networks to learn the
data distribution of the counterfactual outcomes and thus generate individualized response curves.
SCIGAN does not place any restrictions on the form of the treatment-does response functions
and is capable of estimating patient outcomes for multiple treatments, each with an associated
parameter. SCIGAN first trains a generator to generate response curves for each sample within
the training dataset. The learned generator can then be used to train an inference network using
standard supervised methods. For fair comparison, we increase the number of parameters for the the
open-source version of SCIGAN so that the SCIGAN model can have same order of magnitude of
network parameters as GALILEO. In addition, we also finetune the hyperparameters (Tab. 4) of the
enlarged SCIGAN to realize its full strength. We set num_dosage_samples 9 and λ = 10.


                          Table 4: Table of hyper-parameters for SCIGAN.
                                Parameter                Values
                                 Number of samples       3, 5, 7, 9, 11
                                 λ                       0.1, 1, 10, 20



G.3     H YPER - PARAMETERS

We list the hyper-parameter of GALILEO in Tab. 5.


G.4     C OMPUTATION R ESOURCES

We use one Tesla V100 PCIe 32GB GPU and a 32-core Intel(R) Xeon(R) Gold 5118 CPU @ 2.30GHz
to train all of our model.


                                                   30
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                        Table 5: Table of hyper-parameters for all of the tasks.
  Parameter                                           GNFC TAGC                                MuJoCo                  BAT
  hidden layers of all neural networks                         4                   4               5                     5
  hidden units of all neural networks                        256                 256              512                  512
  collect samples for each time of model update             5000                5000             40000                96000
  batch size of discriminators                              5000                5000             40000                80000
  horizon                                                     50                   1              100             48 (half-hours)
  ϵµ (also ϵD )                                             0.005                0.01   0.05 (0.1 for walker2d)        0.05
  times for discriminator update                               2                   2               1                     5
  times for model update                                       1                   1               2                    20
  times for supervised learning update                         1                   1               4                    20
  learning rate for supervised learning                      1e-5                1e-5             3e-4                 1e-5
  γ                                                          0.99                 0.0             0.99                 0.99
  clip-ratio                                                NAN                 NAN              NAN                    0.1
  max DKL                                                   0.001               0.001            0.001                 NAN
  optimization algorithm (the first term of Eq. 23)         TRPO                TRPO             TRPO                  PPO


H     A DDITIONAL R ESULTS

H.1    A LL OF THE R ESULT TABLE

We give the result of CNFC in Tab. 8, TCGA in Tab. 9, BAT in Tab. 7, and MuJoCo in Tab. 6.

H.2    AVERAGED R ESPONSE C URVES

We give the averaged responses for all of the tasks and the algorithms in Fig. 16 to Fig. 23. We
randomly select 20% of the states in the dataset and equidistantly sample actions from the action
space for each sampled state, and plot the averaged predicted feedback of each action. The real
response is slightly different among different figure as the randomly-selected states for testing is
different. We sample 9 points in GNFC tasks and 33 points in TAGC tasks for plotting.

H.3    A BLATION S TUDIES

In Sec. 4.3 and Appx. E.1, we introduce several techniques
to develop a practical GALILEO algorithm. Based on task         10
e0.2_p0.05 in GNFC, we give the ablation studies to
investigate the effects of these techniques. We first com-       8
pare two variants that do not handle the assumptions viola-
tion problems: (1) NO_INJECT_NOISE: set ϵµ and ϵD
                                                                    sqrt MISE


                                                                 6
to zero, which makes the overlap assumption not satisfied;;
(2) SINGLE_SL: without replacing the second term in              4
Eq. 8 with standard supervised learning even when the
output probability of D is far away from 0.5. Besides,           2
we introduced several tricks inspired by GAIL and give
a comparison of these tricks and GAIL: (3) ONE_STEP:             0
                                                                        EO      DIS TEP      _SL     AIL     ISE
use one-step reward instead of cumulative rewards (i.e.,           GALIL SINGLE_ ONE_S SINGLE PURE_G JECT_NO
                                                                                                    _ IN
Q and V; see Eq. 24 and Eq. 25) for re-weighting, which                                          NO
is implemented by set γ to 0; (4) SINGE_DIS:         remove
Tφ∗1 (x, a) and replace it with EMθ Tφ∗0 (x, a, x′ ) , which Figure 10: Illustration of the ablation

is inspired by GAIL that uses a value function as a baseline studies. The error bars are the standard
instead of using another discriminator; (5) PURE_GAIL: error.
remove the second term in Eq. 8. It can be regarded as a naive adoption of GAIL and a partial
implementation of GALILEO.
We summarize the results in Fig. 10. Based on the results of NO_INJECT_NOISE and SINGLE_SL,
we can see that handling the assumption violation problems is important and will increase the ability


                                                      31
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Table 6: The root mean square errors on MuJoCo tasks. We bold the lowest error for each task.
“medium” dataset is used for training, while “expert” and “medium-replay” datasets are just used
for testing. ± follows the standard deviation of three seeds.
              TASK                                 HalfCheetah
              DATASET       medium (train)      expert (test)    medium-replay (test)
              GALILEO        0.378 ± 0.003     2.287± 0.005         1.411 ± 0.037
              OFF-SL         0.404 ± 0.001     3.311 ± 0.055        2.246 ± 0.016
              TASK                                    Walker2d
              DATASET       medium (train)      expert (test)    medium-replay (test)
              GALILEO         0.49 ± 0.00      1.514 ± 0.002        0.968 ± 0.004
              OFF-SL         0.467 ± 0.004     1.825 ± 0.061        1.239 ± 0.004
              TASK                                    Hopper
              DATASET       medium (train)      expert (test)    medium-replay (test)
              GALILEO        0.037 ± 0.002     0.322 ± 0.036        0.408 ± 0.003
              OFF-SL         0.034 ± 0.001     0.464 ± 0.021        0.574 ± 0.008

on counterfactual queries. The results of PURE_GAIL tell us that the partial implementation of
GALILEO is not enough to give stable predictions on counterfactual data; On the other hand, the
result of ONE_STEP also demonstrates that embedding the cumulative error of one-step prediction
is helpful for GALILEO training; Finally, we also found that SINGLE_DIS          nearly
                                                                                       has almost no
effect on the results. It suggests that, empirically, we can use EMθ Tφ∗0 (x, a, x′ ) as a replacement


for Tφ∗1 (x, a), which can reduce the computation costs of the extra discriminator training.

H.4   W ORST-C ASE P REDICTION E RROR

In theory, GALILEO increases the generalization ability by focusing on the worst-case samples’
training to achieve AWRM.hTo demonstrate the property, we proposei a new metric named Mean-Max
                                                               2
Square Error (MMSE): E maxa∈A (M ∗ (x′ |x, a) − M (x′ |x, a)) and give the results of MMSE
for GNFC in Tab. 10 and for TCGA in Tab. 11.

H.5   D ETAILED R ESULTS IN THE M U J O C O TASKS

We select 3 environments from D4RL (Fu et al., 2020) to construct our model learning tasks. We
compare it with a typical transition model learning algorithm used in the previous offline model-based
RL algorithms (Yu et al., 2020; Kidambi et al., 2020), which is a variant of standard supervised
learning. We name the method OFF-SL. We train models in datasets HalfCheetah-medium, Walker2d-
medium, and Hopper-medium, which are collected by a behavior policy with 1/3 performance to
the expert policy, then we test them in the corresponding expert dataset. We plot the converged
results and learning curves of GALILEO and OFF-SL in three MuJoCo tasks in Tab. 6 and Fig. 11
respectively.
In Fig. 11, we can see that both OFF-SL and GALILEO perform well in the training datasets.
OFF-SL can even reach a bit lower error in halfcheetah and walker2d. However, when we verify
the models through “expert” and “medium-replay” datasets, which are collected by other policies,
the performance of GALILEO is significantly more stable and better than OFF-SL. As the training
continues, OFF-SL even gets worse and worse. In summary, GALILEO reaches significantly better
performances in the expert dataset: the averaged declines of root MSE in three environments are
56.5%, 49.2%, and 34.8%. However, whether in GALILEO or OFF-SL, the performance for testing
is at least 2x worse than in the training dataset. The phenomenon indicates that although GALILEO
can make better performances for counterfactual queries, the risks of using the models are still large
and still challenging to be further solved.


                                                 32
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


            1.2                                GALILEO                         0.25                                GALILEO                                                   GALILEO
                                               OFF-SL                                                                                     1.2                                OFF-SL
                                                                                                                   OFF-SL
                                                                                                                                          1.1
                                                                               0.20


                                                           mean square error
            1.0                                                                                                                           1.0
 root MSE


                                                                                                                               sqrt MSE
                                                                               0.15                                                       0.9
            0.8
                                                                                                                                          0.8
            0.6                                                                0.10                                                       0.7
                                                                                                                                          0.6
                                                                               0.05                                                       0.5
            0.4
                  0.0   0.2    0.4    0.6    0.8    1.0                               0.0   0.2    0.4    0.6    0.8    1.0                     0.0   0.2    0.4    0.6    0.8    1.0
                              update steps         ×105                                           update steps         ×105                                 update steps         ×105

      (a) halfcheetah-medium (train)                                             (b) hopper-medium (train)                                (c) walker2d-medium (train)

                                                                               0.65                                GALILEO                                                   GALILEO
            2.2                                                                                                                           1.6                                OFF-SL
                                                                                                                   OFF-SL
                                                                               0.60                                                       1.5
                                                           mean square error


            2.0
                                                                               0.55                                                       1.4
 root MSE


                                                                                                                               sqrt MSE
                                               GALILEO
            1.8                                OFF-SL                                                                                     1.3
                                                                               0.50
                                                                                                                                          1.2
            1.6
                                                                               0.45                                                       1.1
            1.4                                                                0.40                                                       1.0
                  0.0   0.2    0.4    0.6    0.8    1.05                              0.0   0.2    0.4    0.6    0.8    1.05                    0.0   0.2    0.4    0.6    0.8    1.0
                              update steps         ×10                                            update steps         ×10                                  update steps         ×105

 (d)    halfcheetah-medium-replay (e) hopper-medium-replay (test) (f) walker2d-medium-replay (test)
 (test)

            3.4                                                                                                    GALILEO                1.9
                                                                               0.55
                                                                                                                   OFF-SL
            3.2
                                                                               0.50                                                       1.8
                                                           mean square error


            3.0
                                                                               0.45
 root MSE


                                                                                                                               sqrt MSE


                                               GALILEO                                                                                    1.7                                GALILEO
            2.8
                                               OFF-SL                          0.40                                                                                          OFF-SL
            2.6                                                                                                                           1.6
                                                                               0.35
            2.4
                                                                               0.30                                                       1.5
            2.2
                                                                               0.25
                  0.0   0.2    0.4    0.6    0.8    1.0                               0.0   0.2    0.4    0.6    0.8    1.0                     0.0   0.2    0.4    0.6    0.8    1.0
                              update steps         ×105                                           update steps         ×105                                 update steps         ×105

            (g) halfcheetah-expert (test)                                             (h) hopper-expert (test)                                  (i) walker2d-expert (test)

Figure 11: Illustration of learning curves of the MuJoCo Tasks. The X-axis record the steps of the
environment model update, and the Y-axis is the corresponding prediction error. The figures with
titles ending in “(train)” means the dataset is used for training while the titles ending in “(test)” means
the dataset is just used for testing. The solid curves are the mean reward and the shadow is the
standard error of three seeds.


                                                                                                   33
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                                                                                              1.0


                                                                          normalized fulfilled order amount
                                                                                                              0.8

                                                                                                              0.6

                                                                                                              0.4

                                                                                                              0.2

                                                                                                                                0.0                           0.2         0.4     0.6         0.8         1.0
                                                                                                                                                                    normalized actions

Figure 12: Illustration of relationship between user feedback and the actions of the offline dataset in
the real-world food-delivery platform.


H.6                                   D ETAILED R ESULTS IN THE BAT TASK

The core challenge of the environment model learning in BAT tasks is similar to the challenge in
Fig. 1. Specifically, the behavior policy in BAT tasks is a human-expert policy, which will tend to
increase the budget of allowance in the time periods with a lower supply of delivery clerks, otherwise
will decrease the budget (Fig. 12 gives an instance of this phenomenon in the real data).
Since there is no oracle environment model for querying, we have to describe the results with other
metrics.

                               1.00                                     GALILEO                                                                  1.00                                         GALILEO                                  1.00                                 GALILEO
  rescaled averaged response


                                                                                                                    rescaled averaged response


                                                                        SL                                                                                                                    SL          rescaled averaged response                                        SL
                                                                                                                                                 0.98                                                                                  0.98
                               0.98
                                                                                                                                                 0.96                                                                                  0.96
                               0.96                                                                                                              0.94
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       0.94
                                                                                                                                                 0.92
                               0.94                                                                                                                                                                                                    0.92
                                                                                                                                                 0.90
                               0.92                                                                                                              0.88                                                                                  0.90
                                                                                                                                                 0.86                                                                                  0.88
                               0.90
                                      0.0      0.2    0.4   0.6   0.8                 1.0                                                               0.0         0.2    0.4   0.6    0.8         1.0                                       0.0   0.2   0.4   0.6   0.8       1.0
                                       normalized allocated allowances                                                                                   normalized allocated allowances                                                       normalized allocated allowances
                                                 (a) City-A                                                                                                          (b) City-B                                                                      (c) City-C

                               1.00         GALILEO                                                                                              1.00                                                                                  1.00                                 GALILEO
  rescaled averaged response


                                                                                                                    rescaled averaged response


                                                                                                                                                                                                          rescaled averaged response


                                            SL                                                                                                                                                                                                                              SL
                               0.98                                                                                                                                                                                                    0.99
                                                                                                                                                 0.98
                               0.96                                                                                                                                                                                                    0.98
                               0.94                                                                                                              0.96                                                                                  0.97
                               0.92                                                                                                                                                                                                    0.96
                               0.90                                                                                                              0.94                                                                                  0.95
                               0.88                                                                                                                                                                                                    0.94
                                                                                                                                                 0.92                                         GALILEO
                               0.86                                                                                                                                                           SL                                       0.93
                                      0.0      0.2    0.4   0.6   0.8                 1.0                                                               0.0         0.2    0.4   0.6    0.8         1.0                                       0.0   0.2   0.4   0.6   0.8       1.0
                                       normalized allocated allowances                                                                                   normalized allocated allowances                                                       normalized allocated allowances
                                                 (d) City-D                                                                                                          (e) City-E                                                                       (f) City-F

Figure 13: Illustration of the response curves in the 6 cities. Although the ground-truth curves
are unknown, through human expert knowledge, we know that it is expected to be monotonically
increasing .

First, we review whether the tendency of the response curve is consistent. In this application, with a
larger budget of allowance, the supply will not be decreased. As can be seen in Fig. 13, the tendency
of GALILEO’s response is valid in 6 cities but almost all of the models of SL give opposite directions
to the response. If we learn a policy through the model of SL, the optimal solution is canceling all of
the allowances, which is obviously incorrect in practice.
Second, we conduct randomized controlled trials (RCT) in one of the testing cities. Using the RCT
samples, we can evaluate the correctness of the sort order of the model predictions via Area Under


                                                                                                                                                                           34
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                rescaled cumulative treatment effects
                                                                        1.0         random
                                                                                    GALILEO
                                                                                    SL
                                                                        0.5

                                                                        0.0

                                                                        0.5

                                                                        1.0

                                                                              0.0      0.2      0.4     0.6     0.8     1.0
                                                                              cumulative samples (rescaled to 1)

                         Figure 14: Illustration of the AUUC result for BAT.


the Uplift Curve (AUUC) (Betlei et al., 2020). To plot AUUC, we first sort the RCT samples based
on the predicted treatment effects. Then the cumulative treatment effects are computed by scanning
the sorted sample list. If the sort order of the model predictions is better, the sample with larger
treatment effects will be computed early. Then the area of AUUC will be larger than the one via a
random sorting strategy. The result of AUUC show GALILEO gives a reasonable sorting to the RCT
samples (see Fig. 14).
Finally, we search for the optimal policy via the cross-entropy method planner (Hafner et al., 2019)
based on the learned model. We test the online supply improvement in 6 cities. The algorithm
compared is a human-expert policy, which is also the behavior policy of the offline datasets. We
conduct online A/B tests for each of the cities. For each test, we randomly split a city into two
partitions, one is for deploying the optimal policy learned from the GALILEO model, and the other is
as a control group, which keeps the human-expert policy as before. Before the intervention, we collect
10 days’ observation data and compute the averaged five-minute order-taken rates as the baselines
of the treatment and control group, named bt and bc respectively. Then we start intervention and
observe the five-minute order-taken rate in the following 14 days for the two groups. The results of the
treatment and control groups are yit and yic respectively, where i denotes the i-th day of the deployment.
The percentage points of the supply improvement are computed via difference-in-difference (DID):
                                   PT t         t       c    c
                                      i (yi − b ) − (yi − b )
                                                                × 100,
                                                 T
where T is the total days of the intervention and T = 14 in our experiments.


Table 7: Results on BAT. We use City-X to denote the experiments on different cities. “pp” is an
abbreviation of percentage points on the supply improvement.
                      target                  City-A    City-B   City-C
                       supply improvement                                                     +1.63pp         +0.79pp     +0.27pp
                       target                                                                 City-D          City-E          City-F
                       supply improvement                                                     +0.2pp          +0.14pp     +0.41pp

The results are summarized in Tab. 7. The online experiment is conducted in 14 days and the results
show that the policy learned with GALILEO can make better (the supply improvements are from 0.14
to 1.63 percentage points) budget allocation than the behavior policies in all the testing cities. We
give detailed results which record the supply difference between the treatment group and the control
group in Fig. 15.


                                                                                                35
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


 rescaled five-minute order-taken rate


                                                                                           rescaled five-minute order-taken rate


                                                                                                                                                                                                      rescaled five-minute order-taken rate
                                         1.00                                                                                      1.00                                                                                                       1.000
                                         0.98                                                                                      0.98                                                                                                       0.995
                                         0.96                                                                                      0.96                                                                                                       0.990
                                         0.94
                                                                                                                                   0.94                                                                                                       0.985
                                         0.92
                                                                                                                                   0.92                                                                                                       0.980
                                         0.90
                                                                                                                                   0.90                                                                                                       0.975
                                         0.88
                                         0.86                  treatment group (GALILEO)                                           0.88                                   treatment group (GALILEO)                                           0.970                                   treatment group (GALILEO)
                                                               control group                                                                                              control group                                                                                               control group
                                         0.84                  the day starting A/B test                                           0.86                                   the day starting A/B test                                           0.965                                   the day starting A/B test
                                                0   5     10      15          20                                                          0         5          10            15          20                                                           0          5          10           15          20
                                                        day number                                                                                        day number                                                                                                   day number
                                                    (a) City-A                                                                                      (b) City-B                                                                                                  (c) City-C
 rescaled five-minute order-taken rate


                                                                                           rescaled five-minute order-taken rate


                                                                                                                                                                                                      rescaled five-minute order-taken rate



                                         1.00                                                                                      1.00                                                                                                       1.00
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              0.99
                                         0.99                                                                                      0.98                                                                                                       0.98
                                         0.98                                                                                      0.96                                                                                                       0.97
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              0.96
                                         0.97                                                                                      0.94                                                                                                       0.95
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              0.94
                                         0.96                  treatment group (GALILEO)
                                                                                                                                   0.92
                                                                                                                                              treatment group (GALILEO)                                                                                   treatment group (GALILEO)
                                                               control group                                                                  control group                                                                                   0.93        control group
                                                               the day starting A/B test                                                      the day starting A/B test                                                                                   the day starting A/B test
                                                0   5     10      15          20                                                          0         5          10            15          20                                                           0         5          10           15           20
                                                        day number                                                                                        day number                                                                                                  day number
                                                    (d) City-D                                                                                      (e) City-E                                                                                                   (f) City-F

                                                    Figure 15: Illustration of the daily responses in the A/B test in the 6 cities.


                                                                                                                                                            36
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


         √
Table 8: M ISE results on GNFC. We bold the lowest error for each task. ± is the standard
deviation of three random seeds.
                                 e1_p1   e0.2_p1        e0.05_p1
                  GALILEO      5.17 ± 0.06    4.73 ± 0.13    4.70 ± 0.02
                  SL           5.15 ± 0.23    4.73 ± 0.31    23.64 ± 4.86
                  IPW          5.22 ± 0.09    5.50 ± 0.01    5.02 ± 0.07
                  SCIGAN       7.05 ± 0.52    6.58 ± 0.58    18.55 ± 3.50
                               e1_p0.2        e0.2_p0.2      e0.05_p0.2
                  GALILEO      5.03 ± 0.09    4.72 ± 0.05    4.87 ± 0.15
                  SL           5.21 ± 0.63    6.74 ± 0.15    33.52 ± 1.32
                  IPW          5.27 ± 0.05    5.69 ± 0.00    20.23 ± 0.45
                  SCIGAN       16.07 ± 0.27   12.07 ± 1.93   19.27 ± 10.72
                               e1_p0.05       e0.2_p0.05     e0.05_p0.05
                  GALILEO      5.23 ± 0.41    5.01 ± 0.08    6.17 ± 0.33
                  SL           5.89 ± 0.88    14.25 ± 3.48   37.50 ± 2.29
                  IPW          5.21 ± 0.01    5.52 ± 0.44    31.95 ± 0.05
                  SCIGAN       11.50 ± 7.76   13.05 ± 4.19   25.74 ± 8.30

         √
Table 9: M ISE results on TCGA. We bold the lowest error for each task. ± is the standard
deviation of three random seeds.
                                 t0_bias_2.0 t0_bias_20.0 t0_bias_50.0
                   GALILEO      0.34 ± 0.05    0.67 ± 0.13   2.04 ± 0.12
                   SL           0.38 ± 0.13    1.50 ± 0.31   3.06 ± 0.65
                   IPW          6.57 ± 1.16    6.88 ± 0.30   5.84 ± 0.71
                   SCIGAN       0.74 ± 0.05    2.74 ± 0.35   3.19 ± 0.09
                                t1_bias_2.0    t1_bias_6.0   t1_bias_8.0
                   GALILEO      0.43 ± 0.05    0.25 ± 0.02   0.21 ± 0.04
                   SL           0.47 ± 0.05    1.33 ± 0.97   1.18 ± 0.73
                   IPW          3.67 ± 2.37    0.54 ± 0.13   2.69 ± 1.17
                   SCIGAN       0.45 ± 0.25    1.08 ± 1.04   1.01 ± 0.77
                                t2_bias_2.0    t2_bias_6.0   t2_bias_8.0
                   GALILEO      1.46 ± 0.09    0.85 ± 0.04   0.46 ± 0.01
                   SL           0.81 ± 0.14    3.74 ± 2.04   3.59 ± 0.14
                   IPW          2.94 ± 1.59    1.24 ± 0.01   0.99 ± 0.06
                   SCIGAN       0.73 ± 0.15    1.20 ± 0.53   2.13 ± 1.75


                                              37
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


          √
Table 10: M M SE results on GNFC. We bold the lowest error for each task. ± is the standard
deviation of three random seeds.
                                 e1_p1    e0.2_p1         e0.05_p1
                  GALILEO      3.86 ± 0.03     3.99 ± 0.01    4.07 ± 0.03
                  SL           5.73 ± 0.33     5.80 ± 0.28    18.78 ± 3.13
                  IPW          4.02 ± 0.05     4.15 ± 0.12    22.66 ± 0.33
                  SCIGAN       8.84 ± 0.54     12.62 ± 2.17   24.21 ± 5.20
                               e1_p0.2         e0.2_p0.2      e0.05_p0.2
                  GALILEO      4.13 ± 0.10     4.11 ± 0.15    4.21 ± 0.15
                  SL           5.87 ± 0.43     7.44 ± 1.13    29.13 ± 3.44
                  IPW          4.12 ± 0.02     6.12 ± 0.48    30.96 ± 0.17
                  SCIGAN       12.87 ± 3.02    14.59 ± 2.13   24.57 ± 3.00
                               e1_p0.05        e0.2_p0.05     e0.05_p0.05
                  GALILEO      4.39 ± 0.20     4.34 ± 0.20    5.26 ± 0.29
                  SL           6.12 ± 0.43     14.88 ± 4.41   30.81 ± 1.69
                  IPW          13.60 ± 7.83    26.27 ± 2.67   32.55 ± 0.12
                  SCIGAN       9.19 ± 1.04     15.08 ± 1.26   17.52 ± 0.02


          √
Table 11: M M SE results on TCGA. We bold the lowest error for each task. ± is the standard
deviation of three random seeds.
                                 t0_bias_2.0 t0_bias_20.0 t0_bias_50.0
                   GALILEO      1.56 ± 0.04    1.96 ± 0.53    3.16 ± 0.13
                   SL           1.92 ± 0.67    2.31 ± 0.19    5.11 ± 0.66
                   IPW          7.42 ± 0.46    5.36 ± 0.96    5.38 ± 1.24
                   SCIGAN       2.11 ± 0.47    5.23 ± 0.27    5.59 ± 1.02
                                t1_bias_2.0    t1_bias_6.0    t1_bias_8.0
                   GALILEO      1.43 ± 0.06    1.09 ± 0.05    1.36 ± 0.36
                   SL           1.12 ± 0.15    3.65 ± 1.91    3.96 ± 1.81
                   IPW          1.14 ± 0.11    0.90 ± 0.09    2.04 ± 0.99
                   SCIGAN       3.32 ± 0.88    4.74 ± 2.12    5.17 ± 2.42
                                t2_bias_2.0    t2_bias_6.0    t2_bias_8.0
                   GALILEO      3.77 ± 0.35    3.99 ± 0.40    2.08 ± 0.60
                   SL           2.70 ± 0.67    8.33 ± 5.05    9.70 ± 3.12
                   IPW          2.92 ± 0.15    3.90 ± 0.17    4.47 ± 2.16
                   SCIGAN       3.82 ± 2.12    1.83 ± 1.49    3.62 ± 4.9


                                              38
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                     15                                                              15                                                                         15
                     14                                                              14                                                                         14
 averaged response


                                                                 averaged response


                                                                                                                                            averaged response
                     13                                                              13                                                                         13
                     12                                                              12                                                                         12
                     11                                                              11                                                                         11
                     10                                                              10                                                                         10
                      9         pred                                                  9           pred                                                           9       pred
                      8         real                                                  8           real                                                           8       real
                          0.0   0.2    0.4     0.6   0.8   1.0                              0.2          0.4        0.6     0.8       1.0                            0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8 0.9 1.0
                                         action                                                                 action                                                            action
                                  (a) t0_bias2                                                     (b) t0_bias20                                                          (c) t0_bias50

                     18
                                pred                                                 17                                             pred
                                                                                                                                                                17
                                                                 averaged response


                                                                                                                                    real
 averaged response


                                                                                                                                            averaged response
                     16         real                                                 16
                                                                                     15                                                                         16
                     14                                                                                                                                         15
                                                                                     14
                     12                                                              13                                                                         14
                                                                                     12                                                                         13
                     10                                                              11                                                                                              pred
                                                                                     10                                                                         12                   real
                      8
                          0.0   0.2    0.4     0.6   0.8   1.0                               0.2          0.4        0.6      0.8                                    0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8 0.9
                                        action                                                                  action                                                            action
                                  (d) t1_bias2                                                      (e) t1_bias6                                                           (f) t1_bias8

                     30                                                              30.0                                                                       30
                                                                                                                                            averaged response
 averaged response


                                                                 averaged response


                                                                                     27.5                                                                       28
                     25
                                                                                     25.0                                                                       26
                     20                                                              22.5                                                                       24
                                                                                     20.0                                                                       22
                     15                                                              17.5
                                             pred                                                                   pred                                        20                    pred
                     10                      real                                    15.0                           real                                        18                    real
                                                                                     12.5
                          0.0   0.2    0.4     0.6   0.8   1.0                                0.2          0.4        0.6     0.8                                    0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8 0.9
                                        action                                                                   action                                                           action
                                  (g) t2_bias2                                                      (h) t2_bias6                                                           (i) t2_bias8

  Figure 16: Illustration of the averaged response curves of Supervised Learning (SL) in TCGA.


                                                                                                               39
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                     56               pred                                                                 55       pred                                            60                               pred
 averaged response


                                                                                       averaged response


                                                                                                                                                averaged response
                     55               real                                                                          real                                                                             real
                                                                                                           54                                                       55
                     54
                                                                                                           53
                     53                                                                                                                                             50
                     52                                                                                    52
                                                                                                                                                                    45
                     51                                                                                    51
                     50                                                                                    50                                                       40
                     49
                              2           1       0   1    2       3       4   5                                1      0   1    2       3   4                            1     0    1        2   3     4
                                                      action                                                               action                                                   action
                                              (a) e1_p1                                                               (b) e0.2_p1                                             (c) e0.05_p1

                     56               pred                                                                 55       pred                                                                             pred
                                                                                                                                                                    60
 averaged response


                                                                                       averaged response


                                                                                                                                                averaged response
                     55               real                                                                          real                                                                             real
                                                                                                           54                                                       55
                     54
                     53                                                                                    53                                                       50
                     52                                                                                    52                                                       45
                     51                                                                                    51                                                       40
                     50                                                                                    50                                                       35
                     49
                          2           1       0       1   2        3       4       5                            1      0   1    2       3   4                            1     0    1        2   3     4
                                                      action                                                               action                                                   action
                                          (d) e1_p0.2                                                                (e) e0.2_p0.2                                           (f) e0.05_p0.2

                     55               pred                                                                 56                                                       65                               pred
 averaged response


                                                                                       averaged response


                                                                                                                                                averaged response


                     54               real                                                                                                                          60                               real
                                                                                                           54
                                                                                                                                                                    55
                     53                                                                                    52
                                                                                                                                                                    50
                     52                                                                                    50                                                       45
                                                                                                           48                                                       40
                     51
                                                                                                           46       pred                                            35
                     50                                                                                    44       real                                            30
                                  1           0       1        2       3       4                                1      0   1        2   3   4                            1     0    1        2   3     4
                                                      action                                                               action                                                   action
                                          (g) e1_p0.05                                                              (h) e0.2_p0.05                                           (i) e0.05_p0.05

   Figure 17: Illustration of the averaged response curves of Supervised Learning (SL) in GNFC.


                                                                                                                           40
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


           (a) t0_bias2                   (b) t0_bias20                  (c) t0_bias50


           (d) t1_bias2                   (e) t1_bias6                   (f) t1_bias8


           (g) t2_bias2                   (h) t2_bias6                    (i) t2_bias8

Figure 18: Illustration of the averaged response curves of Inverse Propensity Weighting (IPW) in
TCGA.


                                               41
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


            (a) e1_p1                     (b) e0.2_p1                    (c) e0.05_p1


           (d) e1_p0.2                    (e) e0.2_p0.2                 (f) e0.05_p0.2


           (g) e1_p0.05                  (h) e0.2_p0.05                 (i) e0.05_p0.05

Figure 19: Illustration of the averaged response curves of Inverse Propensity Weighting (IPW) in
GNFC.


                                               42
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                     15                                                              15                                                                         15
                     14                                                              14                                                                         14
 averaged response


                                                                 averaged response


                                                                                                                                            averaged response
                     13                                                              13                                                                         13
                     12                                                              12                                                                         12
                     11                                                              11                                                                         11
                     10                                                              10                                                                         10
                      9         pred                                                  9           pred                                                           9       pred
                      8         real                                                  8           real                                                           8       real
                          0.0   0.2    0.4     0.6   0.8   1.0                              0.2          0.4        0.6     0.8       1.0                            0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8 0.9 1.0
                                         action                                                                 action                                                            action
                                  (a) t0_bias2                                                     (b) t0_bias20                                                          (c) t0_bias50

                     18
                                                                                     17                                                                         17
                                                                 averaged response
 averaged response


                                                                                                                                            averaged response
                     16                                                              16
                                                                                     15                                                                         16
                     14
                                                                                     14                                                                         15
                     12
                                                                                     13                                                                         14
                     10                                                              12                                                                         13
                      8                      pred                                    11                             pred                                                             pred
                                             real                                    10                             real                                        12                   real
                      6
                          0.0   0.2    0.4     0.6   0.8   1.0                               0.2          0.4        0.6      0.8                                    0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8 0.9
                                        action                                                                  action                                                            action
                                 (d) t1_bias2                                                       (e) t1_bias6                                                           (f) t1_bias8

                     30                                                              30.0                                                                       30                                pred
                                                                                                                                    pred
                                                                                                                                            averaged response
 averaged response


                                                                                                                                                                                                  real
                                                                 averaged response


                                                                                     27.5                                           real                        28
                     25
                                                                                     25.0                                                                       26
                     20                                                              22.5                                                                       24
                                                                                     20.0                                                                       22
                     15                                                              17.5
                                             pred                                                                                                               20
                                                                                     15.0
                     10                      real                                                                                                               18
                                                                                     12.5
                          0.0   0.2    0.4     0.6   0.8   1.0                                0.2          0.4        0.6     0.8                                    0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8 0.9
                                        action                                                                   action                                                           action
                                 (g) t2_bias2                                                       (h) t2_bias6                                                           (i) t2_bias8

                                Figure 20: Illustration of the averaged response curves of SCIGAN in TCGA.


                                                                                                               43
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                     56               pred                                                                   56       pred                                                                                pred
                                                                                                                                                                         58
 averaged response


                                                                                         averaged response


                                                                                                                                                     averaged response
                     55               real                                                                   55       real                                                                                real
                     54                                                                                      54                                                          56
                     53                                                                                      53                                                          54
                     52                                                                                      52
                     51                                                                                      51                                                          52
                     50                                                                                      50                                                          50
                     49
                              2           1       0   1    2       3       4      5                               1      0   1    2       3    4                              1      0   1        2   3     4
                                                      action                                                                 action                                                      action
                                              (a) e1_p1                                                                 (b) e0.2_p1                                                (c) e0.05_p1

                     56                                                                                                                                                  58
                                                                                                             62       pred                                                                                pred
                                                                                                                                                                         57
 averaged response


                                                                                         averaged response


                                                                                                                                                     averaged response
                     55                                                                                      60       real                                                                                real
                                                                                                                                                                         56
                     54                                                                                      58                                                          55
                     53                                                        pred                                                                                      54
                                                                                                             56
                     52                                                        real                                                                                      53
                                                                                                             54
                     51                                                                                                                                                  52
                     50                                                                                      52
                                                                                                                                                                         51
                     49                                                                                      50                                                          50
                          2           1       0       1   2        3       4         5                            1      0   1    2       3    4                              1      0   1        2   3     4
                                                      action                                                                 action                                                      action
                                          (d) e1_p0.2                                                                  (e) e0.2_p0.2                                              (f) e0.05_p0.2

                                      pred                                                                   62
                     54                                                                                                                                                  54
 averaged response


                                                                                         averaged response


                                                                                                                                                     averaged response


                                      real                                                                   60
                     52                                                                                                                                                  52
                                                                                                             58
                                                                                                             56                                                          50
                     50
                                                                                                             54                                                          48
                     48                                                                                      52                                                          46
                                                                                                                                              pred                                pred
                     46                                                                                      50                               real                       44       real
                                  1           0       1        2       3         4                                1      0   1        2   3     4                             1      0   1        2   3     4
                                                      action                                                                 action                                                      action
                                          (g) e1_p0.05                                                                (h) e0.2_p0.05                                              (i) e0.05_p0.05

                                  Figure 21: Illustration of the averaged response curves of SCIGAN in GNFC.


                                                                                                                             44
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


           (a) t0_bias2                  (b) t0_bias20                 (c) t0_bias50


           (d) t1_bias2                  (e) t1_bias6                   (f) t1_bias8


           (g) t2_bias2                  (h) t2_bias6                   (i) t2_bias8

         Figure 22: Illustration of the averaged response curves of GALILEO in TCGA.


                                              45
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


            (a) e1_p1                    (b) e0.2_p1                   (c) e0.05_p1


           (d) e1_p0.2                   (e) e0.2_p0.2                 (f) e0.05_p0.2


          (g) e1_p0.05                  (h) e0.2_p0.05                (i) e0.05_p0.05

         Figure 23: Illustration of the averaged response curves of GALILEO in GNFC.


                                              46
