Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


M ODEL -BASED D ECENTRALIZED P OLICY O PTIMIZA -
TION

 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                             A BSTRACT
         Decentralized policy optimization has been commonly used in cooperative multi-
         agent tasks. However, since all agents are updating their policies simultaneously,
         from the perspective of individual agents, the environment is non-stationary, result-
         ing in it being hard to guarantee monotonic policy improvement. To help the policy
         improvement be stable and monotonic, we propose model-based decentralized
         policy optimization (MDPO), which incorporates a latent variable function to help
         construct the transition and reward function from an individual perspective. We
         theoretically analyze that the policy optimization of MDPO is more stable than
         model-free decentralized policy optimization. Moreover, due to non-stationarity,
         the latent variable function is varying and hard to be modeled. We further propose
         a latent variable prediction method to reduce the error of latent variable function,
         which theoretically contributes to the monotonic policy improvement. Empirically,
         MDPO can indeed obtain superior performance than model-free decentralized
         policy optimization in a variety of cooperative multi-agent tasks.


1    I NTRODUCTION
Decentralized multi-agent reinforcement learning (MARL) has been commonly used in practice for
cooperative multi-agent tasks, e.g., traffic signal control (Wei et al., 2018), unmanned aerial vehicles
(Qie et al., 2019), and IoT (Cao et al., 2020), where global information is inaccessible. Independently
performing policy optimization using local information, e.g., independent PPO (Schulman et al.,
2017) (IPPO), is one of the most straightforward methods for decentralized MARL. Recent empirical
studies (de Witt et al., 2020; Yu et al., 2021a; Papoudakis et al., 2021) demonstrate that IPPO performs
surprisingly well in several cooperative multi-agent benchmarks, which shows great promise for fully
decentralized policy optimization.
However, since all agents are updating policies, from the perspective of an individual agent, the
environment is non-stationary (Zhang et al., 2019). Thus, the monotonic policy improvement, which
can be achieved by policy optimization in single-agent settings (Schulman et al., 2015; 2017), may
not be guaranteed in decentralized MARL. Concretely, in policy optimization, the state visitation
frequency is assumed to be stationary since the agent policy is limited to slight updates, which
is necessary to guarantee monotonic policy improvement (Schulman et al., 2015). However, in
decentralized multi-agent settings, as all agents are updating policies simultaneously, the state
visitation frequency will change greatly, which contradicts the fundamental assumption of policy
optimization, thus the monotonic improvement of policy optimization may not be preserved.
To address this problem, we resort to exploiting the environment model to stabilize the state visitation
frequency and help monotonic policy improvement. However, learning an environment model in
decentralized settings is non-trivial, since the information of other agents, e.g., other agents’ policies,
is not observable and changing. Therefore, we introduce a latent variable to help distinguish different
transitions resulting from the unobservable information. And then we build an environment model
for each agent, which contains a transition function, a reward function, and a latent variable function
that learns the latent variable given observation. The agents are trained using independent policy
optimization methods, e.g., TRPO (Schulman et al., 2015) or PPO (de Witt et al., 2020), on both the
experiences generated by the environment model and collected in the environment.
Since the environment is non-stationary, the latent variable function is also varying during learning.
We theoretically show that independently performing policy optimization on experiences generated


                                                    1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


by the environment model with the varying latent variable function can obtain more stationary
observation visitation frequency than on the experiences collected in the non-stationary environment.
Thus, independent policy optimization goes more stable on the environment model.
Moreover, to obtain monotonic improvement, the gap between the return of interacting with the
environment and the return predicted by the environment model should be small. We theoretically
analyze that the return gap is bounded by the prediction error of the latent variable function. As
the latent variable function is varying due to non-stationarity, to minimize the prediction error, we
propose a latent variable prediction method that uses the historical variables to predict the future
variable. Thus, the latent variable prediction can reduce the return gap and help the monotonic policy
improvement.
The proposed algorithm, model-based decentralized policy optimization (MDPO), is theoretically
grounded and empirically effective for fully decentralized learning. We evaluate MDPO on a variety
of cooperative multi-agent tasks, i.e., a stochastic game, multi-agent particle environment (MPE)
(Lowe et al., 2017), and multi-agent MuJoCo (Peng et al., 2021a). MDPO outperforms the model-free
independent policy optimization baseline, and the proposed latent variable prediction additionally
obtains performance gain, verifying that MDPO can help stable and monotonic policy improvement
in fully decentralized learning.

2    P RELIMINARIES
Dec-POMDP. A cooperative multi-agent task is generally modeled as a decentralized partially
observable Markov decision process (Dec-POMDP) (Oliehoek & Amato, 2016). Specifically, a
Dec-POMDP is defined as a tuple G = {S, I, A, O, Ω, P, R, γ}. S is the state space, I is the set
of agents, and A = A1 × · · · × A|I| is the joint action space, where Ai is the action space for
each agent i. At each state s, each agent i ∈ I merely gets access to the observation oi ∈ O,
which is drawn from observation function Ω(s, i), and selects an action ai ∈ Ai , and all the actions
form a joint action a ∈ A. The state transitions to next s′ according to the transition function
P (s′ |s, a) : S × A × S → [0, 1], and all agents receive a shared
                                                                 P∞ reward r = R(s, a) : S × A → R.
The objective is to maximize the expected return η(π) = E[ t=0 γ t rt |ρ0 , π] under the joint policy
of all agents π and distribution of initial state ρ0 , where γ ∈ [0, 1) is the discounted factor. The joint
policy π can be represented as the product of each agent’s policy πi . Also we denote π−i as the joint
policy of all agents except i.
Fully decentralized learning. We consider the fully decentralized way to solve the Dec-POMDP
(Tan, 1993; de Witt et al., 2020), where each agent independently learns a policy and executes
actions without communication or parameter sharing in both training and execution phases. Since
all agents are updating policies, from the perspective of individual agents, the environment is non-
stationary, which fundamentally challenges decentralized learning (Zhang et al., 2019). The existing
decentralized MARL methods are limited. Independent Q-learning (IQL) (Tan, 1993) and independent
policy optimization, e.g., IPPO (de Witt et al., 2020), are the most straightforward fully decentralized
algorithms. Despite good empirical performance (Papoudakis et al., 2021), due to non-stationarity,
these methods lack theoretical guarantees. IQL has no convergence guarantee, to the best of our
knowledge. Although there has been some study (Sun et al., 2022), IPPO may not guarantee policy
improvement by independent policy optimization, since the assumption of stationary state visitation
frequency for policy optimization may not hold in fully decentralized settings, which we will discuss
in the following.
Monotonic policy improvement. In Dec-POMDP, from a centralized perspective, we can obtain a
TRPO objective (Schulman et al., 2015) of the joint policy π for the monotonic improvement,
                           X new      X                   old
   η(π new ) − η(π old ) ≥  ρπ (s)         π new (a|s)Aπ (s, a) − C · DKL max
                                                                              (π old ∥π new ) (1)
                              s                     a
                                      π old                             old
                              X                     X
                          ⪆       ρ           (s)       π new (a|s)Aπ                       max
                                                                              (s, a) − C · DKL  (π old ∥π new ),   (2)
                              s                     a
        old
where ρπ (s) =              t                old
                  P
                      t=0 γ Pr(st = s|π          ) is the discounted state visitation frequency given
                      new          old
 old                π            π
π , similarly for ρ       (s), A       is the advantage function under π old , DKL max
                                                                                       (π old ∥π new ) =
            old         new
maxs DKL (π (·|s)∥π (·|s)), and C is a constant. From (1) to (2) is an approximation or


                                                            2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                                      new
assumption (Schulman et al., 2015). As ρπ        is unknown and the policy is limited to slight updates,
  π new                      π old
ρ       is approximated by ρ       . However, in fully decentralized MARL, this assumption may not
hold, as all agents are updating their policies simultaneously and their joint policy may change
significantly especially when the number of agents is large. This will severely affect the performance
of independent policy optimization. Although we can constrain the policy update of each agent
to be slight like TRPO, this leads to much slower convergence, especially in fully decentralized
MARL, where the joint policy has a much larger search space and is merely optimized by independent
learning of individual agents.

3     M ODEL -BASED D ECENTRALIZED P OLICY O PTIMIZATION
In this paper, we provide a novel perspective and resort to the environment model to bridge the gap
             new       old
between ρπ       and ρπ for each agent such that the monotonic joint policy improvement can be
potentially achieved by fully decentralized policy optimization.
As illustrated in the following, we turn the learning process into a Dyna-style (Sutton, 1990) decen-
tralized model-based method with the green path 1 . Each agent i additionally learns a decentralized
model using local information from policy rollout and can optionally perform policy optimization on
the experiences from model rollout. When optimizing policy with model rollout, we essentially have
 1 , which means the state visitation frequency in model rollout (ρmodel ) is more stable. Thus, the
approximation from (1) to (2) becomes acceptable under looser constraints of policy update. Further,
we can bound the gap between the returns of policy rollout (η) and model rollout (η model ), formally
in 2 . Once the bound (B) is controllable throughout the learning process, it can potentially guarantee
the monotonic improvement of the joint policy in the real environment.
               π old                                                                    new          old       π model   π old
 environment           policy rollout      policy optimization π new           1   ρπ         − ρπ             i
                                                                                                           > ρmodel − ρmodel
                                                                                                                        i


      model            model rollout      policy optimization πimodel                         new
                                                                               2 η(πimodel , π−i  ) − η model (πimodel ) < B
               πiold

Thus, 1 and 2 together highlight the potential benefits of incorporating an environment model for
decentralized policy optimization. In the following, we discuss how to learn such a decentralized
model, theoretically investigate its benefits for decentralized policy optimization, and analyze the
return bound for monotonic policy improvement.

3.1   L ATENT VARIABLE M ODEL

In decentralized learning, from the perspective of each agent i, the transition function and reward
function are respectively,
        Pi (s′ |s, ai ) = Ea−i ∼π−i P (s′ |s, a, a−i ) and Ri (s, ai ) = Ea−i ∼π−i R(s, a, a−i ),
where a−i denotes the joint action of all agents except i. As other agents are also updating their
policies, Pi and Ri are varying throughout the learning process, which is the well-known non-
stationarity problem. Moreover, as each agent i usually obtains observation instead of state in
decentralized learning, the model can only be learned on (oi , ai , o′i , r). Thus, it is challenging to
construct an environment model from the perspective of an individual agent.
To build a decentralized environment model, we introduce a latent variable zi , which helps distinguish
different transitions resulting from varying unobservable information of the full state and other agents’
policies. Then the transition function and the reward function can be redefined as:
                                        Pi (o′i |oi , ai , zi ) and Ri (oi , ai , zi ).
As we discuss fully decentralized learning, we drop the subscript of i for simplicity in the following.
To model the transition function and the reward function with the latent variable, we define the
latent variable function from the perspective of an individual agent, ψ(z|o), which indicates the
   1
     Related work on model-based MARL can be found in Appendix E. However, none of the existing work
considers exploiting the environment model to help fully decentralized policy optimization.


                                                              3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


probability of latent variable z given observation o. As z is related to the policies of other agents,
ψ(z|o) also varies during policy updates. A latent variable model consists of three modules: transition
function Pθ , reward function Rϕ , and latent variable function ψω , to predict the next observation and
reward. As the impact of unobservable information is designed to merely reflect on the latent variable,
although other agents update their policies, the transition function and reward function stay constant
and only the latent variable function varies. We learn such a model by maximizing the likelihood of
experiences of policy rollout D,
                max E(o,a,o′ ,r)∼D,z∼ψω (·|o) Pθ (o′ |o, a, z) − (Rϕ (o, a, o′ , z) − r)2 .

                                                                                                      (3)
                 θ,ω,ϕ

We examine the correlation between latent variable learned end-to-end and inaccessible information in
a simple setting, and the learned latent variable is indeed correlated with the inaccessible information.
More details can be found in Appedix B.
Moreover, when using the learned latent variable model to train an agent, we adopt k-step branched
model rollout in MBPO (Janner et al., 2019) to avoid compounding model error due to long-
horizon rollout. Concretely, at each policy update of an agent, we sample h-step length experiences
{(o1 , a1 , o′1 , r1 ), · · · , (oh , ah , o′h , rh )} from policy rollout D and perform k-step model rollout start-
ing from the last observation o′h under current policy π. The policy π is updated on the merged
(h + k)-step experiences {(o1 , a1 , o′1 , r1 ), · · · , (oh+k , ah+k , o′h+k , rh+k )} by policy optimization,
e.g., PPO (Schulman et al., 2015).

3.2    S TABLE P OLICY O PTIMIZATION ON M ODEL

Now, we turn to analyze the benefits of such a model-based method over model-free independent
policy optimization. We first theoretically analyze that independently performing policy optimization
e.g.,, TRPO (Schulman et al., 2015) or PPO (Schulman et al., 2017), on the latent variable model can
make the learning process more stable.
In decentralized learning, from the perspective of an agent, given the true latent variable function ψ,
the discounted observation visitation frequency of D obtained by policy rollout is defined as

                          ρπ,ψ (o) = ρπ,ψ
                                      0   (o) + γρπ,ψ
                                                  1   (o) + γ 2 ρπ,ψ
                                                                 2   (o) + · · · ,

where ρπ,ψ
         t  (o) ≜ P r(ot = o) and ot is the observation at timestep t of experience from D. Note
that ρπ,ψ (o) is an unbiased estimate of discounted observation visitation frequency when interacting
in the environment. Similarly, ρπ,ψω denotes the discounted observation visitation frequency for
experiences obtained by model rollout. During the learning process, π n and ψ n respectively denote
the policy and latent variable function after the nth policy update. Then, we have the following
theorem. All proofs are available in Appendix A.
                                           n    n        n−1
                                                               ,ψ n−1
Theorem 1. Define ∆ρn (o) ≜ ρπ ,ψ (o) − ρπ                              (o), and denote ∥∆ρn ∥ ≜ max|ρn (o) −
                                                                                                     o
ψ n−1 (o)|, similarly for ∥∆π n ∥ and ∥∆ψ n ∥. It holds that,
                                               ∥∆ρn ∥ ≤ C (Eπ + Eψ ) ,

where Eπ ≜ max ∥∆π n ∥, Eψ ≜ max ∥∆ψ n ∥ and C is a constant. Assume ψωn = (1−α)ψωn−1 +αψ n
                n                      n
and ψω0 = ψ 0 2 . It holds that Eψ > Eψω and the bound above is lower when substituting ψ with ψω .

According to Theorem 1, the divergence of discounted observation visitation frequency is bounded by
the divergence of policy and latent variable function. Again, the policy divergence can be constrained
via policy optimization, like TRPO. Thus, the main difference lies in the divergence of latent variable
function. As indicated by Theorem 1, the learned latent variable function ψω has a smaller divergence
between consecutive policy rollouts than the true latent variable function ψ. Therefore, independent
policy optimization on experiences generated by the latent variable model can obtain more stationary
observation visitation frequency than on the experiences collected in the varying environment, so the
learning process of independent policy optimization becomes stable on the model.
   2
     Since ψ is varying and ψω is continuously updated using the experiences from several recent policy rollouts,
we use the form of soft-update for the relation between ψ and ψω .


                                                         4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


3.3   R ETURN B OUNDS

We then analyze the bound of return gap between interacting in the environment and interacting with
the model. If the return improvement of interacting with the model is higher than the bound, the
agent can obtain the monotonic policy improvement when interacting in the environment.
However, the return of interacting in the environment is hard to analyze in decentralized learning
since the policies of other agents are inaccessible, we turn to analyze the return in policy rollout,
which is an unbiased estimate of expected return in the environment.
Several bounds have been introduced in MBPO (Janner et al., 2019) for the return bound analysis,
which however are not sufficient in decentralized learning. Thus, we need to introduce two new
bounds that indicate the divergence of latent variable function between consecutive policy rollouts
and the error of learned latent variable function. Formally, with ψ n , ψωn , and π n respectively referring
to the true latent variable function, the learned latent variable function, and the policy of the nth
policy rollout, we denote the bounds as follows:
       • reward bound rmax ≜ max max{R(o, a, z), Rϕ (o, a, z)};
                                   o,a,z
       • policy divergence ϵπ ≜ maxDT V (π∥π n ), where DT V is total variation distance;
                                      o
       • transition function error ϵθ ≜ maxEat ,zt ∼(π,ψωn ) DT V (P (ot+1 |ot , at ) ∥Pθ (ot+1 |ot , at , zt ));
                                         t
       • latent variable function divergence ϵψ ≜ maxDT V ψ n ∥ψ n+1 ;
                                                          o
       • learned latent variable function error ϵω ≜ maxDT V (ψ n ∥ψωn ).
                                                              o

Additionally, we use several notations to represent different returns. The return in nth policy rollout
with the true latent variable function ψ is denoted as η(π, ψ), the return in model rollout with the nth
learned latent variable function ψω is denoted as η model (π, ψωn ), and the return in k-step branched
model rollout with h-step experiences of nth policy rollout is denoted as η branch ((π n , π), (ψ, ψωn )).
Now we analyze the return bound of model rollout and branched model rollout with the newly
introduced ϵψ and ϵω in the following two theorems.
Theorem 2. The return gap between n + 1th policy rollout and model rollout with nth learned model
is bounded as:
                                                      2rmax
                 η π, ψ n+1 − η model (π, ψωn ) ≤

                                                             2 (γϵθ + 2ϵπ + 2ϵω + ϵψ ).
                                                     (1 − γ)
                                                    |                {z                }
                                                                   C(ϵθ ,ϵπ ,ϵω ,ϵψ )

Theorem 3. The return gap between n + 1th policy rollout and branched model rollout with nth
learned model is bounded as:
                 η π, ψ n+1 − η branch ((π n , π) , (ψ n , ψωn )) ≤ C (ϵθ , ϵπ , ϵω , ϵψ ) .


According to Theorem 2 and 3, we can guarantee the monotonic improvement in the environment
via improving the return in model rollout or branched model rollout beyond a bound linear to
(ϵπ , ϵθ , ϵω , ϵψ ). In these bounds, ϵθ and ϵω are limited via supervised learning and ϵπ is constrained
by policy optimization. However, ϵψ is left unrestricted. In the following, we try to find a better
bound in which all elements are controllable.

3.4   L ATENT VARIABLE P REDICTION

In order to restrict the impact of divergence of the latent variable function, we introduce one new
error bound, which measures the divergence between the learned latent variable function and the
true latent variable function in incoming policy rollout. Formally, such an error bound in nth policy
rollout is defined as:
                                     ϵ̂ω ≜ maxDT V ψ n+1 ∥ψωn .

                                               o
Now we use ϵ̂ω in place of ϵψ to analyze the return bound of model rollout and branched model
rollout again in the following two theorems.
Theorem 4. The return gap of n + 1th policy rollout and model rollout with nth learned model is
bounded as:
                           η π, ψ n+1 − η model (π, ψωn ) ≤ C (ϵθ , ϵπ , ϵ̂ω ) .



                                                      5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Figure 1: The environment model includes four modules: transition function Pθ , reward function Rϕ ,
latent variable prediction function fζ , and latent variable functions {ψω1 , · · · , ψωl } over l consecutive
policy rollouts. For learning, each agent maintains the experiences of l consecutive policy rollouts,
Pθ and Rϕ learn on l consecutive policy rollouts, ψωl learns on the experiences of lth policy rollout,
and fζ learns to predict lth latent variable given l − 1 latent variable functions.

Theorem 5. The return gap of n + 1th policy rollout and branched model rollout with nth learned
model is bounded as:
                η π, ψ n+1 − η branch ((π n , π) , (ψ n , ψωn )) ≤ C (ϵθ , ϵπ , ϵω , ϵ̂ω ) .


Now all elements of the bounds are controllable, once we can constrain ϵ̂ω in the learning process.
To achieve this, we introduce a latent variable prediction function, which predicts the latent variable
distribution given observation o in incoming policy rollout via latent variable distributions of o in the
latest l − 1 policy rollouts. However, as the true latent variable function cannot be obtained directly
for an agent, the latent variable prediction function fζ can instead minimize:

                           maxDT V ψωl (o)∥f ψω1 (o), · · · , ψωl−1 (o) .
                                o
With such a latent variable prediction function, ϵ̂ω is controllable.

3.5   A LGORITHM

With all the theoretical analysis and discussions above, we are ready to present the learning of
model-based decentralized policy optimization (MDPO).
As illustrated in Figure 1, the environment model consists of transition function Pθ , reward func-
tion Rϕ , latent variable prediction function fζ , and latent variable functions {ψω1 , · · · , ψωl }
over recent l consecutive policy rollouts. The experiences of the l consecutive policy rollouts
Denv = {D1 , · · · , Dl } are also stored.
After the latest policy rollout l, we update the transition function and reward function, and learn the
latent variable function ψωl of policy rollout l by optimizing the objective:
                   X l                             h                                        i
                                                                                          2
             max         E(o,a,o′ ,r)∼Dj ,z∼ψωj (o) Pθ (o′ |o, a, z) − (Rϕ (o, a, z) − r)      ,    (4)
            θ,ωl ,ϕ
                      j=1

where ψωl is obtained by updating ψωl−1 using Dl , while Pθ and Rϕ are updated using Denv to make
sure they are stable across policy rollouts. Then, the latent variable prediction function fζ is updated
using Dl by optimizing the objective:
                     max Eo∼Dl ,z1 ∼ψω1 (o),··· ,zl ∼ψωl (o) fζ z l |z 1 , · · · , z l−1 .

                                                                                                     (5)
                            ζ
For model rollout, the model predicts the transition in incoming policy rollout given observation o
and action a via l − 1 latest learned latent variable functions (ψ2 , · · · , ψl ) as:
           z ∼ fζ ·|z 2 ∼ ψω2 (o), · · · , z l ∼ ψωl (o) , ô′ ∼ Pθ (o, a, z) , r̂ = Rϕ (o, a, z) .

                                                                                                    (6)
Finally, the policy is updated using the branched model rollout by policy optimization, such as PPO
or TRPO. We summarize the full learning procedure of MDPO in Algorithm 1.


                                                      6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Algorithm 1. MDPO
 1: Initiate Denv = {D 1 , · · · , D l }, π, Pθ , Rϕ , Ψ = {ψω1 , · · · , ψωl }, fζ .
 2: repeat
 3:     policy rollout in environment and obtain Dl
 4:     optimize Pθ ,Rϕ and ψωl on Denv with (4)
 5:     optimize prediction function fζ on Dl with (5)
 6:     obtain branched model rollout Drollout based on Dl using Pθ , Rϕ , π, Ψ, and fζ with (6)
 7:     optimize policy π using Drollout by PPO or TRPO
 8:     for j ← 1, . . . , l − 1 do
 9:         Dj ← Dj+1 , ψωj ← ψωj+1
10:     end for
11: until terminate


4     E XPERIMENTS
For evaluation, we compare MDPO, MDPO without latent variable prediction (denoted by MDPO
w/o prediction), and independent PPO (IPPO) (Schulman et al., 2017) on a set of cooperative multi-
agent tasks including a stochastic game, multi-agent particle environment (MPE) (Lowe et al., 2017),
and multi-agent MuJoCo (Peng et al., 2021b). We do not consider StarCraft multi-agent challenge
(SMAC) (Samvelyan et al., 2019), because IPPO has been shown to perform very well in SMAC
(de Witt et al., 2020; Papoudakis et al., 2021), close enough to centralized training with decentralized
execution methods like QMIX (Rashid et al., 2018) and MAPPO (Yu et al., 2021a). Thus, the gain of
MDPO may not be clearly evidenced there.
By experiments, we try to answer the following three questions:

      1. Does the latent variable model help to generate experiences with more stationary observation
         visitation frequency experimentally?
      2. Does latent variable prediction help to control ϵ̂ω ?
      3. Does MDPO help to improve performance in decentralized learning?

For a fair comparison, the network architecture and hyperparameters are the same for IPPO and
MDPO. The number of environment steps taken in each round (policy rollout, network update) is
consistent and thus we compare the performance of methods under the same number of environment
steps and policy updates. Note that since we consider fully decentralized learning, for all methods,
agents do not use parameter-sharing. Indeed, parameter-sharing should not be allowed in decen-
tralized learning (Terry et al., 2020). More details on experiment settings, implementation, and
hyperparameters are available in Appendix C.

4.1   S TOCHASTIC G AME

The stochastic game is a cooperative game with 30 observations (states), 3 agents, and 5 actions for
each agent, and every episode consists of 40 steps. The transition function and the shared reward
function are randomly generated. The game is chosen to verify our theoretical results.
Figure 2 (left) shows the learning curves of MDPO, MDPO w/o prediction, and IPPO, among which
MDPO performs better throughout the learning process. With a finite observation space in this
game, we calculate the divergence of observation visitation frequencies (∥∆ρ∥ in Section 3.2) in
consecutive rollouts. Concretely, we calculate the L1 distance of observation visitation frequency
over all observations in consecutive rollouts (policy rollouts for IPPO and branched model rollouts
for MDPO), and their curves are shown in Figure 2 (mid). We can see that the latent variable model
generates experiences with more stationary observation visitation frequency than IPPO, which is
consistent with Theorem 1. This may account for the superior performance of MDPO w/o prediction
over IPPO.
We also examine how well the latent variable prediction helps to control the prediction error (ϵ̂ω ). As
the real latent variable function is inaccessible, we examine ϵ̂ω by comparing how well the learned
environment model predicts with and without latent variable prediction. Specifically, we measure the


                                                   7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                                                DYHUDJH UHWXUQ                                                     REVHUYDWLRQ YLVLWDWLRQ IUHTXHQF\                                     SUHGLFW REVHUYDWLRQ &URVV(QWURS\


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          SUHGLFW UHZDUG /  GLVWDQFH



                                                                          ,332

                                                                            0'32 Z R SUHGLFWLRQ

                                                                            0'32


                                                                          URXQG                                                                                          URXQG                                                                                            URXQG
Figure 2: Learning curves of MDPO compared with MDPO w/o prediction and IPPO on the stochastic
game: average return (left), observation visitation frequency divergence (mid), and model prediction
errors (right). Each round is 1600 environment steps.
                                                                                       &RRSHUDWLYH 1DYLJDWLRQ                                                                                            5HJXODU 3RO\JRQ &RQWURO


                DYHUDJH UHWXUQ


                                                                                                   ,332
                                                                                                0'32 Z R SUHGLFWLRQ

                                                                                                   0'32


                                                                                                         URXQG                                                                                                                                URXQG
Figure 3: Learning curves of MDPO, MDPO w/o prediction, and IPPO in Cooperative Navigation
(left) and Regular Polygon Control (right). Each round is 1280 environment steps.

mean cross-entropy of the next observation distribution predicted by the nth learned model and the
ground truth in the n + 1th round, and the mean L1 distance of predicted reward and ground truth
reward. The curves are shown in Figure 2 (right). The lower prediction error of MDPO indicates
that latent variable prediction error (ϵ̂ω ) is controlled at a lower level than without latent variable
prediction. Moreover, as shown in Figure 2 (mid), the divergence of observation visitation frequency
of MDPO and MDPO w/o prediction are similar but much lower than IPPO, which indicates ϵω is
still under control in MDPO. This indicates that MDPO can well control both ϵω and ϵ̂ω .
As MDPO helps to handle non-stationarity in multi-agent settings from the perspective of an individual
agent, it will be natural to also apply MDPO to non-stationary single-agent settings. So, we modify
this stochastic game into a non-stationary single-agent game and show that MDPO also outperforms
the baselines. More details are available in Appendix D.

4.2   MPE

MPE is a multi-agent environment with continuous observation. In our MPE tasks, agents observe
their own positions, velocity, and others’ relative positions. And agents are expected to fulfill a certain
goal via controlling their accelerations in every direction which is continuous in our experiments.
Two tasks of MPE, 4-agent Cooperative Navigation and 5-agent Regular Polygon Control, are chosen
for performance comparison. In 4-agent Cooperative Navigation, 4 agents learn to cooperate to
reach 4 landmarks respectively. In 5-agent Regular Polygon Control, 4 agents learn to cooperate
with another agent, which is controlled by a fixed policy, aiming to form a regular pentagon, and the
reward is given according to the similarity to a regular pentagon.
Figure 3 shows the learning curves of all methods. Generally, MDPO w/o prediction performs better
than IPPO, which verifies that the latent variable model can help decentralized policy improvement
by making the observation visitation frequency more stationary. And MDPO outperforms MDPO
w/o prediction, which verifies latent variable prediction can reduce the gap between the return of
interaction and the return predicted by the environment model.
It is worth noting that the unobservable information required to fulfill the goal is at completely
different levels in the two tasks. Concretely, acknowledging the general direction of others is enough
to decide which landmark to approach in Cooperative Navigation. Yet the precise positions of others


                                                                                                                                                                          8
    Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                                           +DOI&KHHWDK  î                                                      +RSSHU  î                                                            $QW  î


DYHUDJH UHWXUQ


                                                                    URXQG                                                                    URXQG                                                                   URXQG
                                                           +DOI&KHHWDK  î                                         +DOI&KHHWDK   >         @                                   +DOI&KHHWDK  î


DYHUDJH UHWXUQ


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        ,332
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           0'32 Z R SUHGLFWLRQ
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        0'32

                                                                    URXQG                                                                      URXQG                                                                 URXQG
    Figure 4: Learning curves of MDPO, MDPO w/o prediction, and IPPO in six multi-agent MuJoCo
    tasks. Each round is 4000 environment steps for 4-agent Ant and 2000 for other tasks.

    matter to form a regular polygon in Regular Polygon Control and are hard to learn accurately. Thus,
    MDPO performs well in Cooperative Navigation since the very early learning stage, while it does
    not perform well in Regular Polygon Control before 600 rounds. Although a more accurate model is
    required in Regular Polygon Control, MDPO still converges to better performance. And this indicates
    a progressive pattern in prediction also works when prediction is hard to be fairly accurate.

     4.3                                     M ULTI -AGENT M U J O C O

    Multi-agent MuJoCo is a continuous multi-agent robotic control environment, based on OpenAI’s
    Mujoco Gym environments. In a multi-agent MuJoCo task, each agent controls several joints of the
    robotic to move forward, where both the observation space and action space are continuous. We
    choose 3-agent Hopper, 4-agent Ant, and 4 versions of HalfCheetah with different agent numbers or
    joint allocation for performance comparison. Details of joint allocation are given in Appendix C.
   As illustrated in Figure 4, MDPO consistently performs better in these tasks with different difficulties
   and various agent numbers. Compared with MPE, agents in multi-agent MuJoCo have deeper impacts
   on each other due to the interaction between adjacent joints. Consequently, the transitions of each
   agent are closely related to the policies of other agents. Thus, non-stationarity caused by policy
   updates of other agents is severer in these tasks, resulting in IPPO struggling and converging to low
   performance. Moreover, note that MDPO w/o prediction performs almost the same as IPPO or even
   worse in some tasks. The poor performance of MDPO w/o prediction is a consequence of a larger ϵψ
   caused by strongly associated agents in these tasks. Thus, latent variable prediction is necessary in
   these tasks with closely associated agents.


     5                                  C ONCLUSION

   In this paper, we propose model-based decentralized policy optimization (MDPO). By introducing
   a latent variable into the environment model, we theoretically show the model helps to generate
   experiences with more stationary observation visitation frequency and benefits decentralized policy
   optimization. Furthermore, We theoretically analyze that the return bound for monotonic policy
   improvement is controllable by the prediction error of the latent variable function. Consequently,
   we propose a latent variable prediction method to constrain the prediction error. We examine
   all the theories and designs via experiments on a set of cooperative multi-agent tasks. Results
   verify our theoretical results and show MDPO indeed obtains superior performance over model-free
   decentralized policy optimization.


                                                                                                                                                9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


R EFERENCES
Zilong Cao, Pan Zhou, Ruixuan Li, Siqi Huang, and Dapeng Wu. Multiagent deep reinforcement
  learning for joint multichannel access and task offloading of mobile-edge computing in industry
  4.0. IEEE Internet of Things Journal, 7(7):6201–6213, 2020.
Christian Schroeder de Witt, Tarun Gupta, Denys Makoviichuk, Viktor Makoviychuk, Philip HS
  Torr, Mingfei Sun, and Shimon Whiteson. Is independent learning all you need in the starcraft
  multi-agent challenge? arXiv preprint arXiv:2011.09533, 2020.
Yali Du, Chengdong Ma, Yuchen Liu, Runji Lin, Hao Dong, Jun Wang, and Yaodong Yang.
  Fully decentralized model-based policy optimization for networked systems. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2207.06559, 2022.
Vladimir Feinberg, Alvin Wan, Ion Stoica, Michael I Jordan, Joseph E Gonzalez, and Sergey Levine.
  Model-based value estimation for efficient model-free reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:1803.00101, 2018.
Michael Janner, Justin Fu, Marvin Zhang, and Sergey Levine. When to trust your model: Model-based
 policy optimization. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2019.
Woojun Kim, Jongeui Park, and Youngchul Sung. Communication in multi-agent reinforcement
 learning: Intention sharing. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2021.
Ryan Lowe, Yi Wu, Aviv Tamar, Jean Harb, Pieter Abbeel, and Igor Mordatch. Multi-agent actor-critic
  for mixed cooperative-competitive environments. In Advances in Neural Information Processing
  Systems, 2017.
Frans A Oliehoek and Christopher Amato. A concise introduction to decentralized POMDPs. Springer,
  2016.
Georgios Papoudakis, Filippos Christianos, Lukas Schäfer, and Stefano V Albrecht. Benchmarking
  multi-agent deep reinforcement learning algorithms in cooperative tasks. In Advances in Neural
  Information Processing Systems, 2021.
Deepak Pathak, Pulkit Agrawal, Alexei A Efros, and Trevor Darrell. Curiosity-driven exploration by
  self-supervised prediction. In International Conference on Machine Learning, 2017.
Bei Peng, Tabish Rashid, Christian Schroeder de Witt, Pierre-Alexandre Kamienny, Philip Torr,
  Wendelin Böhmer, and Shimon Whiteson. Facmac: Factored multi-agent centralised policy
  gradients. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2021a.
Bei Peng, Tabish Rashid, Christian Schroeder de Witt, Pierre-Alexandre Kamienny, Philip Torr,
  Wendelin Böhmer, and Shimon Whiteson. Facmac: Factored multi-agent centralised policy
  gradients. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2021b.
Han Qie, Dianxi Shi, Tianlong Shen, Xinhai Xu, Yuan Li, and Liujing Wang. Joint optimization of
  multi-uav target assignment and path planning based on multi-agent reinforcement learning. IEEE
  access, 7:146264–146272, 2019.
Tabish Rashid, Mikayel Samvelyan, Christian Schroeder, Gregory Farquhar, Jakob Foerster, and Shi-
  mon Whiteson. Qmix: Monotonic value function factorisation for deep multi-agent reinforcement
  learning. In International Conference on Machine Learning, 2018.
Mikayel Samvelyan, Tabish Rashid, Christian Schroeder de Witt, Gregory Farquhar, Nantas Nardelli,
 Tim GJ Rudner, Chia-Man Hung, Philip HS Torr, Jakob Foerster, and Shimon Whiteson. The
 starcraft multi-agent challenge. In International Conference on Autonomous Agents and MultiAgent
 Systems, 2019.
John Schulman, Sergey Levine, Pieter Abbeel, Michael Jordan, and Philipp Moritz. Trust region
  policy optimization. In International conference on machine learning (ICML), 2015.
John Schulman, Filip Wolski, Prafulla Dhariwal, Alec Radford, and Oleg Klimov. Proximal policy
  optimization algorithms. arXiv preprint arXiv:1707.06347, 2017.


                                                10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Mingfei Sun, Sam Devlin, Katja Hofmann, and Shimon Whiteson. Monotonic improvement guaran-
 tees under non-stationarity for decentralized ppo. arXiv preprint arXiv:2202.00082, 2022.
Richard S Sutton. Integrated architectures for learning, planning, and reacting based on approximating
  dynamic programming. In International Conference on Machine Learning, 1990.
Ming Tan. Multi-agent reinforcement learning: independent versus cooperative agents. In Interna-
 tional Conference on Machine Learning, 1993.
Justin K Terry, Nathaniel Grammel, Ananth Hari, Luis Santos, and Benjamin Black. Revisiting
  parameter sharing in multi-agent deep reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2005.13625,
  2020.
Tingwu Wang, Xuchan Bao, Ignasi Clavera, Jerrick Hoang, Yeming Wen, Eric Langlois, Shunshi
  Zhang, Guodong Zhang, Pieter Abbeel, and Jimmy Ba. Benchmarking model-based reinforcement
  learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:1907.02057, 2019.
Hua Wei, Guanjie Zheng, Huaxiu Yao, and Zhenhui Li. Intellilight: A reinforcement learning
  approach for intelligent traffic light control. In International Conference on Knowledge Discovery
 & Data Mining, 2018.
Daniël Willemsen, Mario Coppola, and Guido CHE de Croon. Mambpo: Sample-efficient multi-robot
  reinforcement learning using learned world models. In IEEE/RSJ International Conference on
  Intelligent Robots and Systems, 2021.
Chao Yu, Akash Velu, Eugene Vinitsky, Yu Wang, Alexandre Bayen, and Yi Wu. The surprising
  effectiveness of mappo in cooperative, multi-agent games. arXiv preprint arXiv:2103.01955,
  2021a.
Xiaopeng Yu, Jiechuan Jiang, Haobin Jiang, and Zongqing Lu. Model-based opponent modeling.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2108.01843, 2021b.
Kaiqing Zhang, Zhuoran Yang, and Tamer Basar. Multi-agent reinforcement learning: A selective
  overview of theories and algorithms. arXiv preprint arXiv:1911.10635, 2019.
Kaiqing Zhang, Sham M. Kakade, Tamer Basar, and Lin F. Yang. Model-based multi-agent RL in
  zero-sum markov games with near-optimal sample complexity. arXiv preprint arXiv:2007.07461,
  2020.
Weinan Zhang, Xihuai Wang, Jian Shen, and Ming Zhou. Model-based multi-agent policy optimiza-
 tion with adaptive opponent-wise rollouts. arXiv preprint arXiv:2105.03363, 2021.


                                                 11
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


A     P ROOFS
A.1    O BSERVATION V ISITATION F REQUENCY D IVERGENCE

In this section, we provide proofs for the upper bound of observation visitation frequency divergence.
Lemma 1. Given two pairs of policy and latent variable function, (π1 , ψ1 ) and (π2 , ψ2 ). ∀o ∈ O, it
holds that
          X
              |π1 (a|o) ψ1 (z|o) − π2 (a|o) ψ2 (z|o)| ≤ |A| · ∥π1 − π2 ∥ + |Z| · ∥ψ1 − ψ2 ∥ ,
             a,z

where ∥π1 − π2 ∥ ≜ max|π1 (a|o) − π2 (a|o)|, ∥ψ1 − ψ2 ∥ ≜ max|ψ1 (z|o) − ψ2 (z|o)|.
                            a,o                                                                    z,o


Proof.
    X                                                                           X
            |π1 (a|o) ψ1 (z|o) − π2 (a|o) ψ2 (z|o)| ≤                                  |π1 (a|o) ψ1 (z|o) − π1 (a|o) ψ2 (z|o)|
      a,z                                                                       a,z
                                                                                    X
                                                                                +           |π1 (a|o) ψ2 (z|o) − π2 (a|o) ψ2 (z|o)|
                                                                                      a,z
                                                                                X                   X
                                                                        =              π1 (a|o)          |ψ1 (z|o) − ψ2 (z|o)|
                                                                                a                    z
                                                                                    X                    X
                                                                                +           ψ2 (z|o)         |π1 (a|o) − π2 (a|o)|
                                                                                      z                  a
                                                                        ≤ |A| · ∥π1 − π2 ∥ + |Z| · ∥ψ1 − ψ2 ∥ .


Lemma 2 (Timestep observation visitation frequency recursion). Given two pairs of policy and latent
variable function (π1 , ψ1 ) and (π2 , ψ2 ), we define :
                                              (π ,ψ1 ),(π2 ,ψ2 )
                                     ∆ρt 1                           (o) ≜ ρπt 1 ,ψ1 (o) − ρtπ2 ,ψ2 (o) ,
                                         (π ,ψ1 ),(π2 ,ψ2 )                                 (π ,ψ1 ),(π2 ,ψ2 )
                                  ∆ρt 1                              ≜ max ∆ρt 1                                 (o) .
                                                                            o

It holds that
            (π ,ψ ),(π2 ,ψ2 )                                                                                            (π ,ψ1 ),(π2 ,ψ2 )
          1
      ∆ρt+1 1
                                (o′ ) ≤ |A| · ∥π1 − π2 ∥ + |Z| · ∥ψ1 − ψ2 ∥ + |O| · ∆ρt 1                                                     .

Proof. For observation visitation frequency at timestep t + 1, there is a recurrence relation:
                                 X π,ψ       X
                    ρπ,ψ    ′
                     t+1 (o ) =      ρt (o)       P (o′ |a, o, z) π (a|o) ψ (z|o)
                                                  o                   a,z


Thus, the divergence of observation visitation frequency at timestep t + 1 can be processed corre-
spondingly:
                          o′ =ρπt+1    o′ − ρπt+1    o′
      (π ,ψ ),(π2 ,ψ2 )
        1 1
                                 1 ,ψ1
                                               2 ,ψ2

    ∆ρt+1
                                                                                                                     !
                                     X                         X
                                 =             ρπt 1 ,ψ1 (o)         (P (o′|a, o, z) π1 (a|s) ψ1 (z|o))
                                     o                         a,z
                                                                                                                         !
                                         X                        X
                                     −            ρπt 2 ,ψ2 (o)         (P (o′|a, o, z) π2 (a|s) ψ2 (z|o))
                                          o                       a,z
                                                                                                                                              !
                                     X                         X
                                 =             ρπt 1 ,ψ1 (o)         (P (o′|a, o, z) (π1 (a|o) ψ1 (z|o) − π2 (a|o) ψ2 (z|o)))
                                     o                         a,z
                                                                                                                                    !
                                         X          (π ,ψ ),(π ,ψ )
                                                                                       X
                                     +            ∆ρt 1 1 2 2 (o)                            (P (o′|a, o, z) π2 (a|o) ψ2 (z|o))
                                          o                                            a,z


                                                                        12
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Using Lemma 1, we can bound the divergence of observation state frequency at timestep t + 1:

                                                                                                                                                      !
    (π1 ,ψ1 ),(π2 ,ψ2 )       ′
                                        X                              X             ′
                                                     ρtπ1 ,ψ1 (o)

  ∆ρt+1                   o        ≤                                         P o |a, o, z |π1 (a|o) ψ1 (z|o) − π2 (a|o) ψ2 (z|o)|
                                            o                          a,z
                                                                                                                                    !
                                                X            (π ,ψ ),(π ,ψ )
                                                                                               X           ′
                                        +                  ∆ρt 1 1 2 2 (o)                           P o |a, o, z π2 (a|o) ψ2 (z|o)
                                                 o                                             a,z
                                     X   π ,ψ
                                   ≤    ρt 1 1 (o) (|A| ∥π1 − π2 ∥ + |Z| ∥ψ1 − ψ2 ∥)
                                            o
                                                                               X
                                                                                           P o′ |a, o, z π2 (a|o) ψ2 (z|o)
                                                       (π ,ψ1 ),(π2 ,ψ2 )
                                        + ∆ρt 1
                                                                               o,a,z
                                                                                                                  (π ,ψ1 ),(π2 ,ψ2 )
                                   ≤ |A| · ∥π1 − π2 ∥ + |Z| · ∥ψ1 − ψ2 ∥ + |O| · ∆ρt 1


Lemma 3 (discounted observation visitation frequency divergence bound). Given two pairs of policy
and latent variable function (π1 , ψ1 ) and (π2 , ψ2 ), with the same distribution of initial observation
ρ0 (o), it holds that

                                   ∆ρ(π1 ,ψ1 ),(π2 ,ψ2 )                   ≤ C (∥π1 − π2 ∥ + ∥ψ1 − ψ2 ∥) ,
                                                                       1

where C is a certain constant.

Proof. We transform it to the cumulative form of the timestep, and scale it using Lemma 2:


                                            ∞
                                                                (π ,ψ1 ),(π2 ,ψ2 )
                                            X
  ∆ρ(π1 ,ψ1 ),(π2 ,ψ2 ) (o) =                        γ t ∆ρt 1                           (o)
                                            t=0
                                        T −1                                                           ∞
                                                                 (π ,ψ1 ),(π2 ,ψ2 )                                       (π ,ψ1 ),(π2 ,ψ2 )
                                        X                                                              X
                                    ≤                γ t ∆ρt 1                           (o) + γ T             γ t−T ∆ρt 1                     (o)
                                        t=1                                                            t=T
                                        T
                                        X −1
                                    ≤                γ t (|A| ∥π1 − π2 ∥ + |Z| ∥ψ1 − ψ2 ∥)
                                        t=1
                                                           T −2
                                                           X                 (π ,ψ1 ),(π2 ,ψ2 )            2γ T
                                        + γ |O|                      γ t ∆ρt 1                         +
                                                               t=1
                                                                                                           1−γ
                                                  −1            −1−t
                                                T              TX
                                                                                     !
                                                X
                                                           t                     k                                                             2γ T
                                    ≤                  γ               (γ |O|)            (|A| ∥π1 − π2 ∥ + |Z| ∥ψ1 − ψ2 ∥) +                       .
                                                t=1
                                                                                                                                               1−γ
                                                                k=0

Thus, we get bound discounted observation visitation frequency divergence:

                               ∆ρ(π1 ,ψ1 ),(π2 ,ψ2 )                       ≤ C1 (∥π1 − π2 ∥ + ∥ψ1 − ψ2 ∥) ,
                                                                      ∞


         ∆ρ(π1 ,ψ1 ),(π2 ,ψ2 )              ≤ |O| · ∆ρ(π1 ,ψ1 ),(π2 ,ψ2 )                          ≤ C2 (∥π1 − π2 ∥ + ∥ψ1 − ψ2 ∥) .
                                        1                                                      ∞


A.2    L ATENT VARIABLE F UNCTION D IVERGENCE

In this section, we provide proof for divergence comparison between latent variable function of policy
rollout and learned latent variable function in the model.


                                                                              13
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Lemma 4 (Latent variable function divergence comparison). Assume ψωn = (1 − α)ψωn−1 + αψ n ,
and initially ψω1 = ψ 1 , where n is the nth policy rollout. Then,
                                                      Eψ > Eψω ,
where Eψ ≜ max ψ n − ψ n−1 and Eψω ≜ max ψωn − ψωn−1 .
                n                                        n


Proof. Firstly, we can construct such a recursive inequality:
  ψ n − ψωn−1 = ψ n − (1 − α) ψωn−2 − αψ n−1 ≤ ψ n − ψ n−1 + (1 − α) ψ n−1 − ψωn−2 .

Thus, we can expand it recursively:
      ψ n − ψωn−1 ≤ ψ n − ψ n−1 + (1 − α) ψ n−1 − ψωn−2
                                                                                               n−1
                     ≤ ψ n − ψ n−1 + (1 − α) ψ n−1 − ψ n−2 + · · · + (1 − α)                          ψ 1 − ψω0
                                                                                               n−1
                     = ψ n − ψ n−1 + (1 − α) ψ n−1 − ψ n−2 + · · · + (1 − α)                          ψ1 − ψ0

                                                      n−1
                     ≤Eψ 1 + (1 − α) + · · · + (1 − α)
                         Eψ
                     <      .
                         α
Using this inequality, we can zoom ψωn − ψωn−1 :
            ψωn − ψωn−1 = (1 − α) ψωn−1 + αψ n − ψωn−1 = α ψ n − ψωn−1 z < Eψ .
Thus, Eψω = max ψωn − ψωn−1 < Eψ .
                 n


Now we combine Lemma 3 and 4 to prove Theorem 1.
                                                                                       n   n    n−1    n−1
Theorem 1 (Latent variable model benefits). Define ∆ρn (o) ≜ ρπ ,ψ (o) − ρπ ,ψ (o), and
denote ∥∆ρn ∥ ≜ max|ρn (o) − ψ n−1 (o)|, similarly for ∥∆π n ∥ and ∥∆ψ n ∥. It holds that,
                      o
                                               ∥∆ρn ∥ ≤ C (Eπ + Eψ ) ,
where Eπ ≜ max ∥∆π n ∥ , Eψ ≜ max ∥∆ψ n ∥ and C is a constant. Assume ψωn = (1 − α)ψωn−1 +
                n                          n
αψ n , and initially ψω0 = ψ 0 .3 It holds that Eψ > Eψω and the bound above is lower when substituting
ψ with ψω .

Proof. Using Lemma 3, we can scale ∥∆ρn ∥,
                                ∥∆ρn ∥ ≤ C (∥∆π n ∥ + ∥∆ψ n ∥) ≤ C (Eπ + Eψ )
Using Lemma 4, Eψ > Eψω . Thus, the bound above is lower for Eψω .

A.3    L EMMAS FOR R ETURN B OUND A NALYSIS

In this section, we prove several lemmas as preparations for return bound analysis.
Lemma 5 (TVD bound of joint distribution). Consider two joint distributions of n + 1 variables like
this:

                                                                            n
                                                                            Y
                                 P1 (x, y1 , y2 , · · · , yn ) = P1 (x) ·         P1 (yi |x)
                                                                            i=1
                                                                            Yn
                                 P2 (x, y1 , y2 , · · · , yn ) = P2 (x) ·         P2 (yi |x)
                                                                            i=1
   3
     Since ψ is varying and ψω is continuously updated using the experiences from several recent policy rollouts,
we use the form of soft-update for the relation between ψ and ψω .


                                                             14
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


We can bound the total variation distance of the joint distributions as:
                                                                                     n
                                                                                     X
DT V (P1 (x, y1 , · · · , yn ) ∥P2 (x, y1 , · · · , yn )) ≤ DT V (P1 (x) ∥P2 (x))+         maxDT V (P1 (yi |x) ∥P2 (yi |x)).
                                                                                            x
                                                                                     i=1



Proof. We start the proof from a basis case when n = 1:


                     1X
 DT V (P1 ∥P2 ) =          |P1 (x, y) − P2 (x, y)|
                     2 x,y
                     1X
                   ≤       |P1 (x) P1 (y|x) − P2 (x) P1 (y|x)| + |P2 (x) P1 (y|x) − P2 (x) P2 (y|x)|
                     2 x,y
                     1X
                   =       |P1 (x) − P2 (x)| · P1 (y|x) + P2 (x) · |P1 (y|x) − P2 (y|x)|
                     2 x,y
                     1X                         X
                   =       |P1 (x) − P2 (x)| +      P2 (x) DT V (P1 (y|x) ∥P2 (y|x))
                     2 x                         x
                   ≤DT V (P1 (x) ∥P2 (x)) + maxDT V (P1 (y|x) ∥P2 (y|x))
                                                      x


Similarly, we can prove the case of multi-variables:


 DT V (P1 ∥P2 ) ≤ DT V (P1 (x) ∥P2 (x)) +maxDT V (P1 (y1 , · · · , yn |x) ∥P2 (y1 , · · · , yn |x))
                                          x
                                            h
                ≤ DT V (P1 (x) ∥P2 (x)) +max DT V (P1 (y1 |x) ∥P2 (y1 |x))
                                                     x
                                                                                                                      i
                                                     + maxDT V (P1 (y2 , · · · , yn |x) ∥P2 (y2 , · · · , yn |x))
                                                          x
                  = DT V (P1 (x) ∥P2 (x)) +maxDT V (P1 (y1 |x) ∥P2 (y1 |x))
                                                     x
                                                     + maxDT V (P1 (y2 , · · · , yn |x) ∥P2 (y2 , · · · , yn |x))
                                                          x
                                                    n
                                                    X
                  ≤ DT V (P1 (x) ∥P2 (x)) +               maxDT V (P1 (yi |x) ∥P2 (yi |x))
                                                           x
                                                    i=1


Before proving following lemmas, we clarify the premise our discuss in this section is based on. In a
Dec-POMDP, denote the co-occurrence probability of tuple (o, a, z) at timestep t as P t (o, a, z) ≜
P (ot = o, at = a, zt = z).
Consider two Dec-POMDPs different merely in transition function and reward function, G1 , G2 . P1
represents the probability in G1 while P2 for G2 . Different policies and latent variable functions,
(π1 , ψ1 ) and (π2 , ψ2 ), are used to rollout respectively in G1 and G2 , We denote several bound
between them:
      reward bound: rmax ≜ max max{R1 (o, a, z), R2 (o, a, z)};
                                     o,a,z

      policy bound: ϵπ ≜ maxDT V (π1 ∥π2 ) ;
                                 o

      latent variable function bound: ϵψ ≜ maxDT V (ψ1 ∥ψ2 ) ;
                                                     o

      transition function bound: ϵm ≜ maxEo,a,z∼P t−1 DT V (P1 (ot |o, a, z) ∥P2 (ot |o, a, z)) .
                                                t              2



Additionally, consider the branched model rollout mentioned in Section 3. Policy, latent variable
function, transition function, and reward function vary before and after the model rollout branch. We


                                                          15
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


denote these functions via superscripts ’Pre’ for function before branch and ’Post’ for functions after
branch. Correspondingly, when discussing branched model rollout, we extend the bounds above:
    reward bound: rmax ≜ max max{R1P re (o, a, z), R1P ost (o, a, z), R2P re (o, a, z), R2P ost (o, a, z)};
                             o,a,z

    policy bound: ϵπ ≜ maxDT V π1P re ∥π2P re , ϵP
                     P re
                                                    π
                                                      ost
                                                           ≜ maxDT V π1P ost ∥π2P ost ;
                              o                                 o

    latent variable function bound: ϵP
                                     ψ
                                       re
                                          ≜ max DTV   ψ P re
                                                        1    ∥ψ P re
                                                                2      , ϵP
                                                                          ψ
                                                                            ost
                                                                                ≜ maxDT V ψ1P ost ∥ψ2P ost ;
                                              o                                   o


    transition function bound: ϵP
                                m
                                  re
                                                             P1P re (ot |o, a, z) ∥P2P re (ot |o, a, z) ,
                                     ≜ maxEo,a,z∼P t−1,P re DT V
                                    t        2

                             ϵm ≜ maxEo,a,z∼P t−1,P ost DT V P1P ost (ot |o, a, z) ∥P2P ost (ot |o, a, z) .
                              P ost
                                        t           2


Lemma 6 (Observation distributions TVD bound). The total variation distance of observation
distributions at timestep t, P1 (ot ) and P2 (ot ), can be bounded as below:
                               DT V (P1 (ot ) ∥P2 (ot )) ≤ t (ϵπ + ϵψ + ϵm )
.

Proof.
                               1X
DT V (P1 (ot ) ∥P2 (ot )) =        |P1 (ot ) − P2 (ot )|
                               2 o
                                   t


                              1 X X t−1
                            =           P     (o, a, z) P1 (ot |o, a, z) − P2t−1 (o, a, z) P2 (ot |o, a, z)
                              2 o o,a,z 1
                                 t
                                    X
                              1 X
                            ≤             P1t−1 (o, a, z) − P2t−1 (o, a, z) P1 (ot |o, a, z)
                              2 o   o,a,z
                                 t

                                       X
                                    +      P2t−1 (o, a, z) |P1 (ot |o, a, z) − P2 (ot |o, a, z)|
                                            o,a,z
                              1 X t−1                                X
                            =         P1 (o, a, z) − P2t−1 (o, a, z)   P1 (ot |o, a, z)
                              2 o,a,z                                o       t

                             + Eo,a,z∼P t−1 DT V (P1 (ot |o, a, z) ∥P2 (ot |o, a, z))
                                       2

                            =DT V P1t−1 (o, a, z) ∥P2t−1 (o, a, z) + ϵm


According to Lemma 5,
         DT V P1t−1 (o, a, z) ∥P2t−1 (o, a, z) ≤DT V (P1 (ot−1 ) ∥P2 (ot−1 ))


                                                        + maxDT V (π1 ∥π2 ) + maxDT V (ψ1 ∥ψ2 )
                                                             o                        o
                                                    =DT V (P1 (ot−1 ) ∥P2 (ot−1 )) + ϵπ + ϵψ

Thus,
                DT V (P1 (ot ) ∥P2 (ot )) ≤DT V (P1 (ot−1 ) ∥P2 (ot−1 )) + ϵπ + ϵψ + ϵm
                                          ≤DT V (P1 (o0 ) ∥P2 (o0 )) + t (ϵπ + ϵψ + ϵm )
                                          =t (ϵπ + ϵψ + ϵm )


Lemma 7 (Rollout return bound). The gap between rollout returns in G1 with (π1 , ψ1 ) and G2 with
(π2 , ψ2 ) is bounded as:

                                                   2rmax γ (ϵπ + ϵψ + ϵm )
                 |η1 (π1 , ψ1 ) − η2 (π2 , ψ2 )| ≤                         + ϵπ + ϵψ
                                                   1−γ         1−γ

                                                        16
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Proof.

                                             X                       X
                                                                          γ t P1t (o, a, z) − P2t (o, a, z)

         |η1 (π1 , ψ1 ) − η2 (π2 , ψ2 )| =           R (o, a, z)
                                             o,a,z                    t
                                                      X
                                                            t
                                                           γ DT V P1t (o, a, z) ∥P2t (o, a, z)

                                         ≤2rmax
                                                       t

Using Lemma 5 and 6,

  DT V P1t (o, a, z) ∥P2t (o, a, z) ≤DT V (P1 (ot ) ∥P2 (ot )) + maxDT V (π1 ∥π2 ) + maxDT V (ψ1 ∥ψ2 )

                                                                            o                      o
                                    ≤t (ϵπ + ϵψ + ϵm ) + ϵπ + ϵψ

Thus,



                                                      2rmax         γ (ϵπ + ϵψ + ϵm )
                  |η1 (π1 , ψ1 ) − η2 (π2 , ψ2 )| ≤                                   + ϵπ + ϵψ
                                                      1−γ                 1−γ


Lemma 8 (Branched rollout return bound). In k-step branched rollout with h-step length before
the branch taking   into consideration,
                                          denote the gap between    branched rollout    returns in G1 with
  π1P re , π1P ost , ψ1P re , ψ1P ost and G2 with π2P re , π2P ost , ψ2P re , ψ2P ost as:

|η1 − η2 | ≜ η1branch     π1P re , π1P ost , ψ1P re , ψ1P ost − η2branch           π2P re , π2P ost , ψ2P re , ψ2P ost


which is bounded as:

                        γ h+k+1

             2rmax
                                  ϵP re
                                        + ϵP re
                                                + ϵP re
                                                          + ϵP re
                                                                  + ϵP re

|η1 − η2 | ≤         h+            π       ψ       m         π       ψ
             1−γ        (1 − γ)

                                                     + γ h+1 k ϵP ost
                                                                      + ϵP ost
                                                                               + ϵP ost
                                                                                          + ϵP ost
                                                                                                   + ϵP ost

                                                                π        ψ        m          π        ψ


Proof. According to Lemma 6,

             DT V (P1 (ot ) ∥P2 (ot )) ≤ DT V (P1 (ot−1 ) ∥P2 (ot−1 )) + ϵπ + ϵψ + ϵm ,

which stays in branched rollout case.
We can discuss δt ≜ DT V (P1t (o, a, z) ∥P2t (o, a, z)) with different t value:
when t ≤ h,

                           δ t ≤ t ϵP re
                                         + ϵP  re
                                                  + ϵP  re
                                                             + ϵP re
                                                                     + ϵP re

                                    π        ψ        ω         π       ψ

when h < t ≤ h + k,

         δt ≤h ϵP re
                     + ϵP re
                             + ϵP re
                                       + (t − h) ϵP ost
                                                        + ϵP ost
                                                                 + ϵP ost
                                                                            + ϵP ost
                                                                                     + ϵP ost

                π       ψ       m                 π        ψ        m          π        ψ



when t > h + k,

 δt ≤h ϵP re
             + ϵP re
                     + ϵP re
                               + k ϵP ost
                                          + ϵP ost
                                                   + ϵP ost
                                                              + ϵP ost
                                                                       + ϵP ost

        π       ψ       m           π        ψ        m          π        ψ

                                              + (t − h − k) ϵP    re
                                                                     + ϵP   re
                                                                               + ϵP re
                                                                                         + ϵP  re
                                                                                                  + ϵP re

                                                                π         ψ       m          π       ψ

   = (t − k) ϵP re
                   + ϵP re
                           + ϵP re
                                     + ϵP re
                                             + ϵP re
                                                     + k ϵP ost
                                                                + ϵP   ost
                                                                           + ϵP ost
                                                                                      + ϵP  ost
                                                                                                + ϵP ost

              π       ψ       m         π       ψ         π          ψ         m          π        ψ



                                                           17
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Using the inequalities above, we can write:
      X
             γ t DT V P1t (o, a, z) ∥P2t (o, a, z)

δ≜
        t
    h
    X
       γ t t ϵP re     P re     P re       P re     P re

  ≤           π    + ϵ ψ    + ϵ m      + ϵ π    + ϵ ψ
      t=0
             h+k
             X
                     γ t h ϵP re     P re     P re       P ost     P ost             P ost     P ost     P ost

      +                     π    + ϵ ψ    + ϵ m      + ϵ π     + ϵ ψ     + (t − h) ϵ π     + ϵ ψ     + ϵ m
            t=h+1
              X∞
                       γ t (t − k) ϵP re
                                         + ϵP re
                                                 + ϵP re
                                                           + ϵP re
                                                                   + ϵP re

      +                             π       ψ       m         π       ψ
            t=h+k+1

                                                                    ϵP ost
                                                                           + ϵP ost
                                                                                    + ϵP ost
                                                                                                   + ϵP ost
                                                                                                            + ϵP ost

                                                             +k      π        ψ        m              π        ψ

    h
    X
        t   P re P re P re   P re P re

  ≤    γ h ϵπ + ϵψ + ϵm + ϵπ + ϵψ
      t=0
             h+k
             X
                     γ t h ϵP re
                                 + ϵP re
                                         + ϵP re
                                                   + ϵP re
                                                           + ϵP re

      +                     π       ψ       m         π       ψ
            t=h+1

                                                                    ϵP ost
                                                                           + ϵP ost
                                                                                    + ϵP ost
                                                                                                   + ϵP ost
                                                                                                            + ϵP ost

                                                             +k      π        ψ        m              π        ψ

              ∞
              X
                       γ t (t − k) ϵP re
                                         + ϵP re
                                                 + ϵP re
                                                           + ϵP re
                                                                   + ϵP re

      +                             π       ψ       m         π       ψ
            t=h+k+1

                                            + k ϵP    ost     P ost    P ost        P ost     P ost

                                                    π     + ϵ ψ     + ϵm       +  ϵ π     + ϵ ψ

    ∞               ∞                                     ∞
                           !                                    !
    X               X                                    X
      γ t h + γ h+k   γ t t ϵP re
                                  + ϵP re
                                          + ϵP re
                                                             γ t ϵP    re
                                                                          + ϵP   re

  ≤                          π       ψ       m      +                π         ψ
          t=0                    t=0                                     t=0
                ∞
                           !
                X
                      γt       k ϵP ost
                                        + ϵP ost
                                                 + ϵP ost
                                                            + ϵP ost
                                                                     + ϵP ost

      +                           π        ψ        m          π        ψ
             t=h+1
                                   !
             h    γ h+k+1                                           1
                                       ϵP re
                                             + ϵP re
                                                     + ϵP re
                                                                       ϵP re
                                                                             + ϵP re

  =             +        2              π       ψ       m      +        π       ψ
            1−γ   (1 − γ)                                          1−γ
            γ h+1
                  k ϵP ost
                           + ϵP ost
                                    + ϵP ost
                                               + ϵP ost
                                                        + ϵP ost

      +              π        ψ        m          π        ψ
            1−γ

Thus,

|η1 − η2 | ≤2rmax δ
                        γ h+k+1

             2rmax
                                  ϵP re
                                        + ϵP re
                                                + ϵP re
                                                          + ϵP   re
                                                                    + ϵP  re

           ≤         h+            π       ψ       m           π        ψ
             1−γ        (1 − γ)

                                      + γ h+1 k ϵP    ost     P ost     P ost       P ost     P ost

                                                    π     + ϵ ψ     + ϵ m       + ϵ π     + ϵ ψ


A.4     P ROOF OF RETURN BOUND

In this section, we provide proofs of return bound in different cases.


                                                           18
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Theorem 2 (Rollout return bound for decentralized model) . The gap between return in n + 1th
policy rollout and return in model rollout with nth learned model η model (π, ψωn ) is bounded as:
                                                  2rmax
               η π, ψ n+1 − η model (π, ψωn ) ≤

                                                        2 (γϵθ + 2ϵπ + 2ϵω + ϵψ ).
                                                (1 − γ)
                                                |               {z             }
                                                                     C(ϵθ ,ϵπ ,ϵω ,ϵψ )


Proof.
  η π, ψ n+1 − η model (π, ψωn ) ⩽ η π, ψ n+1 − η (πD
                                                    n               n
                                                      , ψ n ) + η (πD , ψ n ) − η model (π, ψωn )

                                  |           {z             } |               {z                }
                                                        L1                                     L2

Apply Lemma 7 to L1 and L2 :

                                 2rmax γ (ϵπ + ϵψ )
                            L1 ≤                    + ϵπ + ϵψ ,
                                 1−γ      1−γ

                                 2rmax γ (ϵπ + ϵθ + ϵω )
                            L2 ≤                         + ϵπ + ϵω .
                                 1−γ         1−γ
Thus,
                                                  2rmax
                η π, ψ n+1 − η model (π, ψωn ) ≤

                                                        2 (2ϵπ + ϵψ + ϵω + γϵθ ) .
                                                 (1 − γ)


Theorem 3 (Branched rollout return bound for decentralized model) . The gap between return in
n + 1th policy rollout η(π, ψ n+1 ) and return in k-step branched rollout with h-step experience with
nth learned model η branch ((πDn
                                 , π), (ψ n , ψωn )) is bounded as:
                  η π, ψ n+1 − η branch ((πD     n
                                                   , π) , (ψ n , ψωn )) ≤ C (ϵθ , ϵπ , ϵω , ϵψ )



Proof.
              δ ≜ η π, ψ n+1 − η branch ((πD
                                           n
                                              , π) , (ψ n , ψωn ))


                ≤ η π, ψ n+1 − η branch ((πD
                                           n     n
                                                   ) , (ψ n , ψ n ))

                                             , πD
                 |                    {z                            }
                                              L1
                         branch      n    n
                   + η            ((πD , πD ) , (ψ n , ψ n )) − η branch ((πD
                                                                            n
                                                                              , π) , (ψ n , ψωn ))
                    |                                        {z                                  }
                                                             L2

Apply Lemma 8 to L1 and L2 :
                    γ h+k+1

       2rmax                                                h+1
  L1 ≤          h+             (ϵπ + ϵψ ) + (ϵπ + ϵψ ) + γ      (k (ϵπ + ϵψ + ϵθ ) + ϵπ + ϵψ )
       1−γ           1−γ
                    γ h+k+1

       2rmax                                  h+1                    h+1
     =          h+           + 1 + (k + 1) γ         (ϵπ + ϵψ ) + kγ     ϵθ ,
       1−γ           1−γ
                    γ h+k+1

       2rmax                                     h+1
  L2 ≤          h+             (ϵω ) + (ϵω ) + γ     (k (ϵπ + ϵω ) + ϵπ + ϵω )
       1−γ           1−γ
                    γ h+k+1

       2rmax
     =          h+           + 1 ϵω + (k + 1) γ h+1 (ϵπ + ϵω ) .
       1−γ           1−γ
Thus,
                     h+k+1
          2rmax     γ
     δ≤                    + h + 1 + (k + 1) γ h+1 (ϵπ + ϵψ + ϵω ) + kγ h+1 (ϵθ + kϵπ )
          1−γ        1−γ


                                                       19
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Theorem 4 (Rollout return bound for decentralized model with prediction error) . The gap between
return in n + 1th policy rollout η(π, ψ n+1 ) and return in model rollout with nth learned model
η model (π, ψωn ) is bounded as:
                                                      2rmax
                   η π, ψ n+1 − η model (π, ψωn ) ≤

                                                            2 (2ϵπ + ϵ̂ω + γϵθ ).
                                                    (1 − γ)
                                                    |            {z           }
                                                                    C(ϵθ ,ϵπ ,ϵ̂ω )


Proof.
  η π, ψ n+1 − η model (π, ψωn ) ⩽ η π, ψ n+1 − η (πD
                                                    n
                                                      , ψωn ) + η (πD
                                                                    n
                                                                      , ψωn ) − η model (π, ψωn )

                                  |           {z             } |               {z                }
                                                     L1                                    L2

Apply Lemma 7 to L1 and L2 :

                                    2rmax γ (ϵπ + ϵ̂ω )
                               L1 ≤                     + ϵπ + ϵ̂ω
                                    1−γ      1−γ

                                    2rmax γ (ϵπ + ϵθ )
                               L2 ≤                     + ϵπ
                                    1−γ      1−γ
Thus,
                                                     2rmax
                   η π, ψ n+1 − η model (π, ψωn ) ≤

                                                            2 (2ϵπ + ϵ̂ω + γϵθ ) .
                                                    (1 − γ)


Theorem 5 (Branched rollout return bound for decentralized model with prediction error) . The gap
between return in n + 1th policy rollout η(π, ψ n+1 ) and return in k-step branched rollout with h-step
experience with nth learned model η branch ((πD  n
                                                   , π), (ψ n , ψωn )) is bounded as:
                 η π, ψ n+1 − η branch ((πD  n
                                               , π) , (ψ n , ψωn )) ≤ C (ϵθ , ϵπ , ϵω , ϵ̂ω ) .



Proof.
              δ ≜ η π, ψ n+1 − η branch ((πD
                                           n
                                              , π) , (ψ n , ψωn ))


                ≤ η π, ψ n+1 − η branch ((πD
                                           n     n
                                                   ) , (ψωn , ψωn ))

                                             , πD
                 |                    {z                            }
                                            L1

                   + η branch ((πD
                                 n    n
                                   , πD ) , (ψωn , ψωn )) − η branch ((πD
                                                                        n
                                                                          , π) , (ψ n , ψωn ))
                    |                                    {z                                   }
                                                          L2

Apply Lemma 8 to L1 and L2 :
                     γ h+k+1

       2rmax
  L1 ≤          h+             (ϵπ + ϵ̂ω ) + (ϵπ + ϵ̂ω ) + γ h+1 (k (ϵπ + ϵ̂ω + ϵθ ) + ϵπ + ϵ̂ω )
        1−γ           1−γ
                     γ h+k+1

       2rmax
     =          h+           + 1 + (k + 1) γ h+1 (ϵπ + ϵ̂ω ) + kγ h+1 ϵθ ,
        1−γ           1−γ
                     γ h+k+1

       2rmax                                     h+1
  L2 ≤          h+             (ϵω ) + (ϵω ) + γ     (k (ϵπ ) + ϵπ )
        1−γ           1−γ
                     γ h+k+1

       2rmax                                       h+1
     =          h+           + 1 ϵω + (k + 1) γ          ϵπ .
        1−γ           1−γ
Thus,
                   h+k+1
       2rmax      γ                                           h+1                   h+1
    δ≤                   + h + 1 (ϵπ + ϵ̂ω + ϵω ) + (k + 1) γ     (2ϵπ + ϵ̂ω ) + kγ     ϵθ
       1−γ         1−γ



                                                     20
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                                                                                 Low


                                                                                                 High


Figure 5: Conditional probability matrices: P (a−0 |z0 ) (left) and P (z0 |a−0 ) (right). Deeper color
means higher probability. The order of z0 has been adjusted for clarification.


B     V ERIFICATION ON L EARNED L ATENT VARIABLE
To examine how related the learned latent variable and the inaccessible information are, we designed
a simple tabular case, where policies, transition matrix, and reward matrix are preset. There are 3
states and 3 agents with 2 actions for each and the space of latent variable is set to be 4. For agent 0,
we collect experiences ⟨s, a0 , s′ , r⟩ and train a latent variable model end-to-end. For visualization,
we design ψω as an explicit network to fetch learned z0 and preset the forward pass for the state in Pθ
to avoid the correspondence being conditioned on the state. Then, we sample z0 from learned latent
variable function network ψω for each experience in the buffer, and then calculate the conditional
probabilities, P (z0 |a−0 ) and P (a−0 |z0 ). As shown in Figure 5, there is a one-to-one correspondence
between the latent variable and other agents’ joint action. This demonstrates the latent variable model
can implicitly capture inaccessible information relevant to transition and reward via end-to-end
learning.

C     E XPERIMENT D ETAILS
C.1    E NVIRONMENT S ETTING

In this section, we introduce the environment settings we used in the experiments.
Stochastic Game. In our stochastic game, there are 30 observations, 3 agents and 5 actions for each
agent, and episode length is limited to 40 steps. We generate a transition matrix T and a reward
matrix R in advance as transition function and reward function. Concretely, T is a matrix in shape of
[30, 5, 5, 5, 30] and R is a matrix in  shape of [30, 5, 5, 5, 1]. At each timestep t, given observation ot
and agent joint actions a0t , a1t , a2t , the transition is:
                              ot+1 ∼ T [ot , a0t , a1t , a2t ], rt = R[ot , a0t , a1t , a2t ].

MPE. In our MPE tasks, agents observe their own positions, velocity, and others’ relative positions.
And actions of agents control their accelerations in every direction which is continuous in our
experiments. In MPE tasks, the episode length is limited to 40 steps.

      4-Agent Cooperative Navigation. In 4-agent Cooperative Navigation, as shown in Figure 6
      (left), 4 agents learn to cooperate to reach 4 landmarks respectively. Concretely, we denote the
      radius of agent i as di , position of agent i as (xia , yai ) and position of landmark i as (xil , yli ), and
      the reward is:
                                      X3        q
                                                      i      j 2        i     j 2
                              r=−           min (xl − xa ) + (yl − ya ) − pc ,
                                                 j
                                       i=0
      where pc is a collision penalty:
                               X                      q
                                                               j 2          j 2

                      pc =            I{x|x<di +dj }      i            i
                                                        (xa − xa ) + (ya − ya )    .
                               0≤i,j≤3

      Thus, the reward upper bound at each step is −4.


                                                            21
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                             Cooperative Navigation                              Regular Polygon Control


                                   learning agent          agent with fixed policy           landmark



Figure 6: Illustration of MPE tasks: Cooperative Navigation (left) and Regular Polygon Control
(right).


      5-Agent Regular Polygon Control. In 5-agent Regular Polygon Control, as shown in Figure 6
      (right), 4 agents learn to cooperate with another agent, which is controlled by a fixed policy,
      aiming to form a regular pentagon. The fixed policy is that the acceleration of the agent is
      always in the direction of the relative position between the center of the other 4 agents and itself.
      And the reward is given according to the area S of current pentagon scaled by its perimeter C ,
      which formally is:
                                     
                                     S · ( 10 )2 , agents form a convex pentagon
                          Sscaled =          C
                                        0,                                otherwise,
                                     

      and represents the area of its similar pentagon with a perimeter of 10. So when the pentagon is a
      regular pentagon, Sscaled comes to its maximum, 5 cot π5 . Additionally, two penalty items are
      given. Bound penalty, pb , is used to restrict agents to stay in bounds :
                                              
                                              0,
                                                                    |x| < 0.9
                               bound(x) = 10 ∗ (|x| − 0.9), |x| < 1.0 ,
                                               2|x|−2
                                              
                                                e       ,            otherwise
                                                    3
                                                    X
                                                       bound(xi ) + bound(y i ) ,

                                       pb =
                                                    i=0
      where (xi , y i ) is the position of agent i. Collision penalty, pc , is as same as that in 4-agent
      Cooperative Navigation. Finally, we design the reward as:

                                                          1
                      r = min max Sscaled ,                           , 1000 − 4pc − pb ,
                                                 5 cot π5 − Sscaled
      where max operator helps to distinguish when pentagon is relatively large and min operator
      handles the situation being divided by zero. This task is more difficult than Cooperative
      Navigation.

Multi-Agent MuJoCo. In our multi-agent MuJoCo experiments, the state in MuJoCo environment,
which describes the position, velocity, angular velocity of each joint, etc, is used as the observation
distributed to each agent. Specifically, in Ant task, we only use dimensions from 0 to 26 of the state.
We limit the episode length of Halfcheetah to 250 steps, and 500 steps for Ant and Hopper. We
provide the joint allocation of each task in Table 1.

C.2    I MPLEMENTATION & H YPERPARAMETERS

In this section, we provide details for implementation and hyperparameters.
For the experiment environment, we adopt MPE (MIT license) and MuJoCo Gym (MIT license). For
PPO, we follow the version in OpenAI’s Spinning Up (MIT license).


                                                            22
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Table 1: Joint allocation in multi-agent MuJoCo tasks. The relation column indicates how agents
control the joints of robotics.

                Task               MuJoCo action          Multi-agent MuJoCo actions                          Relation
            Hopper 3×1              (a0 , a1 , a2 )             [(a00 ), (a10 ), (a20 )]                       ai = ai0
              Ant 4×2              (a0 , · · · , a7 )       [(a00 , a01 ), · · · , (a30 , a31 )]             a2i+k = aik
          HalfCheetah 3×2          (a0 , · · · , a5 )       [(a00 , a01 ), · · · , (a20 , a21 )]             a2i+k = aik
          HalfCheetah 6×1          (a0 , · · · , a5 )            [(a00 ), · · · , (a50 )]                      ai = ai0
       HalfCheetah 5:[1,1,1,1,2]   (a0 , · · · , a5 )      [(a0 ), · · · , (a30 ), (a40 , a41 )]
                                                              0
                                                                                                             ai+k = aik
                                                                                                                          P      i
                                                                                                                              i a1
          HalfCheetah 5×2           (a0 , · · · , a5 )       [(a00 , a01 ), · · · , (a40 , a41 )]       ai = ai0 , a5 =       5



                    Table 2: Structure of the neural networks we used in experiments.

                            Stochastic Game                       MPE                                Multi-agent MuJoCo
          Network
                          hidden      activation           hidden   activation                        hidden    activation
        PPO Actor       (128,128)        tanh            (128,128)     tanh                         (128,128)      tanh
        PPO Critic      (128,128)        tanh            (128,128)     tanh                         (128,128)      tanh
           ψω             (64,64)       ReLU              (64,64)     ReLU                            (32,32)     ReLU
           fζ              (128)        ReLU              (64,64)     ReLU                             (256)      ReLU
           Pθ            (128,64)       ReLU                (64)      ReLU                           (128,64)     ReLU
           Rϕ            (128,64)       ReLU              (64,64)     ReLU                           (128,64)     ReLU

                                            Table 3: Hyperparameters

                                                   Stochastic Game                MPE Multi-agent MuJoCo
              latent variable dimension                   3                         4          6
                             λ                                                      0.94
                             γ                                                      0.98
                             ϵ                                                       0.2
                          ϵvalue                                                      10
                        centropy                                                    3e-4
                         cvalue                                                      0.5
                  max gradient norm                                                  0.6
                    PPO batch size                                                    32
                  actor learning rate                                               3e-4
                  critic learning rate                                              1e-3
                             k                                       4                         2
                             h                                       8                         6
                             l                                                         8
                            co′                             10                   1,1004        5
          latent variable model batch size                                            64
                 prediction batch size                              32                        128
                   ψω learning rate                                                 1e-5
                   fζ learning rate                        1e-4                   3e-5        5e-5
                   Pθ learning rate                        1e-4                          3e-5
                   Rϕ learning rate                        1e-4                          3e-5


All neural networks used in our implementation are in the form of Multi-Layer Perception (MLP).
Particularly, the transition function and reward function are respectively learned using an ensemble
formed by 3 individual versions of the last layer. The likelihood of next observation is multiplied by
a coefficient co′ to balance the scale of the elements in (3) and (4). The hidden size and activation
function used in the networks are provided in Table 2. And the parameters used in training are
provided in Table 3.

   4
       co′ = 1 in 4-Agent Cooperative Navigation task and co′ = 100 in 5-Agent Regular Polygon Control


                                                            23
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                  DYHUDJH UHWXUQ                                           REVHUYDWLRQ YLVLWDWLRQ IUHTXHQF\                             SUHGLFW REVHUYDWLRQ &URVV(QWURS\


                                                                                                                                                                                                      SUHGLFW UHZDUG /  GLVWDQFH

                                             ,332

                                           0'32 Z R SUHGLFWLRQ
                                             0'32


                                          URXQG                                                                                URXQG                                                                                   URXQG

Figure 7: Learning curves of MDPO compared with MDPO w/o prediction and IPPO on the
single-agent non-stationary stochastic game: average return (left), observation visitation frequency
divergence (mid), and model prediction errors (right). Each round is 1600 environment steps.


In the implementation of latent variable function, both deterministic and stochastic latent variable
satisfy our analysis, and we choose between them according to environment properties and experi-
mental performance. In MPE and stochastic game except for Appendix B, we use deterministic latent
variable with L2 regularization. In stochastic game in Appendix B, we use Category distribution.
And in multi-agent MuJoCo environment, we use Gaussian distribution. As for the implementation
of transition function and reward function, we use Category distribution for transition function in
stochastic game and deterministic output for others.
The experiments are carried out on Intel i9-10900K CPU and NVIDIA GTX 3080Ti GPU. The
training of stochastic game task costs 6 hours, while it takes 14 hours for each MPE task, and 25
hours for each multi-agent MuJoCo task.


D    A DDITIONAL R ESULTS

Since MDPO helps to handle non-stationarity in decentralized MARL from the perspective of an
individual agent, it will be natural and easy to also apply MDPO to single-agent RL in non-stationary
environments. In this section, we investigate how MDPO performs in such a non-stationary single-
agent environment.
We adopt the cooperative stochastic game into a single-agent non-stationary version. Concretely, we
fix the policies of two agents and leave only one agent to update its policy. And we generate 5 noise
matrices (N0 , · · · , N4 ) randomly, which are in the same shape as the transition matrix (T ) and will
influence the transition probability in a rotating manner. Formally, in nth policy rollout, the transition
matrix is T + Nn mod 5 , and we guarantee such a transition matrix is reasonable when generating
noise matrices.
We compare the performance of MDPO, MDPO w/o prediction, and IPPO on the single-agent non-
stationary stochastic game, and the learning curves are shown in Figure 7. As illustrated in Figure 7
(left), MDPO still performs the best in the single-agent non-stationary environment. As shown in
Figure 7 (right), latent variable prediction helps to predict the non-stationary transition, and as no
noise is applied to the reward matrix, there is merely a slight difference in reward prediction. Since
the latent variable in this environment (noise matrices) is in a regular rotation, the prediction function
is easier to learn than in decentralized MARL settings. However, unlike in decentralized MARL,
non-stationarity in this setting will not fade away in pace with policy convergence, thus MDPO w/o
prediction may keep oscillating and generate experiences with larger observation visitation frequency
divergence than MDPO, which is shown in Figure 7 (mid).
Generally, MDPO also works in single-agent non-stationary environments, especially when there is a
regular pattern of non-stationarity. More thorough studies are left as future work.


E    A DDITIONAL R ELATED W ORK

By utilizing an environment model, model-based RL has shown many advantages, such as sample
efficiency (Wang et al., 2019) and exploration (Pathak et al., 2017). Many paradigms have been


                                                                                                                               24
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                                Pass and Shoot                                 3 vs 1 with Keeper
                                0.6                                            0.4

                                0.5                                            0.3


            average goal rate
                                0.4
                                0.3                                            0.2

                                0.2                                            0.1
                                                                                                                ITRPO
                                0.1                                                                             MDPO w/o prediction
                                                                               0.0                              MDPO
                                0.0
                                      0   200    400     600     800   1000          0   200      400     600         800      1000
                                                    round                                           round
Figure 8: Learning curves of MDPO, MDPO w/o prediction, and ITRPO in Run and Pass (left) and 3
vs 1 with Keeper (right). Each round is 3200 environment steps.

proposed on how to exploit the environment model. Model-based planning methods, such as model
predictive control, select actions through model rollouts. Dyna-style methods (Sutton, 1990; Feinberg
et al., 2018; Janner et al., 2019) use both data collected in the real environment and data generated
by the learned model to update the policy. Recent studies have extended model-based methods to
multi-agent settings for sample efficiency in zero-sum game (Zhang et al., 2020), in stochastic game
(Zhang et al., 2021) and in networked system (Du et al., 2022), centralized training (Willemsen et al.,
2021), opponent modeling (Yu et al., 2021b), and communication (Kim et al., 2021). However, none
of them strictly tackle fully decentralized setting of our paper.
Specially, the DMPO (decentralized model-based policy optimization) algorithm in prior work (Du
et al., 2022) is designed for a networked system, where agents are able to communicate along
the edges with their neighbors. The naming of DMPO and MDPO may lead to misunderstanding
of similar settings, but the two algorithms are actually concerned with different settings. In fully
decentralized setting of our paper, no information sharing is allowed between agents. And when the
number of neighbors is set zero in DMPO, it will degenerate into the version of MDPO w/o prediction
in our algorithm.

F    A DDITIONAL E XPERIMENTS
In order to enrich our baseline and test MDPO on more complex environment, we supplement
experiments on Google Research Football environment (GRF) with ITRPO as the baseline. ITRPO
is the decentralized version of TRPO (Schulman et al., 2015), and we use TRPO to optimize the
policy in MDPO and MDPO w/o prediction. Specifically, We choose ‘simple115v2’ as observation
representation which encodes the state with 115 floats and ‘scoring+checkpoint’ as reward which
encodes the domain knowledge that scoring is aided by advancing across the pitch. We examine
MDPO, MDPO w/o prediction and ITRPO in two scenarios, Run and Pass and 3 vs 1 with Keeper, in
both of which MDPO improves the average goal rate. The learning curves is shown in Figure 8.
In our implementation, we use Category distribution for one-hot dimensions in observation and
Gaussion distribution for others to model the transition. We use MLP for reward function and
Gaussion distribution for latent variable function. The structures are listed in Table 4 and the
hyperparameters are listed in Table 5.


                                                                          25
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


             Table 4: Structure of the neural networks we used in GRF experiments.

                                          Google Research Football
                             Network
                                            hidden     activation
                           TRPO Actor     (128,128)       tanh
                           TRPO Critic    (128,128)       tanh
                              ψω          (128,128)      ReLU
                              fζ             (256)       ReLU
                              Pθ          (128,128)      ReLU
                              Rϕ          (128,128)      ReLU


                        Table 5: Hyperparameters in GRF experiments

               TRPO hyperparameters                    MDPO hyperparameters
                        λ               1.0       latent variable dimension        6
                        γ              0.99                    k                   4
                 KL limitation         0.06                    h                  16
             damping coefficient        0.2                    l                   8
          conjugate gradient iteration   5                    co′                  1
              backtrack iteration        5    latent variable model batch size   128
             backtrack coefficient      0.8          prediction batch size       256
              max gradient norm         10             ψω learning rate          1e-5
               TRPO batch size          32             fζ learning rate          5e-5
                      ϵvalue            10             Pθ learning rate          3e-5
              critic learning rate     5e-5            Rϕ learning rate          1e-5


                                              26
