Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


S AMPLING IS AS EASY AS LEARNING THE SCORE :
THEORY FOR DIFFUSION MODELS WITH MINIMAL DATA
ASSUMPTIONS

Sitan Chen∗ Sinho Chewi† Jerry Li‡ Yuanzhi Li§ Adil Salim¶ Anru R. Zhang∥



                                              A BSTRACT
          We provide theoretical convergence guarantees for score-based generative models
          (SGMs) such as denoising diffusion probabilistic models (DDPMs), which con-
          stitute the backbone of large-scale real-world generative models such as DALL·E
          2. Our main result is that, assuming accurate score estimates, such SGMs can
          efficiently sample from essentially any realistic data distribution. In contrast to
          prior works, our results (1) hold for an L2 -accurate score estimate (rather than
          L∞ -accurate); (2) do not require restrictive functional inequality conditions that
          preclude substantial non-log-concavity; (3) scale polynomially in all relevant
          problem parameters; and (4) match state-of-the-art complexity guarantees for dis-
          cretization of the Langevin diffusion, provided that the score error is sufficiently
          small. We view this as strong theoretical justification for the empirical success of
          SGMs. We also examine SGMs based on the critically damped Langevin diffusion
          (CLD). Contrary to conventional wisdom, we provide evidence that the use of the
          CLD does not reduce the complexity of SGMs.


1       I NTRODUCTION
Score-based generative models (SGMs) are a family of generative models which achieve state-of-
the-art performance for generating audio and image data (Sohl-Dickstein et al., 2015; Ho et al.,
2020; Dhariwal & Nichol, 2021; Kingma et al., 2021; Song et al., 2021a;b; Vahdat et al., 2021);
see, e.g., the recent surveys (Cao et al., 2022; Croitoru et al., 2022; Yang et al., 2022). For example,
denoising diffusion probabilistic models (DDPMs) (Sohl-Dickstein et al., 2015; Ho et al., 2020) are
a key component in large-scale generative models such as DALL·E 2 (Ramesh et al., 2022). As
the importance of SGMs continues to grow due to newfound applications in commercial domains,
it is a pressing question of both practical and theoretical concern to understand the mathematical
underpinnings which explain their startling empirical successes.
As we explain in Section 2, at their mathematical core, SGMs consist of two stochastic processes,
the forward process and the reverse process. The forward process transforms samples from a data
distribution q (e.g., images) into noise, whereas the reverse process transforms noise into samples
from q, hence performing generative modeling. Running the reverse process requires estimating the
score function of the law of the forward process; this is typically done by training neural networks on
a score matching objective (Hyvärinen, 2005; Vincent, 2011; Song & Ermon, 2019).
Providing precise guarantees for estimation of the score function is difficult, as it requires an
understanding of the non-convex training dynamics of neural network optimization that is currently
out of reach. However, given the empirical success of neural networks on the score estimation task,
    ∗
     Department of EECS at University of California, Berkeley, sitan@seas.harvard.edu.
    †
     Department of Mathematics at Massachusetts Institute of Technology, schewi@mit.edu. Part of this
work was done while SC was a research intern at Microsoft Research.
   ‡
     Microsoft Research, jerrl@microsoft.com.
   §
     Microsoft Research and Machine Learning Department at Carnegie Mellon University,
yuanzhil@andrew.cmu.edu.
  ¶
     Microsoft Research, adilsalim@microsoft.com.
  ∥
     Departments of Biostatistics & Bioinformatics, Computer Science, Mathematics, and Statistical Science at
Duke University, anru.zhang@duke.edu.


                                                     1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


a natural and important question is whether accurate score estimation implies that SGMs provably
converge to the true data distribution in realistic settings. This is a surprisingly delicate question, as
even with accurate score estimates, as we explain in Section 2.1, there are several other sources of
error which could cause the SGM to fail to converge. Indeed, despite a flurry of recent work (Block
et al., 2020; De Bortoli et al., 2021; De Bortoli, 2022; Lee et al., 2022a; Pidstrigach, 2022; Liu et al.,
2022), prior analyses fall short of answering this question, for (at least) one of three main reasons:

1. Super-polynomial convergence. The bounds obtained are not quantitative (e.g., De Bortoli et al.,
   2021; Pidstrigach, 2022), or scale exponentially in the dimension and other problem parameters
   like time and smoothness (Block et al., 2020; De Bortoli, 2022; Liu et al., 2022), and hence are
   typically vacuous for the high-dimensional settings of interest in practice.
2. Strong assumptions on the data distribution. The bounds require strong assumptions on the true
   data distribution, such as a log-Sobelev inequality (LSI) (see, e.g., Lee et al., 2022a). While the
   LSI is slightly weaker than strong log-concavity, it ultimately precludes the presence of substantial
   non-convexity, which impedes the application of these results to complex and highly multi-modal
   real-world data distributions. Indeed, obtaining a polynomial-time convergence analysis for SGMs
   that holds for multi-modal distributions was posed as an open question in (Lee et al., 2022a).
3. Strong assumptions on the score estimation error. The bounds require that the score estimate
   is L∞ -accurate (i.e., uniformly accurate), as opposed to L2 -accurate (see, e.g., De Bortoli et al.,
   2021). This is problematic because the score matching objective is an L2 loss (see Section A.1 in
   the supplement), and there are empirical studies suggesting that in practice, the score estimate is
   not in fact L∞ -accurate (e.g., Zhang & Chen, 2022). Intuitively, this is because we cannot expect
   that the score estimate we obtain will be accurate in regions of space where the true density is
   very low, simply because we do not expect to see many (or indeed, any) samples from there.

Providing an analysis which goes beyond these limitations is a pressing first step towards theoretically
understanding why SGMs actually work in practice.

1.1   O UR CONTRIBUTIONS

In this work, we take a step towards bridging theory and practice by providing a convergence
guarantee for SGMs, under realistic (in fact, quite minimal) assumptions, which scales polynomially
in all relevant problem parameters. Namely, our main result (Theorem 2) only requires the following
assumptions on the data distribution q, which we make more quantitative in Section 3:

A1 The score function of the forward process is L-Lipschitz.
A2 The (2 + η)-th moment of q is finite, where η > 0 is an arbitrarily small constant.
A3 The data distribution q has finite KL divergence w.r.t. the standard Gaussian.

We note that all of these assumptions are either standard or, in the case of A2, far weaker than what
is needed in prior work. Crucially, unlike prior works, we do not assume log-concavity, an LSI, or
dissipativity; hence, our assumptions cover arbitrarily non-log-concave data distributions. Our main
result is summarized informally as follows.
Theorem 1 (informal, see Theorem 2). Under assumptions A1-A3, and if the score estimation error
in L2 is at most O(ε),
                  e     then with an appropriate choice of step size, the SGM outputs a measure which
                                                    e 2 d/ε2 ) iterations.
is ε-close in total variation (TV) distance to q in O(L

Our iteration complexity is quite tight: it matches state-of-the-art discretization guarantees for the
Langevin diffusion (Vempala & Wibisono, 2019; Chewi et al., 2021a).
We find Theorem 1 surprising, because it shows that SGMs can sample from the data distribution q
with polynomial complexity, even when q is highly non-log-concave (a task that is usually intractable),
provided that one has access to an accurate score estimator. This answers the open question of
(Lee et al., 2022a) regarding whether or not SGMs can sample from multimodal distributions, e.g.,
mixtures of distributions with bounded log-Sobolev constant. In the context of neural networks, our
result implies that so long as the neural network succeeds at the score estimation task, the remaining
part of the SGM algorithm based on the diffusion model is completely principled, in that it admits a
strong theoretical justification.


                                                    2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


In general, learning the score function is also a difficult task. Nevertheless, our result opens the
door to further investigations, such as: do score functions for real-life data have intrinsic (e.g.,
low-dimensional) structure which can be exploited by neural networks? A positive answer to this
question, combined with our sampling result, would then provide an end-to-end guarantee for SGMs.
More generally, our result can be viewed as a black-box reduction of the task of sampling to the
task of learning the score function of the forward process, at least for distributions satisfying our
mild assumptions. Existing computational hardness results for learning natural high-dimensional
distributions like mixtures of Gaussians (Diakonikolas et al., 2017; Bruna et al., 2021; Gupte et al.,
2022) and pushforwards of Gaussians by shallow ReLU networks (Daniely & Vardi, 2021; Chen
et al., 2022a;b) thus immediately imply hardness of score estimation for these distributions. To our
knowledge this yields the first known information-computation gaps for this task.

Arbitrary distributions with bounded support. The assumption that the score function is Lips-
chitz entails in particular that the data distribution has a density w.r.t. Lebesgue measure; in particular,
our theorem fails when q satisfies the manifold hypothesis, i.e., is supported on a lower-dimensional
submanifold of Rd . But this is for good reason: it is not possible to obtain non-trivial TV guarantees,
because the output distribution of the SGM has full support. Instead, we show in Section 3.2 that
we can obtain polynomial convergence guarantees in the bounded Lipschitz metric by stopping the
SGM algorithm early, or in the Wasserstein metric by an additional truncation step, under the sole
assumption that the data distribution q has bounded support, without assuming that q has a density.
Since data distributions encountered in real life satisfy this assumption, our results yield the following
compelling takeaway:

 Given an L2 -accurate score estimate, SGMs can sample from (essentially) any data distribution.

Critically damped Langevin diffusion (CLD). Using our techniques, we also investigate the use
of the critically damped Langevin diffusion (CLD) for SGMs, which was proposed in (Dockhorn
et al., 2022). Although numerical experiments and intuition from the log-concave sampling literature
suggest that the CLD could potentially speed up sampling via SGMs, we provide theoretical evidence
to the contrary. Based on this, in Section 3.3, we conjecture that SGMs based on the CLD do not
exhibit improved dimension dependence compared to the original DDPM algorithm.

1.2   P RIOR WORK

We now provide a detailed comparison to prior work. By now, there is a vast literature on providing
precise complexity estimates for log-concave sampling; see, e.g., Chewi (2022) for an exposition on
recent developments. The proofs in this work build upon the techniques developed in this literature.
However, our work addresses the significantly more challenging setting of non-log-concave sampling.
The work of De Bortoli et al. (2021) provides guarantees for the diffusion Schrödinger bridge (Song
et al., 2021b). However, as previously mentioned their result is not quantitative, and they require an
L∞ -accurate score estimate. The works Block et al. (2020); Lee et al. (2022a); Liu et al. (2022) instead
analyze SGMs under the more realistic assumption of an L2 -accurate score estimate. However, the
bounds of Block et al. (2020); Liu et al. (2022) suffer from exponential dependencies on parameters
like dimension and smoothness, whereas the bounds of Lee et al. (2022a) require q to satisfy an LSI.
The recent work of De Bortoli (2022), motivated by the manifold hypothesis, considers a different
pointwise assumption on the score estimation error which allows the error to blow up at time 0 and at
spatial ∞. We discuss the manifold setting in more detail in Section 3.2. Unfortunately, the bounds
of De Bortoli (2022) also scale exponentially in problem parameters such as the manifold diameter.
We also mention that the use of reversed SDEs for sampling is implicit in the interpretation of
the proximal sampler (Lee et al., 2021) given by Chen et al. (2022c). Our work can be viewed as
expanding upon the theory of Chen et al. (2022c) using a different forward channel (the OU process).

Concurrent work. Very recently, Lee et al. (2022b) independently obtained results similar to our
results for DDPM. While our assumptions are technically somewhat incomparable (they assume the
score error can vary with time but assume the data is compactly supported), our quantitative bounds
are stronger. Additionally, the upper and lower bounds for CLD are unique to our work.


                                                     3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


2       BACKGROUND ON SGM S
Throughout this paper, given a probability measure p which admits a density w.r.t. Lebesgue measure,
we abuse notation and identify it with its density function. Additionally, we will let q denote the data
distribution from which we want to generate new samples. We assume that q is a probability measure
on Rd with full support, and that it admits a smooth density written q = exp(−U ) (we relax this
assumption in Section 3.2).
In this section, we provide a brief exposition to SGMs, following Song et al. (2021b).

2.1       BACKGROUND ON DENOISING DIFFUSION PROBABILISTIC MODELING (DDPM)

Forward process. In denoising diffusion probabilistic modeling (DDPM), we start with a forward
process, which is a stochastic differential equation (SDE). For clarity, we consider the simplest
possible choice, which is the Ornstein–Uhlenbeck (OU) process
                                               √
                             dX̄t = −X̄t dt + 2 dBt ,       X̄0 ∼ q ,                         (1)
where (Bt )t≥0 is a standard Brownian motion in Rd . The OU process is the unique time-homogeneous
Markov process which is also a Gaussian process, with stationary distribution equal to the standard
Gaussian distribution γ d on Rd . In practice, it is also common to introduce a positive smooth function
g : R+ → R and consider the time-rescaled OU process
                                        2
                                                     √
                         dX̄t = −g(t) X̄t dt + 2 g(t) dBt ,             X0 ∼ q .                     (2)
Although our analysis could be extended to consider these variants, in this work we stick with the
choice g ≡ 1 for simplicity; see Song et al. (2021b) for further discussion.
The forward process has the interpretation of transforming samples from the data distribution q into
pure noise. From the well-developed theory of Markov diffusions, it is known that if qt := law(Xt )
denotes the law of the OU process at time t, then qt → γ d exponentially fast in various divergences
and metrics such as the 2-Wasserstein metric W2 ; see Bakry et al. (2014).

Reverse process. If we reverse the forward process (1) in time, then we obtain a process that
transforms noise into samples from q, which is the aim of generative modeling. In general, suppose
that we have an SDE of the form
                                          dX̄t = bt (X̄t ) dt + σt dBt ,
where (σt )t≥0 is a deterministic matrix-valued process. Then, under mild conditions on the pro-
cess (e.g., Föllmer, 1985; Cattiaux et al., 2022), which are satisfied for all processes under considera-
tion in this work, the reverse process also admits an SDE description. Namely, if we fix the terminal
time T > 0 and set
                                      X̄t← := X̄T −t ,        for t ∈ [0, T ] ,
then the process (X̄t← )t∈[0,T ] satisfies the SDE

                                      dX̄t← = b←    ←
                                               t (X̄t ) dt + σT −t dBt ,

where the backwards drift satisfies the relation
                               bt + b←          T
                                     T −t = σt σt ∇ ln qt ,        qt := law(X̄t ) .                        (3)

Applying this to the forward process (1), we obtain the reverse process
                                                           √
               dX̄t← = {X̄t← + 2 ∇ ln qT −t (X̄t← )} dt + 2 dBt ,       X̄0← ∼ qT ,                         (4)
where now (Bt )t∈[0,T ] is the reversed Brownian motion.1 Here, ∇ ln qt is called the score function
for qt . Since q (and hence qt for t ≥ 0) is not explicitly known, in order to implement the reverse
process the score function must be estimated on the basis of samples. The mechanism behind this is
the idea of score matching which goes back to Hyvärinen (2005); Vincent (2011): roughly speaking,
    1
        For ease of notation, we do not distinguish between the forward and the reverse Brownian motions.


                                                         4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Gaussian integration by parts implies that minimizing the L2 (qt ) loss achieved by an estimate st for
the score ∇ ln qt is equivalent to minimizing the L2 (qt ) loss in predicting, given a sample from the
forward process at time t, what noise was applied to the corresponding sample at time 0 to obtain it.
We defer an exposition of the details of score matching to Sections A.1 and D of the supplement.
In light of this, it is thus most natural to assume an L2 (qt ) error bound Eqt [∥st − ∇ ln qt ∥2 ] ≤ ε2score
for the score estimator st . If st is taken to be the empirical risk minimizer for a suitable function class,
then guarantees for the L2 (qt ) error can be obtained via standard statistical analysis, see, e.g., Block
et al. (2020).

Discretization and implementation. We now discuss the final steps required to obtain an im-
                                                                        (1)        (n)
plementable algorithm. First, in the learning phase, given samples X̄0 , . . . , X̄0 from q (e.g., a
database of natural images), we train a neural network via score matching, see Song & Ermon (2019).
Let h > 0 be the step size of the discretization; we assume that we have obtained a score estimate
skh of ∇ ln qkh for each time k = 0, 1, . . . , N , where T = N h.
In order to approximately implement the reverse SDE (4), we first replace the score function ∇ ln qT −t
with the estimate sT −t . Then, for t ∈ [kh, (k + 1)h] we freeze the value of this coefficient in the
SDE at time kh. It yields the new SDE
                                                        √
              dXt← = {Xt← + 2 sT −kh (Xkh     ←
                                                )} dt + 2 dBt ,        t ∈ [kh, (k + 1)h] .            (5)
                                                                                                  ←
Since this is a linear SDE, it can be integrated in closed form; in particular, conditionally on Xkh , the
                ←
next iterate X(k+1)h   has an explicit Gaussian distribution.
There is one final detail: although the reverse SDE (4) should be started at qT , we do not have access
to qT directly. Instead, taking advantage of the fact that qT ≈ γ d , we instead initialize the algorithm
at X0← ∼ γ d , i.e., from pure noise.
Let pt := law(Xt← ) denote the law of the algorithm at time t. The goal of this work is to bound
TV(pT , q), taking into account three sources of error: (1) estimation of the score; (2) discretization
of the SDE with step size h > 0; and (3) initialization of the algorithm at γ d rather than at qT .

2.2   BACKGROUND ON THE CRITICALLY DAMPED L ANGEVIN DIFFUSION (CLD)

The critically damped Langevin diffusion (CLD) is based on the forward process
                               dX̄t = −V̄t dt ,
                                                                                                  (6)
                                 dV̄t = −(X̄t + 2 V̄t ) dt + 2 dBt .
Compared to the OU process (1), this is now a coupled system of SDEs, where we have introduced a
new variable V̄ representing the velocity process. The stationary distribution of the process is γ 2d ,
the standard Gaussian measure on phase space Rd × Rd , and we initialize at X̄0 ∼ q and V̄0 ∼ γ d .
More generally, the CLD (6) is an instance of what is referred to as the kinetic Langevin or the
underdamped Langevin process in the sampling literature. In the context of strongly log-concave
        √the smoother paths of X̄ lead to smaller discretization error, thereby furnishing an algorithm
sampling,
with O(
     e d/ε) gradient complexity (as opposed to sampling based on the overdamped Langevin
                                      2
process, which has complexity O(d/ε
                                e       )), see Cheng et al. (2018); Shen & Lee (2019); Dalalyan &
Riou-Durand (2020); Ma et al. (2021). The recent paper Dockhorn et al. (2022) proposed to use the
CLD as the basis for an SGM and they empirically observed improvements over DDPM.
Applying (3), the corresponding reverse process is
                 dX̄t← = −V̄t← dt ,
                                                                                                         (7)
                   dV̄t← = X̄t← + 2 V̄t← + 4 ∇v ln qT −t (X̄t← , V̄t← ) dt + 2 dBt ,


where qt := law(X̄t , V̄t ) is the law of the forward process at time t. Note that the gradient in the
score function is only taken w.r.t. the velocity coordinate. Upon replacing the score function with an
estimate s, we arrive at the algorithm
                    dXt← = −Vt← dt ,
                    dVt← = Xt← + 2 Vt← + 4 sT −kh (Xkh       ←     ←

                                                               , Vkh ) dt + 2 dBt ,
for t ∈ [kh, (k + 1)h]. We provide further background on the CLD in Section C.1.


                                                     5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


3       R ESULTS
We now formally state our assumptions and our main results.

3.1     R ESULTS FOR DDPM

For DDPM, we make the following mild assumptions on the data distribution q.
Assumption 1 (Lipschitz score). For all t ≥ 0, the score ∇ ln qt is L-Lipschitz.
Assumption 2 (second moment bound). For some η > 0, Eq [∥·∥2+η ] is finite. We also write
m22 := Eq [∥·∥2 ] for the second moment of q.
For technical reasons, we need to assume that q has a finite moment of order slightly but strictly
bigger than 2, but our quantitative bounds will only depend on the second moment m22 .
Assumption 1 is standard and has been used in the prior works Block et al. (2020); Lee et al. (2022a).
However, unlike Lee et al. (2022a); Liu et al. (2022), we do not assume Lipschitzness of the score
estimate. Moreover, unlike Block et al. (2020); De Bortoli et al. (2021); Liu et al. (2022), we do not
assume any convexity or dissipativity assumptions on the potential U , and unlike Lee et al. (2022a)
we do not assume that q satisfies a log-Sobolev inequality. Hence, our assumptions cover a wide
range of highly non-log-concave data distributions. Our proof technique is fairly robust and even
Assumption 1 could be relaxed (as well as other extensions, such as considering the time-changed
forward process (2)), although we focus on the simplest setting in order to better illustrate the
conceptual significance of our results.
We also assume a bound on the score estimation error.
Assumption 3 (score estimation error). For all k = 1, . . . , N , Eqkh [∥skh − ∇ ln qkh ∥2 ] ≤ ε2score .
This is the same assumption as in Lee et al. (2022a), and as discussed in Section 2.1, it is a natural
and realistic assumption in light of the derivation of the score matching objective.
Our main result for DDPM is the following theorem.
Theorem 2 (DDPM, see Section B of supplement). Suppose that Assumptions 1, 2, and 3 hold. Let
pT be the output of the DDPM algorithm (Section 2.1) at time T , and suppose that the step size
h := T /N satisfies h ≲ 1/L, where L ≥ 1. Then, it holds that
                      q                           √            √              √
        TV(pT , q) ≲ KL(q ∥ γ d ) exp(−T ) + (L dh + Lm2 h) T + εscore T             .
                      |        {z          } |            {z      }     |   {z  }
                                                               discretization error   score estimation error
                          convergence of forward process


To interpret this result, suppose that, e.g., KL(q ∥ γ d ) ≤ poly(d) and m2 ≤ d.2 Choosing T ≍
                               2
log(KL(q ∥ γ)/ε) and h ≍ Lε2 d , and hiding logarithmic factors,
                                                                          2
                         TV(pT , q) ≤ O(ε
                                      e + εscore ) ,         for N = Θe L d .
                                                                           ε2
In particular, in order to have TV(pT , q) ≤ ε, it suffices to have score error εscore ≤ O(ε).
                                                                                         e

We remark that the iteration complexity of N = Θ(e L22d ) matches state-of-the-art complexity bounds
                                                     ε
for the Langevin Monte Carlo (LMC) algorithm for sampling under a log-Sobolev inequality (LSI),
see Vempala & Wibisono (2019); Chewi et al. (2021a). This provides some evidence that our
discretization bounds are of the correct order, at least with respect to the dimension and accuracy
parameters, and without higher-order smoothness assumptions.

3.2     C ONSEQUENCES FOR ARBITRARY DATA DISTRIBUTIONS WITH BOUNDED SUPPORT

We now elaborate upon the implications of our results under the sole assumption that the data
distribution q is compactly supported, supp q ⊆ B(0, R). In particular, we do not assume that q has a
    2
    For many distributions
               √            of interest, e.g., the standard Gaussian distribution or product measures, in fact we
have m2 = O( d). Also, for applications
                                   √           to images in which each coordinate (i.e., pixel) lies in a bounded
range [−1, 1], we also have m2 ≤ d.


                                                           6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


smooth density w.r.t. Lebesgue measure, which allows for studying the case when q is supported on a
lower-dimensional submanifold of Rd as in the manifold hypothesis. This setting was investigated
recently in De Bortoli (2022).
For this setting, our results do not apply directly because the score function of q is not well-defined
and hence Assumption 1 fails to hold. Also, the bound in Theorem 2 has a term involving KL(q ∥ γ d )
which is infinite if q is not absolutely continuous w.r.t. γ d . As pointed out by De Bortoli (2022),
in general we cannot obtain non-trivial guarantees for TV(pT , q), because pT has full support and
therefore TV(pT , q) = 1 under the manifold hypothesis. Nevertheless, we show that we can apply
our results using an early stopping technique.
Namely, using the following lemma, we obtain a sequence of corollaries.
Lemma 3 (Lemma 21 in supplement). Suppose that supp q ⊆ B(0, R) where R ≥ 1, and              √ let qt
denote the law of the OU process at time t, started at q. Let εW2 > 0 be such that εW2 √≪ d√and
               √       √                                                                             3
set t ≍ ε2W2 /( d (R ∨ d)). Then, (1) W2 (qt , q) ≤ εW2 , (2) qt satisfies KL(qt ∥ γ d ) ≲ d (R∨
                                                                                              ε2
                                                                                                  d)
                                                                                                       ,
                                                                                                  W2
                                                                   2
                                                                        √   2
and (3) for every t′ ≥ t, qt′ satisfies Assumption 1 with L ≲ dR (R∨
                                                                 ε4
                                                                     d)
                                                                        .
                                                                       W2



By substituting qt for this choice of t in place of q in Theorem 2, we obtain Corollary 4 below. We
remark that taking qt as the new target corresponds to stopping the algorithm early: instead of running
the algorithm backward for a time T , we run the algorithm backward for a time T − t (note that T − t
should be a multiple of the step size h).
Corollary 4 (compactly
                √         √supported data). Suppose that q is supported on the ball of radius R ≥ 1.
Let t ≍ ε2W2 /( d (R ∨ d)). Then, the output pT −t of DDPM is εTV -close in TV to the distribution
qt , which is εW2 -close in
                           W    2 to q,√provided that the step size h is chosen appropriately according to
                                          4
                            d3 R4 (R∨ d)
Theorem 2 and N = Θ    e         2
                             εTV εW  8        and εscore ≤ O(ε
                                                             e TV ).
                                    2


Observing that bothR the TV Rand W1 metrics are upper bounds for the bounded Lipschitz metric
dBL (µ, ν) := sup{ f dµ − f dν f : Rd → [−1, 1] is 1-Lipschitz}, we immediately obtain the
following corollary.
Corollary 5 (compactly supported
                               √         √ BL metric). Suppose that q is supported on the ball of
                                       data,
radius R ≥ 1. Let t ≍ ε2W2 /( d (R ∨ d)). Then, the output pT −t of the DDPM algorithm satisfies
dBL (pT −t , q) ≤ ε, provided
                      √       that the step size h is chosen appropriately according to Theorem 2 and
      e 3 R4 (R ∨ d)4 /ε10 ) and εscore ≤ O(ε
N = Θ(d                                          e TV ).

Finally, if the output pT −t of DDPM at time T − t is projected onto B(0, R0 ) for an appropriate
choice of R0 , then we can also translate our guarantees to the standard W2 metric, which we state as
the following corollary.
Corollary 6 (compactly supported data, W2 metric; see Section √ B.5 √  in supplement). Suppose that
q is supported on the ball of radius R ≥ 1. Let t ≍ ε2W2 /( d (R ∨ d)), and let pT −t,R0 denote
the output of DDPM at time T − t projected onto B(0, R0 ) for R0 = Θ(R).   e      Then, it holds that
W2 (pT −t,R0 , q) ≤ ε, provided that the step size h is chosen appropriately according to Theorem 2,
                     √
      e 3 R8 (R ∨ d)4 /ε12 ), and εscore ≤ O(ε
N = Θ(d                                         e TV ).

Note that the dependencies in the three corollaries above are polynomial in all of the relevant problem
parameters. In particular, since the last corollary holds in the W2 metric, it is directly comparable
to De Bortoli (2022) and vastly improves upon the exponential dependencies therein.

3.3   R ESULTS FOR CLD

In order to state our results for score-based generative modeling based on the CLD, we must first
modify Assumptions 1 and 3 accordingly.
Assumption 4. For all t ≥ 0, the score ∇v ln qt is L-Lipschitz.
Assumption 5. For all k = 1, . . . , N , Eqkh [∥skh − ∇v ln qkh ∥2 ] ≤ ε2score .


                                                    7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


If we ignore the dependence on L and assume that the score estimate is sufficiently accurate, then
                                                                  2
the iteration complexity guarantee of Theorem 2 is N = Θ(d/εe       ). On the other hand, recall from
Section 2.2 that based on intuition from the literature on log-concave sampling and from empirical
findings in Dockhorn et al. (2022), we might expect that SGMs based on the CLD have a smaller
iteration complexity than DDPM. We prove the following theorem.
Theorem 7 (CLD, see Section C of supplement). Suppose that Assumptions 2, 4, and 5 hold. Let pT
be the output of the SGM algorithm based on the CLD (Section 2.2) at time T , and suppose the step
size h := T /N satisfies h ≲ 1/L, where L ≥ 1. Then, there is a universal constant c > 0 such that
TV(pT , q ⊗ γ d ) is bounded, up to a constant factor, by
         q                                            √           √               √
           KL(q ∥ γ d ) + FI(q ∥ γ d ) exp(−cT ) + (L dh + Lm2 h) T + εscore T ,
         |                 {z                  } |        {z         }      | {z }
                                                          discretization error   score estimation error
                 convergence of forward process

where FI(q ∥ γ d ) is the relative Fisher information FI(q ∥ γ d ) := Eq [∥∇ ln(q/γ d )∥2 ].

Note that the result of Theorem 7 is in fact no better than our guarantee for DDPM in Theorem 2.
Although it is possible that this is an artefact of our analysis, we believe that it is in fact fundamental.
As we discuss in Remark C.2, from the form of the reverse process (7), the SGM based on CLD lacks
a certain property (that the discretization error should only depend on the size of the increment of
the X process, not the increments of both the X and V processes) which is crucial for the improved
dimension dependence of the CLD over the Langevin diffusion in log-concave sampling. Hence, in
general, we conjecture that under our assumptions, SGMs based on the CLD do not achieve a better
dimension dependence than DDPM.
We provide evidence for our conjecture via a lower bound. In our proofs of Theorems 2 and 7, we
rely on bounding the KL divergence between certain measures on the path space C([0, T ]; Rd ) via
Girsanov’s theorem. The following result lower bounds this KL divergence, even for the setting in
which the score estimate is perfect (εscore = 0) and the data distribution q is the standard Gaussian.
Theorem 8 (Section C.5 of supplement). Let pT be the output of the SGM algorithm based on the
CLD (Section 2.2) at time T , where the data distribution q is the standard Gaussian γ d , and the score
estimate is exact (εscore = 0). Suppose that the step size h satisfies h ≲ 1/(T ∨ 1). Then, for the
path measures PT and Q←     T of the algorithm and the continuous-time process (7) respectively (see
Section C for details), it holds that KL(Q←T ∥ PT ) ≥ dhT .

Theorem 8 shows that in order to make the KL divergence between the path measures small, we
must take h ≲ 1/d, which leads to an iteration complexity that scales linearly in the dimension d.
Theorem 8 is not a proof that SGMs based on the CLD cannot achieve better than linear dimension
dependence, as it is possible that the output pT of the SGM is close to q ⊗ γ d even if the path
measures are not close, but it rules out the possibility of obtaining a better dimension dependence via
our Girsanov proof technique. We believe that it provides compelling evidence for our conjecture,
i.e., that under our assumptions, the CLD does not improve the complexity of SGMs over DDPM.
We remark that in this section, we have only considered the error arising from discretization of the
SDE. It is possible that the score function ∇v ln qt for the SGM with the CLD is easier to estimate
than the score function for DDPM, providing a statistical benefit of using the CLD. Indeed, under the
manifold hypothesis, the score ∇ ln qt for DDPM blows up at t = 0, but the score ∇v ln qt for CLD
is well-defined at t = 0, and hence may lead to improvements over DDPM. We do not investigate
this question here and leave it as future work.

4    T ECHNICAL OVERVIEW
We now give a detailed technical overview for the proof for DDPM (Theorem 2). The proof for CLD
(Theorem 7) follows along similar lines.
Recall that we must deal with three sources of error: (1) the estimation of the score function; (2) the
discretization of the SDE; and (3) the initialization of the reverse process at γ d rather than at qT .
First, we ignore the errors (1) and (2), and focus on the error (3). Hence, we consider the
continuous-time reverse SDE (4), initialized from γ d (resp. qT ) and denote by p̃t (resp. qT −t )


                                                     8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


its marginal distributions. Note that p̃0 = γ d and that q0 = q, the data distribution. First, us-
ing the exponential contraction of the KL divergence along the (forward) OU process, we have
KL(qT ∥ γ d ) ≤ exp(−2T ) KL(q ∥ γ d ). Then, using the data processing inequality along the backward
process, we have TV(p̃T , q) ≤ TV(γ d , qT ). Therefore, using Pinsker inequality, we get
                                            q                            q
              TV(p̃T , q) ≤ TV(γ d , qT ) ≤ KL(qT ∥ γ d ) ≤ exp(−T ) KL(q ∥ γ d ) ,

i.e., the output p̃T converges to the data distribution q exponentially fast as T → ∞.
Next, we consider the score estimation error (1) and the discretization error (2). Using Girsanov’s
theorem, these errors can be bounded by
                       N
                       X −1       Z (k+1)h
                                                        ←
                              E              ∥sT −kh (X̄kh ) − ∇ ln qT −t (X̄t← )∥2 dt               (8)
                        k=0        kh

(see the inequality (15) in the supplement). Unlike other proof techniques, such as the interpolation
method in Lee et al. (2022a), the error term (8) in Girsanov’s theorem involves an expectation under
the law of the true reverse process, instead of the law of the algorithm (see Lee et al. (2022a)). This
difference allows us to bound the score estimation error using Assumption 3 directly, which allows
a simpler proof that works under milder assumptions on the data distribution. However, the use of
Girsanov’s theorem typically requires a technical condition known as Novikov’s condition, which fails
to hold under under our minimal assumptions. To circumvent this issue, we use an approximation
argument relying on abstract results on the convergence of stochastic processes. A recent concurrent
and independent work Liu et al. (2022) also uses Girsanov’s theorem, but assumes that Novikov’s
condition holds at the outset.

5   C ONCLUSION

In this work, we provided the first convergence guarantees for SGMs which hold under realistic
assumptions (namely, L2 -accurate score estimation and arbitrarily non-log-concave data distributions)
and which scale polynomially in the problem parameters. Our results take a step towards explaining
the remarkable empirical success of SGMs, at least assuming the score is learned with small L2 error.
The main limitation of this work is that we did not address the question of when the score function
can be learned well. In general, studying the non-convex training dynamics of learning the score
function via neural networks is challenging, but we believe that the resolution of this problem, even
for simple learning tasks, would shed considerable light on SGMs. Together with the results in this
paper, it would yield the first end-to-end guarantees for SGMs.
In light of the interpretation of our result as a reduction of the task of sampling to the task of score
function estimation, we also ask whether there are interesting situations where it is easier to learn the
score function (not necessarily via a neural network) than to (directly) sample.

R EFERENCES
Luigi Ambrosio, Nicola Gigli, and Giuseppe Savaré. Gradient flows: in metric spaces and in the
  space of probability measures. Springer Science & Business Media, 2005.
Dominique Bakry, Ivan Gentil, and Michel Ledoux. Analysis and geometry of Markov diffusion oper-
  ators, volume 348 of Grundlehren der Mathematischen Wissenschaften [Fundamental Principles
  of Mathematical Sciences]. Springer, Cham, 2014.
Adam Block, Youssef Mroueh, and Alexander Rakhlin. Generative modeling with denoising auto-
  encoders and Langevin sampling. arXiv e-prints, art. arXiv:2002.00107, 2020.
Joan Bruna, Oded Regev, Min Jae Song, and Yi Tang. Continuous LWE. In Proceedings of the 53rd
  Annual ACM SIGACT Symposium on Theory of Computing, pp. 694–707, 2021.
Hanqun Cao, Cheng Tan, Zhangyang Gao, Guangyong Chen, Pheng-Ann Heng, and Stan Z. Li. A
  survey on generative diffusion model. arXiv e-prints, art. arXiv:2209.02646, 2022.


                                                        9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Patrick Cattiaux, Giovanni Conforti, Ivan Gentil, and Christian Léonard. Time reversal of diffusion
  processes under a finite entropy condition. September 2022.
Sitan Chen, Aravind Gollakota, Adam R. Klivans, and Raghu Meka. Hardness of noise-free learning
   for two-hidden-layer neural networks. arXiv preprint arXiv:2202.05258, 2022a.
Sitan Chen, Jerry Li, and Yuanzhi Li. Learning (very) simple generative models is hard. arXiv
   preprint arXiv:2205.16003, 2022b.
Yongxin Chen, Sinho Chewi, Adil Salim, and Andre Wibisono. Improved analysis for a proximal
  algorithm for sampling. In Po-Ling Loh and Maxim Raginsky (eds.), Proceedings of Thirty Fifth
  Conference on Learning Theory, volume 178 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pp.
  2984–3014. PMLR, 7 2022c.
Xiang Cheng, Niladri S. Chatterji, Peter L. Bartlett, and Michael I. Jordan. Underdamped Langevin
  MCMC: a non-asymptotic analysis. In Sébastien Bubeck, Vianney Perchet, and Philippe Rigollet
  (eds.), Proceedings of the 31st Conference on Learning Theory, volume 75 of Proceedings of
  Machine Learning Research, pp. 300–323. PMLR, 7 2018.
Sinho Chewi. Log-concave sampling. 2022. Book draft available at https://chewisinho.
  github.io/.
Sinho Chewi, Murat A. Erdogdu, Mufan B. Li, Ruoqi Shen, and Matthew Zhang. Analysis of
  Langevin Monte Carlo from Poincaré to log-Sobolev. arXiv e-prints, art. arXiv:2112.12662, 2021a.
Sinho Chewi, Chen Lu, Kwangjun Ahn, Xiang Cheng, Thibaut Le Gouic, and Philippe Rigollet.
  Optimal dimension dependence of the Metropolis-adjusted Langevin algorithm. In Mikhail Belkin
  and Samory Kpotufe (eds.), Proceedings of Thirty Fourth Conference on Learning Theory, volume
  134 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pp. 1260–1300. PMLR, 8 2021b.
Florinel-Alin Croitoru, Vlad Hondru, Radu Tudor Ionescu, and Mubarak Shah. Diffusion models in
  vision: a survey. arXiv e-prints, art. arXiv:2209.04747, 2022.
Arnak S. Dalalyan and Lionel Riou-Durand. On sampling from a log-concave density using kinetic
  Langevin diffusions. Bernoulli, 26(3):1956–1988, 2020.
Arnak S. Dalalyan, Avetik Karagulyan, and Lionel Riou-Durand. Bounding the error of discretized
  Langevin algorithms for non-strongly log-concave targets. arXiv e-prints, art. arXiv:1906.08530,
  June 2019.
Amit Daniely and Gal Vardi. From local pseudorandom generators to hardness of learning. In
 Conference on Learning Theory, pp. 1358–1394. PMLR, 2021.
Valentin De Bortoli. Convergence of denoising diffusion models under the manifold hypothesis.
  arXiv e-prints, art. arXiv:2208.05314, 2022.
Valentin De Bortoli, James Thornton, Jeremy Heng, and Arnaud Doucet. Diffusion Schrödinger
  bridge with applications to score-based generative modeling. In M. Ranzato, A. Beygelzimer,
  Y. Dauphin, P.S. Liang, and J. Wortman Vaughan (eds.), Advances in Neural Information Processing
  Systems, volume 34, pp. 17695–17709. Curran Associates, Inc., 2021.
Prafulla Dhariwal and Alexander Nichol. Diffusion models beat GANs on image synthesis. In
  M. Ranzato, A. Beygelzimer, Y. Dauphin, P.S. Liang, and J. Wortman Vaughan (eds.), Advances in
  Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 34, pp. 8780–8794. Curran Associates, Inc., 2021.
Ilias Diakonikolas, Daniel M Kane, and Alistair Stewart. Statistical query lower bounds for robust
   estimation of high-dimensional Gaussians and Gaussian mixtures. In 2017 IEEE 58th Annual
   Symposium on Foundations of Computer Science (FOCS), pp. 73–84. IEEE, 2017.
Tim Dockhorn, Arash Vahdat, and Karsten Kreis. Score-based generative modeling with critically-
  damped Langevin diffusion. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2022.
Hans Föllmer. An entropy approach to the time reversal of diffusion processes. In Stochastic
  differential systems (Marseille-Luminy, 1984), volume 69 of Lect. Notes Control Inf. Sci., pp.
 156–163. Springer, Berlin, 1985.


                                                10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Aparna Gupte, Neekon Vafa, and Vinod Vaikuntanathan. Continuous LWE is as hard as LWE &
  applications to learning Gaussian mixtures. arXiv preprint arXiv:2204.02550, 2022.

Jonathan Ho, Ajay Jain, and Pieter Abbeel. Denoising diffusion probabilistic models. Advances in
  Neural Information Processing Systems, 33:6840–6851, 2020.

Aapo Hyvärinen. Estimation of non-normalized statistical models by score matching. J. Mach. Learn.
  Res., 6:695–709, 2005.

Diederik Kingma, Tim Salimans, Ben Poole, and Jonathan Ho. Variational diffusion models. In
  M. Ranzato, A. Beygelzimer, Y. Dauphin, P.S. Liang, and J. Wortman Vaughan (eds.), Advances in
  Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 34, pp. 21696–21707. Curran Associates, Inc.,
  2021.

Jean-François Le Gall. Brownian motion, martingales, and stochastic calculus, volume 274 of
  Graduate Texts in Mathematics. Springer, [Cham], French edition, 2016.

Holden Lee, Jianfeng Lu, and Yixin Tan. Convergence for score-based generative modeling with
  polynomial complexity. arXiv e-prints, art. arXiv:2206.06227, 2022a.

Holden Lee, Jianfeng Lu, and Yixin Tan. Convergence of score-based generative modeling for general
  data distributions. 2022b.

Yin Tat Lee, Ruoqi Shen, and Kevin Tian. Structured logconcave sampling with a restricted Gaussian
  oracle. In Mikhail Belkin and Samory Kpotufe (eds.), Proceedings of Thirty Fourth Conference
  on Learning Theory, volume 134 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pp. 2993–3050.
  PMLR, 8 2021.

Xingchao Liu, Lemeng Wu, Mao Ye, and Qiang Liu. Let us build bridges: understanding and
  extending diffusion generative models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2208.14699, 2022.

Yi-An Ma, Niladri S. Chatterji, Xiang Cheng, Nicolas Flammarion, Peter L. Bartlett, and Michael I.
  Jordan. Is there an analog of Nesterov acceleration for gradient-based MCMC? Bernoulli, 27(3):
  1942 – 1992, 2021.

Dan Mikulincer and Yair Shenfeld. On the lipschitz properties of transportation along heat flows.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2201.01382, 2022.

Felix Otto and Cédric Villani. Comment on: “Hypercontractivity of Hamilton–Jacobi equations”, by
  S. G. Bobkov, I. Gentil and M. Ledoux. J. Math. Pures Appl. (9), 80(7):697–700, 2001.

Jakiw Pidstrigach. Score-based generative models detect manifolds.              arXiv e-prints, art.
  arXiv:2206.01018, 2022.

Aditya Ramesh, Prafulla Dhariwal, Alex Nichol, Casey Chu, and Mark Chen. Hierarchical text-
  conditional image generation with CLIP latents. arXiv preprint arXiv:2204.06125, 2022.

Paul T. V. Rolland. Predicting in uncertain environments: methods for robust machine learning. PhD
  thesis, EPFL, 2022.

Ruoqi Shen and Yin Tat Lee. The randomized midpoint method for log-concave sampling. In
  H. Wallach, H. Larochelle, A. Beygelzimer, F. d'Alché-Buc, E. Fox, and R. Garnett (eds.), Advances
  in Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 32. Curran Associates, Inc., 2019.

Jascha Sohl-Dickstein, Eric Weiss, Niru Maheswaranathan, and Surya Ganguli. Deep unsupervised
  learning using nonequilibrium thermodynamics. In Francis Bach and David Blei (eds.), Proceedings
  of the 32nd International Conference on Machine Learning, volume 37 of Proceedings of Machine
  Learning Research, pp. 2256–2265, Lille, France, 7 2015. PMLR.

Yang Song and Stefano Ermon. Generative modeling by estimating gradients of the data distribution.
  In H. Wallach, H. Larochelle, A. Beygelzimer, F. d'Alché-Buc, E. Fox, and R. Garnett (eds.),
  Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 32. Curran Associates, Inc., 2019.


                                                 11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Yang Song, Conor Durkan, Iain Murray, and Stefano Ermon. Maximum likelihood training of score-
  based diffusion models. In M. Ranzato, A. Beygelzimer, Y. Dauphin, P.S. Liang, and J. Wortman
  Vaughan (eds.), Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 34, pp. 1415–1428.
  Curran Associates, Inc., 2021a.
Yang Song, Jascha Sohl-Dickstein, Diederik P. Kingma, Abhishek Kumar, Stefano Ermon, and Ben
  Poole. Score-based generative modeling through stochastic differential equations. In International
  Conference on Learning Representations, 2021b.
J. Michael Steele. Stochastic calculus and financial applications, volume 45 of Applications of
   Mathematics (New York). Springer-Verlag, New York, 2001.
Arash Vahdat, Karsten Kreis, and Jan Kautz. Score-based generative modeling in latent space. In
  M. Ranzato, A. Beygelzimer, Y. Dauphin, P.S. Liang, and J. Wortman Vaughan (eds.), Advances in
  Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 34, pp. 11287–11302. Curran Associates, Inc.,
  2021.
Santosh Vempala and Andre Wibisono. Rapid convergence of the unadjusted Langevin algorithm:
  isoperimetry suffices. In H. Wallach, H. Larochelle, A. Beygelzimer, F. d'Alché-Buc, E. Fox, and
  R. Garnett (eds.), Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 32, pp. 8094–8106. Curran
  Associates, Inc., 2019.
Cédric Villani. Hypocoercivity. Mem. Amer. Math. Soc., 202(950):iv+141, 2009.
Pascal Vincent. A connection between score matching and denoising autoencoders. Neural Comput.,
  23(7):1661–1674, 2011.
Ling Yang, Zhilong Zhang, Shenda Hong, Wentao Zhang, and Bin Cui. Diffusion models: a
  comprehensive survey of methods and applications. arXiv e-prints, art. arXiv:2209.00796, 2022.
Qinsheng Zhang and Yongxin Chen. Fast sampling of diffusion models with exponential integrator.
  arXiv e-prints, art. arXiv:2204.13902, 2022.


                                                12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


A     P RELIMINARIES
In this section, we review the notion of score matching and provide a list of notation for the proofs.

A.1   P RIMER ON SCORE MATCHING

In order to estimate the score function ∇ ln qt , consider minimizing the L2 (qt ) loss over a function
class F ,
                                    minimize      Eqt [∥st − ∇ ln qt ∥2 ] ,                              (9)
                                      st ∈F

where F could be, e.g., a class of neural networks. The idea of score matching, which goes back
to Hyvärinen (2005); Vincent (2011), is that after applying integration by parts for the Gaussian
measure, the problem (9) is equivalent to the following problem:
                                       h                   1              2i
                         minimize E st (X̄t ) + p                     Zt     ,                  (10)
                           st ∈F                      1 − exp(−2t)
                                                                           p
where Zt ∼ normal(0, Id ) is independent of X̄0 and X̄t = exp(−t) X̄0 + 1 − exp(−2t) Zt , in the
sense that (9) and (10) share the same minimizers. We give a self-contained derivation in Appendix D
for the sake of completeness. Unlike (9), however, the objective in (10) can be replaced with an
                                                               (1)        (n)
empirical version and estimated on the basis of samples X̄0 , . . . , X̄0 from q, leading to the
finite-sample problem
                                        n                                  2
                                     1X          (i)          1        (i)
                     minimize              st (X̄t ) + p              Zt     ,
                        st ∈F        n i=1               1 − exp(−2t)
         (i)                                                             (i)
where (Zt )i∈[n] are i.i.d. standard Gaussians independent of (X̄0 )i∈[n] . Moreover, if we parame-
terize the score as st = − √ 1         zbt , then the empirical problem is equivalent to
                                1−exp(−2t)
                                                          n
                                                    1X           (i)    (i) 2
                                 minimize
                                 √                        zbt (X̄t ) − Zt     ,
                          bt ∈−
                          z        1−exp(−2t) F     n i=1
                                                                                  (i)
which has the illuminating interpretation of predicting the added noise Zt              from the noised data
  (i)
X̄t , i.e., denoising.

N OTATION

For a measurable mapping T : X → X and a measure µ on X, where X is a measurable space, the
notation T# µ refers to the pushforward of µ by the mapping T , i.e., if X ∼ µ, then T (X) ∼ T# µ.

Stochastic processes and their laws.

       • The data distribution is q = q0 .
       • The forward process (1) is denoted (X̄t )t∈[0,T ] , and X̄t ∼ qt .
       • The reverse process (4) is denoted (X̄t← )t∈[0,T ] , where X̄t← := X̄T −t ∼ qT −t .
       • The SGM algorithm (5) is denoted (Xt← )t∈[0,T ] , and Xt← ∼ pt . Recall that we initialize at
         p0 = γ d , the standard Gaussian measure.
       • The process (Xt←,qT )t∈[0,T ] is the same as (Xt← )t∈[0,T ] , except that we initialize this
         process at qT rather than at γ d . We write Xt←,qT ∼ pqt T .

Conventions for Girsanov’s theorem. When we apply Girsanov’s theorem, it is convenient to
instead think about a single stochastic process, which for ease of notation we denote simply via
(Xt )t∈[0,T ] , and we consider different measures over the path space C([0, T ]; Rd ).
The two measures we consider over path space are:


                                                     13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


       • Q←
          T , under which (Xt )t∈[0,T ] has the law of the reverse process (4);

       • PTqT , under which (Xt )t∈[0,T ] has the law of the SGM algorithm initialized at qT (corre-
         sponding to the process (Xt←,qT )t∈[0,T ] defined above).

We also use the following notion from stochastic calculus (Le Gall, 2016, Definition 4.6):

       • A local martingale (Lt )t∈[0,T ] is a stochastic process s.t. there exists a sequence of non-
         decreasing stopping times Tn → T s.t. Ln = (Lt∧Tn )t∈[0,T ] is a martingale.

Other parameters. We recall that T > 0 denotes the total time for which we run the forward
process; h > 0 is the step size of the discretization; L ≥ 1 is the Lipschitz constant of the score
function; m22 := Eq [∥·∥2 ] is the second moment under the data distribution; and εscore is the L2 score
estimation error.

Notation for CLD. The notational conventions for the CLD are similar; however, we must also
consider a velocity variable V . When discussing quantities which involve both position and velocity
(e.g., the joint distribution qt of (X̄t , V̄t )), we typically use boldface fonts.

B     P ROOFS FOR DDPM
B.1   P RELIMINARIES ON G IRSANOV ’ S THEOREM AND A FIRST ATTEMPT AT APPLYING
      G IRSANOV ’ S THEOREM

First, we recall a consequence of Girsanov’s theorem that can be obtained by combining Pages
136–139, Theorem 5.22, and Theorem 4.13 of Le Gall (2016).
                                      Rt
Theorem 9. For t ∈ [0, T ], let Lt = 0 bs dBs where B is a Q-Brownian motion. Assume that
    RT
EQ 0 ∥bs ∥2 ds < ∞. Then, L is a Q-martingale in L2 (Q). Moreover, if
                                                    Z t           1 t
                                                                    Z
             EQ E(L)T = 1 , where E(L)t := exp          bs dBs −       ∥bs ∥2 ds ,      (11)
                                                      0           2 0
then E(L) is also a Q-martingale and the process
                                                       Z t
                                           t 7→ Bt −         bs ds
                                                         0

is a Brownian motion under P := E(L)T Q, the probability distribution with density E(L)T w.r.t. Q.

If the assumptions of Girsanov’s theorem are satisfied (i.e., the condition (11)), we can apply
Girsanov’s theorem to Q = Q←T and
                               √
                          bt = 2 (sT −kh (Xkh ) − ∇ ln qT −t (Xt )) ,
where t ∈ [kh, (k + 1)h]. This tells us that under P = E(L)T Q←
                                                              T , there exists a Brownian motion
(βt )t∈[0,T ] s.t.
                             √
                     dBt = 2 (sT −kh (Xkh ) − ∇ ln qT −t (Xt )) dt + dβt .                  (12)
Recall that under Q←
                   T we have a.s.
                                                               √
                   dXt = {Xt + 2 ∇ ln qT −t (Xt )} dt +            2 dBt ,   X0 ∼ qT .                (13)
The equation above still holds P -a.s. since P ≪ Q←
                                                  T (even if B is no longer a P -Brownian motion).
Plugging (12) into (13) we have P -a.s.,3
                                                       √
                   dXt = {Xt + 2 sT −kh (Xkh )} dt + 2 dβt ,         X0 ∼ qT .
   3
     We still have X0 ∼ qT under P because the marginal at time t = 0 of P is equal to the marginal at time
t = 0 of Q←T . That is a consequence of the fact that E(L) is a (true) QT -martingale.
                                                                        ←


                                                    14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


In other words, under P , the distribution of X is the SGM algorithm started at qT , i.e., P = PTqT =
E(L)T Q← T . Therefore,

           qT                   dQ←
  KL(Q←
      T ∥ PT ) = EQ← ln            T
                                      = EQ←   ln E(L)−1                                          (14)
                   T
                                dPTqT      T          T

                                        N
                                        X −1       Z (k+1)h
                                      =      EQ← T
                                                            ∥sT −kh (Xkh ) − ∇ ln qT −t (Xt )∥2 dt ,
                                         k=0           kh

where we used EQ←
                T
                  Lt = 0 because L is a martingale.
The equality (14) allows us to bound the discrepancy between the SGM algorithm and the reverse
process.

B.2    C HECKING THE ASSUMPTIONS OF G IRSANOV ’ S THEOREM AND THE G IRSANOV
       DISCRETIZATION ARGUMENT

In most applications of Girsanov’s theorem in sampling, a sufficient condition for (11) to hold, known
as Novikov’s condition, is satisfied. Here, Novikov’s condition writes
                          NX−1 Z (k+1)h
              EQT exp
                  ←                      ∥sT −kh (Xkh ) − ∇ ln qT −t (Xt )∥2 dt < ∞ ,
                          k=0    kh

and if Novikov’s condition holds, we can apply Girsanov’s theorem directly. However, under
Assumptions 1, 2, and 3 alone, Novikov’s condition need not hold. Indeed, in order to check
Novikov’s condition, we would want X0 to have sub-Gaussian tails for instance.
Furthermore, we also could not check that the condition (11), which is weaker than Novikov’s
condition, holds. Therefore, in the proof of the next Theorem, we use a approximation technique to
show that
               qT              dQ←
  KL(Q← T ∥ PT ) = EQ←     ln     T
                                      ≤ EQ←    ln E(L)−1                                          (15)
                        T
                              dPTqT        T           T

                                        N
                                        X −1        Z (k+1)h
                                      =       EQ← T
                                                             ∥sT −kh (Xkh ) − ∇ ln qT −t (Xt )∥2 dt .
                                         k=0           kh

We then use a discretization argument based on stochastic calculus to further bound this quantity. The
result is the following theorem.
Theorem 10 (discretization error for DDPM). Suppose that Assumptions 1, 2, and 3 hold. Let Q←       T
and PTqT denote the measures on path space corresponding to the reverse process (4) and the SGM
algorithm with L2 -accurate score estimate initialized at qT . Assume that L ≥ 1 and h ≲ 1/L. Then,
               TV(PTqT , Q←  2      ←    qT      2        2      2 2 2
                          T ) ≤ KL(QT ∥ PT ) ≲ (εscore + L dh + L m2 h ) T .


Proof. We start by proving
   NX −1     Z (k+1)h
         EQ←
           T
                       ∥sT −kh (Xkh ) − ∇ ln qT −t (Xt )∥2 dt ≲ (ε2score + L2 dh + L2 m22 h2 ) T .
      k=0       kh

Then, we give the approximation argument to prove the inequality (15).
Bound on the discretization error. For t ∈ [kh, (k + 1)h], we can decompose
            EQ←
              T
                [∥sT −kh (Xkh ) − ∇ ln qT −t (Xt )∥2 ]
                  ≲ EQ←
                      T
                        [∥sT −kh (Xkh ) − ∇ ln qT −kh (Xkh )∥2 ]
                         + EQ←
                             T
                               [∥∇ ln qT −kh (Xkh ) − ∇ ln qT −t (Xkh )∥2 ]
                          + EQ←T
                                 [∥∇ ln qT −t (Xkh ) − ∇ ln qT −t (Xt )∥2 ]
                                   h      qT −kh          2i
                  ≲ ε2score + EQ←    ∇ ln        (X  kh )    + L2 EQ←    [∥Xkh − Xt ∥2 ] .           (16)
                                 T
                                           qT −t                       T


                                                  15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


We must bound the change in the score function along the forward process. If S : Rd → Rd is the
mapping S(x) := exp(−(t − kh)) x, then qT −kh = S# qT −t ∗ normal(0, 1 − exp(−2 (t − kh))).
We can then use Lee et al. (2022a, Lemma C.12) (or the more general Lemma 17 that we prove in
Section C.4) with α = exp(t − kh) = 1 + O(h) and σ 2 = 1 − exp(−2 (t − kh)) = O(h) to obtain
                qT −kh       2
         ∇ ln          (Xkh ) ≲ L2 dh + L2 h2 ∥Xkh ∥2 + (1 + L2 ) h2 ∥∇ ln qT −t (Xkh )∥2
                 qT −t
                               ≲ L2 dh + L2 h2 ∥Xkh ∥2 + L2 h2 ∥∇ ln qT −t (Xkh )∥2
where the last line uses L ≥ 1.
For the last term,
        ∥∇ ln qT −t (Xkh )∥2 ≲ ∥∇ ln qT −t (Xt )∥2 + ∥∇ ln qT −t (Xkh ) − ∇ ln qT −t (Xt )∥2
                                ≲ ∥∇ ln qT −t (Xt )∥2 + L2 ∥Xkh − Xt ∥2 ,
where the second term above is absorbed into the third term of the decomposition (16). Hence,
                EQ←
                  T
                    [∥sT −kh (Xkh ) − ∇ ln qT −t (Xt )∥2 ]
                      ≲ ε2score + L2 dh + L2 h2 EQ←
                                                  T
                                                    [∥Xkh ∥2 ]
                           + L2 h2 EQ←
                                     T
                                       [∥∇ ln qT −t (Xt )∥2 ] + L2 EQ←
                                                                     T
                                                                       [∥Xkh − Xt ∥2 ] .

Using the fact that under Q←    T , the process (Xt )t∈[0,T ] is the time reversal of the forward process
(X̄t )t∈[0,T ] , we can apply the moment bounds in Lemma 11 and the movement bound in Lemma 12
to obtain
                EQ←
                  T
                    [∥sT −kh (Xkh ) − ∇ ln qT −t (Xt )∥2 ]
                       ≲ ε2score + L2 dh + L2 h2 (d + m22 ) + L3 dh2 + L2 (m22 h2 + dh)
                       ≲ ε2score + L2 dh + L2 m22 h2 .

                                                     Rt
Approximation argument. For t ∈ [0, T ], let Lt = 0 bs dBs where B is a Q←       T -Brownian motion
and we define                   √
                          bt = 2 {sT −kh (Xkh ) − ∇ ln qT −t (Xt )} ,
                                             RT
for t ∈ [kh, (k + 1)h]. We proved that EQ← T  0
                                                  ∥bs ∥2 ds ≲ (ε2score + L2 dh + L2 m22 h2 ) T < ∞.
Using Le Gall (2016, Proposition 5.11), (E(L)t )t∈[0,T ] is a local martingale. Therefore, there exists
a non-decreasing sequence of stopping times Tn ↗ T s.t. (E(L)t∧Tn )t∈[0,t] is a martingale. Note
that E(L)t∧Tn = E(Ln )t where Lnt = Lt∧Tn . Since E(Ln ) is a martingale, we have
                                  EQ←
                                    T
                                      E(Ln )T = EQ←
                                                  T
                                                    E(Ln )0 = 1 ,

i.e., EQ←
        T
          E(L)Tn = 1.

We apply Girsanov’s theorem to Lnt = 0 bs 1[0,Tn ] (s) dBs , where B is a Q←
                                                Rt
                                                                                     T -Brownian mo-
                         ∥bs 1[0,Tn ] (s)∥ ds ≤ EQ←
                     RT                   2
                                                       RT        2
tion. Since EQ←   T    0                             T  0
                                                            ∥bs ∥ ds < ∞ (see the last paragraph) and
EQ← T
      E(L  n
             ) T =  1, we obtain  that  under P n :=
                                                     E(L n
                                                           )     ←                               n
                                                            T QT there exists a Brownian motion β s.t.
for t ∈ [0, T ],
                           √
                   dBt = 2 {sT −kh (Xkh ) − ∇ ln qT −t (Xt )} 1[0,Tn ] (t) dt + dβtn .
Recall that under Q←
                   T we have a.s.
                                                             √
                     dXt = {Xt + 2 ∇ ln qT −t (Xt )} dt +        2 dBt ,   X0 ∼ qT .
The equation above still holds P n -a.s. since P n ≪ Q←
                                                      T . Combining the last two equations we then
obtain P n -a.s.,
                                                                                       √
 dXt = {Xt +2 sT −kh (Xkh )} 1[0,Tn ] (t) dt+{Xt +2 ∇ ln qT −t (Xt )} 1[Tn ,T ] (t) dt+ 2 dβtn , (17)


                                                    16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


and X0 ∼ qT . In other words, P n is the law of the solution of the SDE (17). At this stage we have
the bound
                                                       1 Tn                       1 Tn
                                             h            Z              i          Z
                                −1
  KL(Q←T  ∥ P n
                ) = E ←
                     QT ln E(L) Tn  =  E QT←   −L Tn +         ∥b s ∥2
                                                                       ds  = E ←
                                                                              QT          ∥bs ∥2 ds
                                                       2 0                        2 0
                        1 T
                           Z
                  ≤ EQT
                      ←        ∥bs ∥2 ds ≲ (ε2score + L2 dh + L2 m22 h2 ) T,
                        2 0
where we used that EQ← T
                         LTn = 0 because L is a Q←   T -martingale and Tn is a bounded stopping
time (Le Gall, 2016, Corollary 3.23). Our goal is now to show that we can obtain the final result by
an approximation argument.
We consider a coupling of (P n )n∈N , PTqT : a sequence of stochastic processes (X n )n∈N over the
same probability space, a stochastic process X and a single Brownian motion W over that space s.t.4
                                                                                              √
 dXtn = {Xtn +2 sT −kh (Xkh  n
                               )} 1[0,Tn ] (t) dt+{Xtn +2 ∇ ln qT −t (Xtn )} 1[Tn ,T ] (t) dt+ 2 dWt ,
and                                                                        √
                                                       n
                                dXt = {Xt + 2 sT −kh (Xkh )} dt +
                                                               2 dWt ,
with X0 = X0 a.s. and X0 ∼ qT . Note that the distribution of X (resp. X) is P n (resp. PTqT ).
           n                                                   n


Let ε > 0 and consider the map πε : C([0, T ]; Rd ) → C([0, T ]; Rd ) defined by
                                          πε (ω)(t) := ω(t ∧ T − ε) .
Noting that Xtn = Xt for every t ∈ [0, Tn ] and using Lemma 13, we have πε (X n ) → πε (X) a.s.,
uniformly over [0, T ]. Therefore, πε# P n → πε# PTqT weakly. Using the lower semicontinuity of the
KL divergence and the data-processing inequality (Ambrosio et al., 2005, Lemma 9.4.3 and Lemma
9.4.5), we obtain
                                           qT
                    KL((πε )# Q←                                    ←           n
                               T ∥ (πε )# PT ) ≤ lim inf KL((πε )# QT ∥ (πε )# P )
                                                        n→∞
                                                     ≤ lim inf KL(Q←   n
                                                                   T ∥P )
                                                        n→∞
                                                     ≲ (ε2score + L2 dh + L2 m22 h2 ) T .
Finally, using Lemma 14, πε (ω) → ω as ε → 0, uniformly over [0, T ]. Therefore, using Ambrosio
                                                       qT               qT
et al. (2005, Corollary 9.4.6), KL((πε )# Q←                     ←
                                           T ∥ (πε )# PT ) → KL(QT ∥ PT ) as ε ↘ 0. Therefore,
                                      qT
                             KL(Q←            2        2      2 2 2
                                 T ∥ PT ) ≲ (εscore + L dh + L m2 h ) T .

We conclude with Pinsker’s inequality (TV2 ≤ KL).

B.3      P ROOF OF T HEOREM 2

We can now conclude our main result.


Proof of Theorem 2. We recall the notation from Section 4. By the data processing inequality,

             TV(pT , q) ≤ TV(PT , PTqT ) + TV(PTqT , Q←              d        qT   ←
                                                      T ) ≤ TV(qT , γ ) + TV(PT , QT ) .

Using the convergence of the OU process in KL divergence (see, e.g., Bakry et al., 2014, Theorem
5.2.1) and applying Theorem 10 for the second term,
                          q                                   √                √
             TV(pT , q) ≲ KL(q ∥ γ d ) exp(−T ) + (εscore + L dh + Lm2 h) T ,

which proves the result.

   4
       Such a coupling always exists, see Le Gall (2016, Corollary 8.5).


                                                        17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


B.4      AUXILIARY LEMMAS

In this section, we prove some auxiliary lemmas which are used in the proof of Theorem 2.
Lemma 11 (moment bounds for DDPM). Suppose that Assumptions 1 and 2 hold. Let (X̄t )t∈[0,T ]
denote the forward process (1).

      1. (moment bound) For all t ≥ 0,

                                                   E[∥X̄t ∥2 ] ≤ d ∨ m22 .

      2. (score function bound) For all t ≥ 0,

                                                 E[∥∇ ln qt (X̄t )∥2 ] ≤ Ld .


                                                                d               p
Proof.         1. Along the OU process, we have X̄t = exp(−t) X̄0 +              1 − exp(−2t) ξ, where
           ξ ∼ normal(0, Id ) is independent of X̄0 . Hence,

                        E[∥X̄t ∥2 ] = exp(−2t) E[∥X∥2 ] + {1 − exp(−2t)} d ≤ d ∨ m22 .

      2. This follows from the L-smoothness of ln qt (see, e.g., Vempala & Wibisono, 2019, Lemma
         9). We give a short proof for the sake of completeness.
           If Lt f := ∆f − ⟨∇Ut , ∇f ⟩ is the generator associated with qt ∝ exp(−Ut ), then

                        0 = Eqt L Ut = Eqt ∆Ut − Eqt [∥∇Ut ∥2 ] ≤ Ld − Eqt [∥∇Ut ∥2 ] .

Lemma 12 (movement bound for DDPM). Suppose that Assumption 2 holds. Let (X̄t )t∈[0,T ] denote
the forward process (1). For 0 ≤ s < t with δ := t − s, if δ ≤ 1, then

                                       E[∥X̄t − X̄s ∥2 ] ≲ δ 2 m22 + δd .


Proof. We can write

                                   2
                                        h    Z t           √               2i
                    E[∥X̄t − X̄s ∥ ] = E −       X̄r dr + 2 (Bt − Bs )
                                              s
                                        Z t
                                     ≲δ     E[∥X̄r ∥2 ] dr + δd ≲ δ 2 (d + m22 ) + δd
                                             s
                                       ≲ δ 2 m22 + δd ,

where we used Lemma 11.


We omit the proofs of the two next lemmas as they are straightforward.
Lemma 13. Consider fn , f : [0, T ] → Rd s.t. there exists an increasing sequence (Tn )n∈N ⊆ [0, T ]
satisfying the conditions

         • Tn → T as n → ∞,

         • fn (t) = f (t) for every t ≤ Tn .

Then, for every ε > 0, fn → f uniformly over [0, T − ε]. In particular, fn (· ∧ T − ε) → f (· ∧ T − ε)
uniformly over [0, T ].
Lemma 14. Consider f : [0, T ] → Rd continuous, and fε : [0, T ] → Rd s.t. fε (t) = f (t ∧ (T − ε))
for ε > 0. Then fε → f uniformly over [0, T ] as ε → 0.


                                                        18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


B.5   P ROOF OF C OROLLARY 6

Proof of Corollary 6. For R0 > 0, let ΠR0 denote the projection onto B(0, R0 ). We want to prove
that W2 ((ΠR0 )# pT −t , q) ≤ ε. We use the decomposition
            W2 ((ΠR0 )# pT −t , q) ≤ W2 ((ΠR0 )# pT −t , (ΠR0 )# qt ) + W2 ((ΠR0 )# qt , q) .
For the first term, since (ΠR0 )# pT −t and (ΠR0 )# qt both have support contained in B(0, R0 ), we
can upper bound the Wasserstein distance by the total variation distance. Namely, Rolland (2022,
Lemma 9) implies that
                                           q
      W2 ((ΠR0 )# pT −t , (ΠR0 )# qt ) ≲ R0 TV((ΠR0 )# pT −t , (ΠR0 )# qt ) + R0 exp(−R0 ) .
By the data-processing inequality,
                       TV((ΠR0 )# pT −t , (ΠR0 )# qt ) ≤ TV(pT −t , qt ) ≤ εTV ,
where εTV is from Corollary 4, yielding
                                                         √
                    W2 ((ΠR0 )# pT −t , (ΠR0 )# qt ) ≲ R0 εTV + R0 exp(−R0 ) .
Next, we take R0 ≥ R so that (ΠR0 )# q = q. Since ΠR0 is 1-Lipschitz, we have
                W2 ((ΠR0 )# qt , q) = W2 ((ΠR0 )# qt , (ΠR0 )# q) ≤ W2 (qt , q) ≤ εW2 ,
where εW2 is from Corollary 4. Combining these bounds,
                                              √
                   W2 ((ΠR0 )# pT −t , q) ≲ R0 εTV + R0 exp(−R0 ) + εW2 .

We now take εW2 = ε/3, R0 = Θ(R), e                e 2 /R2 ) to obtain the desired result. The
                                         and εTV = Θ(ε
iteration complexity follows from Corollary 4.

C     P ROOFS FOR CLD
C.1   BACKGROUND ON THE CLD PROCESS

More generally, for the forward process we can introduce a friction parameter γ > 0 and consider
                               dX̄t = V̄t dt ,
                                                                  p
                                dV̄t = −X̄t dt − γ V̄t dt +           2γ dBt .
If we write θ̄t := (X̄t , V̄t ), then the forward process satisfies the linear SDE

                                                                 0      1               0
          dθ̄t = Aγ θ̄t dt + Σγ dBt ,           where Aγ :=                  and Σγ := √      .
                                                                −1 −γ                    2γ
The solution to the SDE is given by
                                                 Z t
                         θ̄t = exp(tAγ ) θ̄0 +            exp{(t − s) Aγ } Σγ dBs ,               (18)
                                                  0
which means that by the Itô isometry,
                                            Z t
 law(θ̄t ) = exp(tAγ )# law(θ̄0 ) ∗ normal 0,   exp{(t − s) Aγ } Σγ ΣT
                                                                     γ exp{(t − s) A T
                                                                                     γ } ds  .
                                                      0

Since det Aγ = 1, Aγ is always invertible. Moreover, from tr Aγ = −γ, one can work out that the
spectrum of Aγ is
                                                       r
                                               n γ        γ2     o
                                spec(Aγ ) = − ±               −1 .
                                                  2        4
However, Aγ is not diagonalizable. The case of γ = 2 is special, as it corresponds to the case when
the spectrum is {−1}, and it corresponds to the critically damped case. Following Dockhorn et al.
(2022), which advocated for setting γ = 2, we will also only consider the critically damped case.
This also has the advantage of substantially simplifying the calculations.


                                                      19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


C.2     G IRSANOV DISCRETIZATION ARGUMENT

In order to apply Girsanov’s theorem, we introduce the path measures PTqT and Q←
                                                                               T , under which

                       dXt = −Vt dt ,
                       dVt = {Xt + 2 Vt + 4 sT −kh (Xkh , Vkh )} dt + 2 dBt ,
for t ∈ [kh, (k + 1)h], and
                      dXt = −Vt dt ,
                      dVt = {Xt + 2 Vt + 4 ∇v ln qT −t (Xt , Vt )} dt + 2 dBt ,
respectively.
Applying Girsanov’s theorem, we have the following theorem.
Corollary 15. Suppose that Novikov’s condition holds:
                   NX −1 Z (k+1)h
                                                                                  2
        EQ←T
             exp  2               ∥sT −kh (Xkh , Vkh ) − ∇ v ln q T −t (Xt , Vt )∥  dt   < ∞.
                       k=0    kh

Then,
                qT                     dQ←
       KL(Q←
           T ∥ PT ) = EQ← ln              T
                        T
                                       dPTqT
                             N
                             X −1         Z (k+1)h
                       =2           EQ←
                                      T
                                                     ∥sT −kh (Xkh , Vkh ) − ∇v ln qT −t (Xt , Vt )∥2 dt .
                             k=0           kh


Similarly to Appendix B.2, even if Novikov’s condition does not hold, one can use an approximation
to argue that the KL divergence is still upper bounded by the last expression. Since the argument
follows along the same lines, we omit it for brevity.
Using this, we now aim to prove the following theorem.
Theorem 16 (discretization error for CLD). Suppose that Assumptions 2, 4, and 5 hold. Let Q←    T
and PTqT denote the measures on path space corresponding to the reverse process (7) and the SGM
algorithm with L2 -accurate score estimate initialized at qT . Assume that L ≥ 1 and h ≲ 1/L. Then,
                                   2
                 TV(PTqT , Q←         ←    qT      2        2      2 2 2
                            T ) ≤ KL(QT ∥ PT ) ≲ (εscore + L dh + L m2 h ) T .



Proof. For t ∈ [kh, (k + 1)h], we can decompose
   EQ←
     T
       [∥sT −kh (Xkh , Vkh ) − ∇v ln qT −t (Xt , Vt )∥2 ]
         ≲ EQ←
             T
               [∥sT −kh (Xkh , Vkh ) − ∇v ln qT −kh (Xkh , Vkh )∥2 ]
                 + EQ←
                     T
                       [∥∇v ln qT −kh (Xkh , Vkh ) − ∇v ln qT −t (Xkh , Vkh )∥2 ]
                 + EQ←T
                        [∥∇v ln qT −t (Xkh , Vkh ) − ∇v ln qT −t (Xt , Vt )∥2 ]
                          h        qT −kh               2i
         ≲ ε2score + EQ←    ∇ v ln        (X kh , Vkh )    + L2 EQ←    [∥(Xkh , Vkh ) − (Xt , Vt )∥2 ](19)
                                                                                                       .
                        T
                                    qT −t                          T


The change in the score function is bounded by Lemma 17, which generalizes Lee et al. (2022a,
Lemma C.12). From the representation (18) of the solution to the CLD, we note that
                               qT −kh = (M0 )# qT −t ∗ normal(0, M1 )
with

                M0 = exp (t − kh) A2 ,
                     Z t−kh
                M1 =        exp{(t − kh − s) A2 } Σ2 ΣT                   T
                                                      2 exp{(t − kh − s) A2 } ds .
                       0



                                                       20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


In particular, since ∥A2 ∥op ≲ 1, ∥A−12 ∥op ≲ 1, and ∥Σ2 ∥op ≲ 1 it follows that ∥M0 ∥op = 1 + O(h)
and ∥M1 ∥op = O(h). Substituting this into Lemma 17, we deduce that if h ≲ 1/L, then
                  qT −kh             2         qT −kh               2
          ∇v ln          (Xkh , Vkh ) ≤ ∇ ln          (Xkh , Vkh )
                   qT −t                        qT −t
               ≲ L dh + L h (∥Xkh ∥ + ∥Vkh ∥2 ) + (1 + L2 ) h2 ∥∇ ln qT −t (Xkh , Vkh )∥2
                    2       2 2         2

              ≲ L2 dh + L2 h2 (∥Xkh ∥2 + ∥Vkh ∥2 ) + L2 h2 ∥∇ ln qT −t (Xkh , Vkh )∥2 ,
where in the last step we used L ≥ 1.
For the last term,
       ∥∇ ln qT −t (Xkh , Vkh )∥2 ≲ ∥∇ ln qT −t (Xt , Vt )∥2 + L2 ∥(Xkh , Vkh ) − (Xt , Vt )∥2 ,
where the second term above is absorbed into the third term of the decomposition (19). Hence,
                     EQ← T
                           [∥sT −kh (Xkh , Vkh ) − ∇v ln qT −t (Xt , Vt )∥2 ]
                            ≲ ε2score + L2 dh + L2 h2 EQ←
                                                        T
                                                          [∥Xkh ∥2 + ∥Vkh ∥2 ]
                                  + L2 h2 EQ←
                                            T
                                              [∥∇ ln qT −t (Xt , Vt )∥2 ]
                                  + L2 EQ←
                                         T
                                           [∥(Xkh , Vkh ) − (Xt , Vt )∥2 ] .
By applying the moment bounds in Lemma 18 together with Lemma 19 on the movement of the CLD
process, we obtain
              EQ← T
                    [∥sT −kh (Xkh , Vkh ) − ∇v ln qT −t (Xt , Vt )∥2 ]
                     ≲ ε2score + L2 dh + L2 h2 (d + m22 ) + L3 dh2 + L2 (dh + m22 h2 )
                    ≲ ε2score + L2 dh + L2 m22 h2 .
The proof is concluded via an approximation argument as in Section B.2.

Remark. We now pause to discuss why the discretization bound above does not improve upon the
result for DDPM (Theorem 10). In the context of log-concave sampling, one instead considers the
underdamped Langevin process
                            dXt = Vt ,
                                                              p
                             dVt = −∇U (Xt ) dt − γ Vt dt + 2γ dBt ,
which is discretized to yield the algorithm
                           dXt = Vt ,
                                                               p
                            dVt = −∇U (Xkh ) dt − γ Vt dt + 2γ dBt ,
for t ∈ [kh, (k + 1)h]. Let PT denote the path measure for the algorithm, and let QT denote the path
measure for the continuous-time process. After applying Girsanov’s theorem, we obtain
                                     N −1     Z (k+1)h
                                   1 X
                KL(QT ∥ PT ) ≍            EQT          ∥∇U (Xt ) − ∇U (Xkh )∥2 dt .
                                   γ           kh
                                      k=0
In this expression, note that ∇U depends only on the position coordinate. Since the X process is
                                                                                               2
smoother (as we do not add Brownian motion directly to X),
                2
                                                           √ the error ∥∇U (Xt ) − ∇U (Xkh )∥
is of size O(dh ), which allows us to take step size h ≲ 1/ d. This explains why the use of the
underdamped Langevin diffusion leads to improved dimension dependence for log-concave sampling.
In contrast, consider the reverse process, in which
                            N
                            X −1      Z (k+1)h
            ←      qT
     KL(QT ∥ PT ) = 2            EQT←          ∥sT −kh (Xkh , Vkh ) − ∇v ln qT −t (Xt , Vt )∥2 dt .
                            k=0         kh

Since discretization of the reverse process involves the score function, which depends on both X
and V , the error now involves controlling ∥Vt − Vkh ∥2 , which is of size O(dh) (the process V is not
very smooth because it includes a Brownian motion component). Therefore, from the form of the
reverse process, we may expect that SGMs based on the CLD do not improve upon the dimension
dependence of DDPM.
In Section C.5, we use this observation in order to prove a rigorous lower bound against discretization
of SGMs based on the CLD.


                                                   21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


C.3   P ROOF OF T HEOREM 7

Proof of Theorem 7. By the data processing inequality,
        TV(pT , q0 ) ≤ TV(PT , PTqT ) + TV(PTqT , Q←              2d       qT   ←
                                                   T ) ≤ TV(qT , γ ) + TV(PT , QT ) .

In Ma et al. (2021), following the entropic hypocoercivity approach of Villani (2009), Ma et al.
consider a Lyapunov functional L which is equivalent to the sum of the KL divergence and the Fisher
information,
                             L(µ ∥ γ 2d ) ≍ KL(µ ∥ γ 2d ) + FI(µ ∥ γ 2d ) ,
which decays exponentially fast in time: there exists a universal constant c > 0 such that for all t ≥ 0,
                                L(qt ∥ γ 2d ) ≤ exp(−ct) L(q0 ∥ γ 2d ) .
Since q0 = q ⊗ γ d and γ 2d = γ d ⊗ γ d , then L(q0 ∥ γ 2d ) ≲ KL(q ∥ γ d ) + FI(q ∥ γ d ). By Pinsker’s
inequality and Theorem 16, we deduce that
                    q                                                       √                √
     TV(pT , q0 ) ≲ KL(q ∥ γ d ) + FI(q ∥ γ d ) exp(−cT ) + (εscore + L dh + Lm2 h) T ,
which completes the proof.


C.4   AUXILIARY LEMMAS

We start with a perturbation lemma for the score function.
Lemma 17 (score perturbation lemma). Let 0 < ζ < 1. Suppose that M0 , M1 ∈ R2d×2d are two
matrices, where M1 is symmetric. Also, assume that ∥M0 − I2d ∥op ≤ ζ, so that M0 is invertible.
Let q = exp(−H) be a probability density on R2d such that ∇H is L-Lipschitz with L ≤ 4 ∥M11 ∥op .
Then, it holds that
       (M0 )# q ∗ normal(0, M1 )            q
 ∇ ln                            (θ) ≲ L ∥M1 ∥op d + Lζ ∥θ∥ + (ζ + L ∥M1 ∥op ) ∥∇H(θ)∥ .
                    q

Proof. The proof follows along the lines of Lee et al. (2022a, Lemma C.12). First, we show that
when M0 = I2d , if L ≤ 2 ∥M11 ∥op then
                  q ∗ normal(0, M1 )
                                              q
            ∇ ln                     (θ) ≲ L ∥M1 ∥op d + L ∥M1 ∥op ∥∇H(θ)∥ .               (20)
                          q
Let S denote the subspace S := range M1 . Then, since
                                     Z
                                                  1
                                           exp − ⟨θ − θ ′ , M1−1 (θ − θ ′ )⟩ q(dθ ′ ) ,

           q ∗ normal(0, M1 ) (θ) =
                                      θ+S         2
where M1−1 is well-defined on S, we have
                 q ∗ normal(0, M1 )
           ∇ ln                     (θ)
                         q
                         ∇H(θ ′ ) exp(− 12 ⟨θ − θ ′ , M1−1 (θ − θ ′ )⟩) q(dθ ′ )
                    R
                = θ+SR                                                           − ∇H(θ)
                         θ+S
                              exp(− 12 ⟨θ − θ ′ , M1−1 (θ − θ ′ )⟩) q(dθ ′ )
                = ∥Eqθ ∇H − ∇H(θ)∥ .
Here, qθ is the measure on θ + S such that
                                         1
                       qθ (dθ ′ ) ∝ exp − ⟨θ − θ ′ , M1−1 (θ − θ ′ )⟩ q(dθ ′ ) .

                                         2
Note that since L ≤ 2 ∥M11 ∥op , then if we write qθ (θ ′ ) ∝ exp(−Hθ (θ ′ )), we have
                                  1                  1
                    ∇2 H θ ⪰                                               on θ + S .

                                        − L Id ⪰           Id
                                ∥M1 ∥op          2 ∥M1 ∥op


                                                   22
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Let θ⋆ ∈ arg min Hθ denote a mode. We bound
       ∥Eqθ ∇H − ∇H(θ)∥ ≤ L Eθ′ ∼qθ ∥θ ′ − θ∥ ≤ L Eθ′ ∼qθ ∥θ ′ − θ⋆ ∥ + L ∥θ⋆ − θ∥ .
For the first term, (Dalalyan et al., 2019, Proposition 2) yields
                                                       q
                                 Eθ′ ∼qθ ∥θ ′ − θ⋆ ∥ ≤ 2 ∥M1 ∥op d .

For the second term, since the mode satisfies ∇H(θ⋆ ) + M1−1 (θ⋆ − θ) = 0, we have
            ∥θ⋆ − θ∥ ≤ ∥M1 ∥op ∥∇H(θ⋆ )∥ ≤ L ∥M1 ∥op ∥θ⋆ − θ∥ + ∥M1 ∥op ∥∇H(θ)∥
which is rearranged to yield
                                     ∥θ⋆ − θ∥ ≤ 2 ∥M1 ∥op ∥∇H(θ)∥ .
After combining the bounds, we obtain the claimed estimate (20).
Next, we consider the case of general M0 . We have
                          (M0 )# q ∗ normal(0, M1 )
                   ∇ ln                           (θ)
                                    q
                                 (M0 )# q ∗ normal(0, M1 )                     (M0 )# q
                        ≤ ∇ ln                                (θ) + ∇ ln                  (θ) .
                                          (M0 )# q                                q
We can apply (20) with (M0 )# q in place of q, noting that (M0 )# q ∝ exp(−H ′ ) for H ′ := H ◦M0
which is L′ -smooth for L′ := L ∥M0 ∥2op ≲ L, to get
             (M0 )# q ∗ normal(0, M1 )            q
      ∇ ln                                 (θ) ≲ L ∥M1 ∥op d + L ∥M1 ∥op ∥M0 ∇H(M0 θ)∥
                          (M0 )# q
                                                    q
                                                 ≲ L ∥M1 ∥op d + L ∥M1 ∥op ∥∇H(M0 θ)∥ .

Note that
             ∥∇H(M0 θ)∥ ≤ ∥∇H(θ)∥ + L ∥(M0 − I2d ) θ∥ ≲ ∥∇H(θ)∥ + Lζ ∥θ∥ .
We also have
              (M0 )# q
       ∇ ln                (θ) = ∥M0 ∇H(M0 θ) − ∇H(θ)∥
                    q
                                ≤ ∥M0 ∇H(M0 θ) − M0 ∇H(θ)∥ + ∥M0 ∇H(θ) − ∇H(θ)∥
                                ≲ L ∥(M0 − I2d ) θ∥ + ζ ∥∇H(θ)∥ ≲ Lζ ∥θ∥ + ζ ∥∇H(θ)∥ .

Combining the bounds,
                   (M0 )# q ∗ normal(0, M1 )
            ∇ ln                               (θ)
                                 q
                   q
                ≲ L ∥M1 ∥op d + Lζ (1 + L ∥M1 ∥op ) ∥θ∥ + (ζ + L ∥M1 ∥op ) ∥∇H(θ)∥
                   q
                ≲ L ∥M1 ∥op d + Lζ ∥θ∥ + (ζ + L ∥M1 ∥op ) ∥∇H(θ)∥

so the lemma follows.

Next, we prove the moment and movement bounds for the CLD.
Lemma 18 (moment bounds for CLD). Suppose that Assumptions 2 and 4 hold. Let (X̄t , V̄t )t∈[0,T ]
denote the forward process (6).

     1. (moment bound) For all t ≥ 0,
                                             E[∥(X̄t , V̄t )∥2 ] ≲ d + m22 .


                                                      23
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


      2. (score function bound) For all t ≥ 0,
                                                 E[∥∇ ln qt (X̄t , V̄t )∥2 ] ≤ Ld .

Proof.          1. We can write

             E[∥(X̄t , V̄t )∥2 ] = W22 (qt , δ0 ) ≲ W22 (qt , γ 2d ) + W22 (γ 2d , δ0 ) ≲ d + W22 (qt , γ 2d ) .
          Next, the coupling argument of Cheng et al. (2018) shows that the CLD converges exponen-
          tially fast in the Wasserstein metric associated to a twisted norm |||·||| which is equivalent
          (up to universal constants) to the Euclidean norm ∥·∥. It implies the following result, see,
          e.g., Cheng et al. (2018, Lemma 8):

                      W22 (qt , γ 2d ) ≲ W22 (q, γ 2d ) ≲ W22 (q, δ0 ) + W22 (δ0 , γ 2d ) ≲ d + m22 .

      2. The proof is the same as in Lemma 11.



Lemma 19 (movement bound for CLD). Suppose that Assumptions 2 holds. Let (X̄t , V̄t )t∈[0,T ]
denote the forward process (6). For 0 < s < t with δ := t − s, if δ ≤ 1,
                                E[∥(X̄t , V̄t ) − (X̄s , V̄s )∥2 ] ≲ δ 2 m22 + δd .

Proof. First,
                                     h Z t        2i
                                                        Z t
                E[∥X̄t − X̄s ∥2 ] = E      V̄r dr    ≤δ     E[∥V̄r ∥2 ] dr ≲ δ 2 (d + m22 ) ,
                                             s                        s

where we used the moment bound in Lemma 18. Next,
                     h Z t                                   2i
                                                                   Z t
E[∥V̄t − V̄s ∥2 ] = E      (−X̄r − 2 V̄r ) dr + 2 (Bt − Bs )    ≲δ     E[∥X̄r ∥2 + ∥V̄r ∥2 ] dr + δd
                           s                                                         s
                   ≲ δ 2 (d + m22 ) + δd ,
where we used Lemma 18 again.

C.5      L OWER BOUND AGAINST CLD

When proving upper bounds on the KL divergence, we can use the approximation argument described
in Section B.2 in order to invoke Girsanov’s theorem. However, when proving lower bounds on the
KL divergence, this approach no longer works, so we check Novikov’s condition directly for the
setting of Theorem 8.
Lemma 20 (Novikov’s condition holds for CLD). Consider the setting of Theorem 8. Then, Novikov’s
condition 15 holds.

We defer the proof of Lemma 20 to the end of this section. Admitting Lemma 20, we now prove
Theorem 8.

Proof of Theorem 8. Since q0 = γ d ⊗ γ d = γ 2d is stationary for the forward process (6), we have
qt = γ 2d for all t ≥ 0. In this proof, since the score estimate is perfect and qT = γ 2d , we simply
denote the path measure for the algorithm as PT = PTqT . From Girsanov’s theorem in the form of
Corollary 15 and from sT −kh (x, v) = ∇v ln qT −kh (x, v) = −v, we have
                                                   N
                                                   X −1            Z (k+1)h
                         KL(Q←
                             T ∥ PT ) = 2                 Q←
                                                          ET
                                                                              ∥Vkh − Vt ∥2 dt .               (21)
                                                    k=0             kh



                                                              24
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


To lower bound this quantity, we use the inequality ∥x + y∥2 ≥ 21 ∥x∥2 − ∥y∥2 to write, for
t ∈ [kh, (k + 1)h]
       EQ←
         T
           [∥Vkh − Vt ∥2 ] = E[∥V̄T −kh − V̄T −t ∥2 ]
                              h Z T −kh                                           2i
                           =E            {−X̄s − 2 V̄s } ds + 2 (BT −kh − BT −t )
                                           T −t
                                                                 h Z T −kh                    2i
                                   ≥ 2 E[∥BT −kh − BT −t ∥2 ] − E          {−X̄s − 2 V̄s } ds
                                                                                T −t
                                                                  Z T −kh
                                   ≥ 2d (t − kh) − (t − kh)                    E[∥X̄s + 2 V̄s ∥2 ] ds
                                                                   T −t
                                                                  Z T −kh
                                   ≥ 2d (t − kh) − (t − kh)                    E[2 ∥X̄s ∥2 + 8 ∥V̄s ∥2 ] ds .
                                                                    T −t
                                   d              d
Using the fact that X̄s ∼ γ and V̄s ∼ γ for all s ∈ [0, T ], we can then bound
                                                                                   2
                 EQ←
                   T
                     [∥Vkh − Vt ∥2 ] ≥ 2d (t − kh) − 10d (t − kh) ≥ d (t − kh) ,
                  1
provided that h ≤ 10 . Substituting this into (21),
                                            N
                                            X −1 Z (k+1)h
                                                                           2
                 KL(Q←
                     T ∥ PT ) ≥ 2d                              (t − kh) dt = dh2 N = dhT .
                                             k=0      kh

This proves the result.

This lower bound shows that the Girsanov discretization argument of Theorem 16 is essentially tight
(except possibly the dependence on L).
We now prove Lemma 20.

Proof of Lemma 20. Similarly to the proof of Theorem 8 above, we note that
            ∥sT −kh (Xkh , Vkh ) − ∇v ln qT −t (Xt , Vt )∥2 = ∥V̄T −kh − V̄T −t ∥2
                     Z T −kh                                              2
                 =           {−X̄s − 2 V̄s } ds + 2 (BT −kh − BT −t )
                            T −t
                 ≲ h2 sup (∥X̄s ∥2 + ∥V̄s ∥2 ) +                      sup              ∥BT −kh − Bs ∥2 .
                            s∈[0,T ]                           s∈[T −(k+1)h,T −kh]

Hence, for a universal constant C > 0 (which may change from line to line)
             NX −1 Z (k+1)h
 EQT exp 2
   ←                        ∥sT −kh (Xkh , Vkh ) − ∇v ln qT −t (Xt , Vt )∥2 dt
               k=0     kh

                                                  N
                                                  X −1
      ≤ E exp CT h2 sup (∥X̄s ∥2 + ∥V̄s ∥2 ) + Ch                                   sup          ∥BT −kh − Bs ∥2 .
                            s∈[0,T ]                               k=0 s∈[T −(k+1)h,T −kh]

By the Cauchy–Schwarz inequality, to prove that this expectation is finite, it suffices to consider the
two terms in the exponential separately.
Next, we recall that
                                       dX̄t = V̄t dt ,
                                        dV̄t = −(X̄t + 2 V̄t ) dt + 2 dBt .
Define Ȳt := X̄t + V̄t . Then, dȲt = −Ȳt dt + 2 dBt , which admits the explicit solution
                                                   Z t
                            Ȳt = exp(−t) Ȳ0 + 2      exp{−(t − s)} dBs .
                                                           0



                                                           25
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Also, dX̄t = −X̄t dt + Ȳt dt, which admits the solution
                                               Z t
                          X̄t = exp(−t) X̄0 +      exp{−(t − s)} Ȳt dt .
                                                                    0
Hence,
                               ∥X̄t ∥ + ∥V̄t ∥ ≤ 2 ∥X̄t ∥ + ∥Ȳt ∥ ≲ ∥X̄0 ∥ + sup ∥Ȳs ∥
                                                                                         s∈[0,T ]
and
                                                                             n        Z t            o
                     sup ∥Ȳt ∥ ≲ ∥X̄0 ∥ + ∥V̄0 ∥ + sup                       exp(−t)     exp(s) dBs
                    t∈[0,T ]                                      t∈[0,T ]                0

                                     = ∥X̄0 ∥ + ∥V̄0 ∥ + sup exp(−t) ∥B̃(exp(2t)−1)/2 ∥
                                                                  t∈[0,T ]

where B̃ is another standard Brownian motion and we use the interpretation of stochastic integrals
as time changes of Brownian motion (Steele, 2001, Corollary 7.1). Since (X̄0 , V̄0 ) ∼ γ 2d has
independent entries, then
                                      d
                                      Y
  E exp(CT h2 {∥X̄0 ∥2 + ∥V̄0 ∥2 }) =   E exp(CT h2 ⟨ej , X̄0 ⟩2 ) E exp(CT h2 ⟨ej , V̄0 ⟩2 ) < ∞
                                                     j=1
                      √
provided that h ≲ 1/ T . Also, by the Cauchy–Schwarz inequality, we can give a crude bound:
writing τ (t) = (exp(2t) − 1)/2,

                   E exp CT h2 sup exp(−2t) ∥B̃τ (t) ∥2
                                            t∈[0,T ]
                                     h                                      i1/2
                                   ≤ E exp 2CT h2 sup exp(−2t) ∥B̃τ (t) ∥2
                                                           t∈[0,1]
                                          h                                       i1/2
                                         × E exp 2CT h2 sup exp(−2t) ∥B̃τ (t) ∥2
                                                                   t∈[1,T ]
where, by standard estimates on the supremum   √ of Brownian motion (see, e.g., Chewi et al., 2021b,
Lemma 23), the first factor is finite if h ≲ 1/ T (again using independence across the dimensions).
For the second factor, if we split the sum according to exp(−2t) ≍ 2k and use Hölder’s inequality,

                 E exp CT h2 sup exp(−2t) ∥B̃τ (t) ∥2
                                          t∈[1,T ]
                                   K h
                                   Y                                                                    i1/K
                               ≤         E exp CKT h2               sup         exp(−2t) ∥B̃τ (t) ∥2
                                   k=1                        2k ≤t≤2k+1

where K = O(T ). Then,

                                E exp CT 2 h2           sup         exp(−2t) ∥B̃τ (t) ∥2
                                                     2k ≤t≤2k+1

                                      ≤ E exp CT 2 h2 2−k                 sup      ∥B̃τ (t) ∥2 < ∞ ,
                                                                        1≤t≤2k+1
provided h ≲ 1/T , where we again use Chewi et al. (2021b, Lemma 23) and split across the
coordinates. The Cauchy–Schwarz inequality then implies

                        E exp CT h2 sup (∥X̄s ∥2 + ∥V̄s ∥2 ) < ∞ .
                                                       s∈[0,T ]

For the second term, by independence of the increments,
             N
             X −1
 E exp Ch                sup       ∥BT −kh − Bs ∥2
                k=0 s∈[T −(k+1)h,T −kh]
             N
             Y −1                                                            h                     iN
         =          E exp Ch                sup             ∥BT −kh − Bs ∥2 = E exp Ch sup ∥Bs ∥2     .
             k=0                    s∈[T −(k+1)h,T −kh]                                                  s∈[0,h]

By Chewi et al. (2021b, Lemma 23), this quantity is finite if h ≲ 1, which completes the proof.


                                                                   26
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


D    D ERIVATION OF THE SCORE MATCHING OBJECTIVE

In this section, we present a self-contained derivation of the score matching objective (10) for the
reader’s convenience. See also Hyvärinen (2005); Vincent (2011); Song & Ermon (2019).
Recall that the problem is to solve
                                    minimize       Eqt [∥st − ∇ ln qt ∥2 ] .
                                       st ∈F

This objective cannot be evaluated, even if we replace the expectation over qt with an empirical
average over samples from qt . The trick is to use an integration by parts identity to reformulate the
objective. Here, C will denote any constant that does not depend on the optimization variable st .
Expanding the square,
                        Eqt [∥st − ∇ ln qt ∥2 ] = Eqt [∥st ∥2 − 2 ⟨st , ∇ ln qt ⟩] + C .
We can rewrite the second term using integration by parts:
    Z                       Z                  Z
       ⟨st , ∇ ln qt ⟩ dqt = ⟨st , ∇qt ⟩ = − (div st ) dqt
                              ZZ                         p
                                   (div st ) exp(−t) x0 + 1 − exp(−2t) zt dq(x0 ) dγ d (zt ) ,

                           =−

where γ d = normal(0, Id ) and we used the explicit form of the law of the OU process at time t.
Recall the Gaussian integration by parts identity: for any vector field v : Rd → Rd ,
                               Z                 Z
                                 (div v) dγ d = ⟨x, v(x)⟩ dγ d (x) .

Applying this identity,
              Z                                               Z
                                                   1
                ⟨st , ∇ ln qt ⟩ dqt = − p                         ⟨zt , st (xt )⟩ dq(x0 ) dγ d (zt )
                                               1 − exp(−2t)
                         p
where xt = exp(−t) x0 +     1 − exp(−2t) zt . Substituting this in,
                                    h                     2                         i
         Eqt [∥st − ∇ ln qt ∥2 ] = E ∥st (Xt )∥2 + p                 ⟨Zt , st (Xt )⟩ + C
                                                     1 − exp(−2t)
                                    h                  1              2i
                                 = E s(Xt ) + p                   Zt     +C,
                                                  1 − exp(−2t)
                                                                       p
where X0 ∼ q and Zt ∼ γ d are independent, and Xt := exp(−t) X0 + 1 − exp(−2t) Zt .


E    D EFERRED PROOFS

Lemma 21. Suppose that supp q ⊆ B(0, R) where R ≥√1, and let qt denote         √ the law√of the OU
process at time t, started at q. Let ε > 0 be such that ε ≪ d and set t ≍ ε2 /( d (R ∨ d)). Then,

      1. W2 (qt , q) ≤ ε.
      2. qt satisfies
                                                            √              √     3
                                                       d        d (R ∨         d)
                                           KL(qt ∥ γ ) ≲                             .
                                                                    ε2

      3. For every t′ ≥ t, qt′ satisfies Assumption 1 with
                                                                  √      2
                                                   dR2 (R ∨           d)
                                                L≲                           .
                                                         ε4

                                                       27
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023



                                                                             p
Proof.        1. For the OU process (1), we have X̄t := exp(−t) X̄0 + 1 − exp(−2t) Z, where
         Z ∼ normal(0, Id ) is independent of X̄0 . Hence, for t ≲ 1,
                                                         p                        2
                 W22 (q, qt ) ≤ E 1 − exp(−t) X̄0 + 1 − exp(−2t) Z

                                              2
                              = 1 − exp(−t) E[∥X̄0 ∥2 ] + 1 − exp(−2t) d ≲ R2 t2 + dt .


                                                                                         √
         We now take t ≲√min{ε/R,  √  ε2 /d} to ensure that W22 (q, qt ) ≤ ε2 . Since ε ≪ d, it suffices
         to take t ≍ ε2 /( d (R ∨ d)).
     2. For this, we use the short-time regularization result in Otto & Villani (2001, Corollary 2),
        which implies that
                                                                                √        √ 3
                          d    W22 (q, γ d )   W22 (q, δ0 ) + W22 (γ d , δ0 )     d (R ∨ d)
                KL(qt ∥ γ ) ≤                ≲                                ≲              .
                                    4t                       t                        ε2

     3. Using Mikulincer & Shenfeld (2022, Lemma 4), along the OU process,
                     1             exp(−2t) R2                              1
                            Id −                 Id ≼ −∇2 ln qt (x) ≼              Id .
               1 − exp(−2t)      (1 − exp(−2t))2                      1 − exp(−2t)
         With our choice of t, it implies
                                                                                              √    2
                                    1         exp(−2t′ ) R2    1 R2   dR2 (R ∨                    d)
           ∥∇2 ln qt′ ∥op ≲              ′
                                           ∨              ′ 2
                                                              ≲ ∨ 2 ≲                                  .
                              1 − exp(−2t ) (1 − exp(−2t ))    t  t         ε4


                                                  28
