Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


ACHIEVING S UB - LINEAR R EGRET IN I NFINITE H ORI -
ZON AVERAGE R EWARD C ONSTRAINED MDP WITH
L INEAR F UNCTION A PPROXIMATION
 Arnob Ghosh                                                     Xingyu Zhou
 Electrical and Computer Engineering                             Electrical and Computer Engineering
 The Ohio State University                                       Wayne State University
 ghosh.244@osu.edu                                               xingyu.zhou@wayne.edu

 Ness Shroff
 Electrical and Computer Engineering
 The Ohio State University
 shroff.11@osu.edu

                                              A BSTRACT

         We study the infinite horizon average reward constrained Markov Decision Process
         (CMDP). In contrast to existing works on model-based, finite state space, we
         consider the model-free linear CMDP вҲҡ     setup. We first propose a computationally
         inefficient algorithm and show that OМғ( d3 T ) regret and constraint violation can
         be achieved, in which T is the number of interactions, and d is the dimension of
         the feature mapping. We also propose an efficient variant based on the primal-
         dual adaptation of the LSVI-UCB algorithm and show that OМғ((dT )3/4 ) regret and
         constraint violation can be achieved. This improves the known regret bound of
         OМғ(T 5/6 ) for the finite state-space model-free constrained RL which was obtained
         under a stronger assumption compared to ours. We also develop an efficient
         policy-based algorithm via вҲҡ    novel adaptation of the MDP-EXP2 algorithm to the
         primal-dual set up with OМғ( T ) regret and even zero constraint violation bound
         under a stronger set of assumptions.


1    I NTRODUCTION

In many standard applications of Reinforcement learning (RL) (e.g., autonomous vehicles), the
agent needs to satisfy certain constraints (e.g., safety constraint, fairness). These problems can be
formulated as constrained Markov Decision process (CMDP) such that the agent needs to ensure that
average utility (cost, resp.) exceeds a certain threshold (is below a threshold, resp.).
While CMDP in the finite state-space has been studied, those studies can not be extended to the large
state space. RL with value function approximation has demonstrated empirical success for large-scale
RL application using the deep neural networks. However, theoretical understandings of constrained
RL with value function approximation is quite limited. Recently, Ghosh et al. (2022) has made some
progress towards the understanding of the constrained RL for linear MDP under episodic setting. In
particular,
   вҲҡ        Ghosh et al. (2022) developed a primal-dual adaptation of the LSVI-UCB and showed
OМғ( d3 T ) regret and violation where d is the dimension of the feature space and T is the number of
interactions. Importantly, the above bounds are independent of the cardinality of state-space.
However, infinite-horizon model fits well compared to the finite horizon setting for many real-world
applications (e.g., stock-market investment, routing decisions). Compared to the discounted-reward
model, maximizing the long-term average reward under the long-term average utility also has its
advantage in the sense that the transient behavior of the learner does not really matter for the latter case
(Wei et al., 2020). Recently, model-based RL algorithm for infinite-horizon average reward CMDP
has been proposed (Chen et al., 2022). However, it considers tabular setup. Further, the model-based
approach requires large memory to store the model parameters. It is also hard (computationally) to
extend model-based approaches for infinite state-space such as linear MDP (Wei et al., 2020).


                                                     1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Model-free RL algorithm is more popular because of the ease of implementation, and being computa-
tional, and storage efficient particularly for the large state space. However, model-free learning for
the infinite horizon average reward setup is even more challenging. For example, it is still
                                                                                           вҲҡunknown
whether it is possible to achieve a computationally efficient model-free algorithm with OМғ( T ) regret
even under the unconstrained tabular setup (Wei et al., 2020) for a weakly communicating MDP.
To the best of our knowledge, Wei et al. (2022) is the only paper to study model-free algorithms
for CMDPs in the infinite horizon average reward setup. In particular, they consider the finite-state
tabular setting and the regret scales polynomially with the number of states. Thus, the result would
not be useful for large-scale RL applications where the number of states could even be infinite. To
summarize, little is known for the performance guarantee of model-free algorithms in CMDPs beyond
tabular settings in the infinite-horizon average reward setting, even in the case of linear CMDP.
Motivated by this, we are interested in the following question:
 Can we achieve provably sample-efficient and model-free exploration for CMDPs beyond tabular
                    settings for the infinite horizon average reward setting?
Contribution. To answer the above question, we consider CMDP with linear function approximation,
where the transition dynamics, the utility function, and the reward function can be represented as a
linear function of some known feature mapping. Our main contributions are as follows.
                                                                   вҲҡ
вҖў We propose an algorithm (Algorithm 1) which achieves OМғ( d3 T ) regret and constraint violation
   bounds with a high probability when the optimal policy      вҲҡ     belongs to a smooth function class
   (Definition 1). This is the first result that shows that OМғ( T ) regret and violation are achievable for
   linear CMDP in the infinite-horizon regime using model-free RL. Achieving uniform concentration
   bound for individual value function turns out to be challenging and we need to rely on the
   smoothness of the policy, unlike the unconstrained case. The algorithm relies on an optimizer
   that returns the parameters corresponding to the state-action bias function by solving a contained
   optimization problem.
вҖў We also propose an efficient variant and show that OМғ((dT )3/4 ) regret and violation bound can
  be achieved. This is the first result that provides sub-linear regret and violation guarantee under
  only Assumption 1 for linear CMDP using a computationally efficient algorithm. The idea is to
  consider a finite-horizon episodic setup by dividing the entire time-horizon T into multiple episodes
  T /H where each episode consists of H steps. We then invoke the primal-dual adaptation of the
  LSVI-UCB algorithm proposed in Ghosh et al. (2022) to learn the good policy for the finite-horizon
  setting by carefully crafting the constraint for the episodic case. Finally, we bound the gap between
  the infinite-horizon average and the finite-horizon result to obtain the final result.
                                                                                             вҲҡ
вҖў We alsoвҲҡpropose an algorithm which can be implemented efficiently and achieves OМғ( T ) regret
  and OМғ( T ) constraint violation under a stronger set of assumptions (similar to the ones made
  in Wei et al. (2021a) for the unconstrained setup). We, further, show that one can achieve zero
  constraint violation for large enough (still, finite) T while maintaining the same order on regret.
вҖў We attain our bounds without estimating the unknown transition model or requiring a simulator,
  and they depend on the state-space only through the dimension of the feature mapping. To the best
  of our knowledge, these sub-linear bounds are the first results for model-free (or, model-based)
  online RL algorithms for infinite-horizon average reward CMDPs with function approximations.
  Wei et al. (2022) proposes a model-free algorithm in the tabular setting which achieves OМғ(T 5/6 )
  regret. Since linear MDP contains tabular setting our result improves the existing results. Further,
  we show that we can achieve zero constraint violation by maintaining the same order on regret
  under the same set of Assumptions of Wei et al. (2022).
We relegate Related Work to Appendix A.

2    P RELIMINARIES
We consider an infinite horizon constrained MDP, denoted by (S, A, P, r, g) where S is the state
space, A is the action space, P is transition probability measures, r, and g are reward and utility
functions respectively. We assume that S is a measurable space with possibly infinite number of
elements, and A is a finite action set. P(В·|x, a) is the transition probability kernel which denotes the
probability to reach Ra state when action a is taken at state x. We also denote P as p to simplify the
notation. p satisfies X p(dxвҖІ |x, a) = 1 (following integral notation from HernГЎndez-Lerma (2012))


                                                    2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


r : S Г— A вҶ’ [0, 1], and g : S Г— A вҶ’ [0, 1] and are assumed to be deterministic. We can readily
extend to settings when r and g are random.
The process starts with the state x1 . Then at each step t вҲҲ [T ], the agent observes state xt вҲҲ S, picks
an action at вҲҲ A, receives a reward r(xt , at ), and a utility g(xt , at ). The MDP evolves to xt+1 that
is drawn from P(В·|xt , at ). In this paper, we consider the challenging scenario where the agent only
observes the bandit information r(xt , at ) and g(xt , at ) at the visited state-action pair (xt , at ). The
policy-space of an agent is вҲҶ(A|S); {{ПҖt (В·|В·)} : ПҖt (В·|x) вҲҲ вҲҶ(A), вҲҖx вҲҲ S, and t вҲҲ T }. Here вҲҶ(A)
is the probability simplex over the action space. For any xt вҲҲ S , ПҖt (at |xt ) denotes the probability
that the action at вҲҲ A is taken at step t when the state is xt . We also denote the space of stationary
policy as вҲҶs (A|S) where the policy ПҖ(В·|xt ) is independent of time t.
Let JrПҖ (x) and JgПҖ (x) denote the expected value of the average reward and average utility respectively
starting from state x when the agent selects action using the stationary policy ПҖ вҲҲ вҲҶs (A|S)
                                                  пЈ®                      пЈ№
                                                      T
                                             1
                                               EПҖ пЈ° вӢ„(xi , ai )|x1 = xпЈ» ,
                                                    X
                              ПҖ
                            JвӢ„ (x) = lim                                                             (1)
                                      T вҶ’вҲһ T
                                                    i=1

for вӢ„ = r, g, where E is taken with respect to the policy ПҖ and the transition probability kernel P.
From Puterman (2014), there exists a state-action bias function q satisfying the BellmanвҖҷs  equation for
вӢ„ = r, g: qвӢ„ПҖ (x, a) + JвӢ„ПҖ (x) = вӢ„(x, a) + ExвҖІ вҲјp(В·|x,a) [vвӢ„ПҖ (xвҖІ )] where vвӢ„ПҖ (x) = a ПҖ(a|x)qвӢ„ (x, a) =
                                                                                    P
вҹЁПҖ(В·|x), qвӢ„ (x, В·)вҹ©A . q ПҖ and v ПҖ are analogue to the Q-function and value function respectively for
finite-horizon and discounted infinite horizon scenario.
The Problem: We are interested in solving the following problem
                               maximizeПҖ JrПҖ (x) subject to JgПҖ (x) вүҘ b                                 (2)
Let ПҖ вҲ— be an optimal stationary solution of the above problem. Note that both JrПҖ and JgПҖ depend
on the initial state x. Also note that our approach can be extended to multiple constraints, and the
constraints of the form JgПҖ (x) вүӨ b.
Unlike the episodic set-up where the sub-linear regret is possible, it is known that even in the
unconstrained set-up, the necessary condition for sub-linear regret is that the optimal policy has a
long-term average reward and utility that are independent of the initial state (Bartlett and Tewari,
2012). Hence, we assume the following:
Assumption 1. There exists JrвҲ— , JgвҲ— and a stationary ПҖ вҲ— such that they are solution of (2) and the
followings hold for all вӢ„ = r, g, x вҲҲ S, and a вҲҲ A

          JвӢ„вҲ— + qвӢ„вҲ— (x, a) = вӢ„(x, a) + ExвҖІ вҲјP(В·|x,a) [vвӢ„вҲ— (xвҖІ )], vвӢ„вҲ— (x) =
                                                                            X
                                                                              ПҖ вҲ— (a|x)qвӢ„вҲ— (x, a) (3)
                                                                           a


We denote JrвҲ— as the optimal gain. We also denote the span of vвӢ„вҲ— as sp(vвӢ„вҲ— ) = sups vвӢ„вҲ— (s) вҲ’ inf s vвӢ„вҲ— (s)
for вӢ„ = r, g. For a finite state and action space (a.k.a. tabular case), the weakly communicating
MDP is the broadest class to study the regret minimization in the literature, and is known to satisfy
Assumption 1. Assumption 1 is adaptation of the BellmanвҖҷs optimality equation for unconstrained
version (Wei et al., 2021a) in the CMDP. Note that unlike the unconstrained case, here the optimal
policy might not be greedy with respect to qr as the greedy policy might not be feasible.
BellmanвҖҷs equation with state-independent average reward and average utility: A stationary
policy ПҖ satisfies the BellmanвҖҷs equation with state-independent average reward and average utility if
there exists measurable functions vвӢ„ПҖ : S вҶ’ R, qвӢ„ПҖ : S Г— A вҶ’ R such that the following holds for all
x вҲҲ S, вӢ„ = r, g, and a вҲҲ A

           JвӢ„ПҖ + qвӢ„ПҖ (x, a) = вӢ„(x, a) + ExвҖІ вҲјP(В·|x,a) [vвӢ„ПҖ (xвҖІ )], vвӢ„ПҖ (x) =
                                                                             X
                                                                               ПҖ(a|x)qвӢ„ПҖ (x, a),  (4)
                                                                            a


Wei et al. (2022) assumes that any stationary policy (not only the optimal policy) satisfies the
BellmanвҖҷs equation with state-independent average reward and average utility. In Section 3 we
consider the setup where Assumption 1 is satisfied which is weaker compared to Wei et al. (2022). In
Section 4 we consider a set of assumptions which entails that every stationary policy satisfies (4).


                                                     3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Learning Metric: The agent is unaware of the underlying environment, and seeks to learn the optimal
policy. Hence, the agent can take action according to a non-stationary policy ПҖt at a state xt .
We are interested in minimizing the following metrics
                          T
                          X                                                         T
                                                                                    X
           Regret(T ) =     (JrвҲ— вҲ’ r(xt , at )),         Violation(T ) = (T b вҲ’           g(xt , at )).   (5)
                           t=1                                                      t=1
The regret denotes the difference between the total reward obtained by best stationary policy and the
reward obtained by the learner. The violation denotes how far the total utility achieved by the learner
compared to the T b. Similar metrics are employed in model-based infinite horizon average reward
(Chen et al., 2022) and in the finite horizon setup (Ding et al., 2021).
Linear Function Approximation. To handle a possible large number of states, we consider the
following linear MDPs.
Assumption 2. The CMDP is a linear MDP with feature map П• : S Г— A вҶ’ Rd , if there exists d
unknown signed measures Вө = {Вө1 , . . . , Вөd } over S such that for any (x, a, xвҖІ ) вҲҲ S Г— A Г— S,
                                       P(xвҖІ |x, a) = вҹЁП•(x, a), Вө(xвҖІ )вҹ©                                    (6)
and there exists vector Оёr , Оёg вҲҲ Rd such that for any (x, a) вҲҲ S Г— A,
                          r(x, a) = вҹЁП•(x, a), Оёr вҹ© g(x, a) = вҹЁП•(x, a), Оёg вҹ©
Assumption 2 adapts the definition of linear MDP in Jin et al. (2020) to the constrained case. By
the above definition, the transition model, the reward, and the utility functions are linear in terms
of feature map П•. We remark that despite being linear, P(В·|x, a) can still have infinite degrees of
freedom since Вө(В·) is unknown. Note that tabular MDP is part of linear MDP (Jin et al., 2020).
Similar Constrained Linear MDP model is also considered in Ghosh et al. (2022) (for episodic setup).
Note that Ding et al. (2021); Zhou et al. (2021) studied another related concept known as linear
kernel MDP in episodic setup. In the linear kernel MDP, the transition probability is given by
P(xвҖІ |x, a) = вҹЁПҲ(xвҖІ , x, a), Оёвҹ©. In general, linear MDP and linear kernel MDPs are two different
classes of MDP (Zhou et al., 2021).
Under linear CMDP, we can represent the qвӢ„вҲ— function as a linear in the feature space.
                                                                                   вҲ—    d
Lemma 1 (Wei et al. (2021a)). Under Assumptions 1 and 2, there exists
 вҲ—                 T вҲ—                                               вҲ—
                                                                       вҲҡ a fixed wвӢ„ вҲ—вҲҲ R such that
qвӢ„ (x, a) = П•(x, a) wвӢ„ for вӢ„ = r, g and all (x, a) вҲҲ S Г— A with ||wвӢ„ || d(2 + sp(vвӢ„ )).

3     O PTIMISM - BASED A LGORITHMS
3.1   F IXED - POINT O PTIMIZATION WITH O PTIMISM
                                                                                 вҲҡ
                                                                               вҲ—     3
We presentвҲҡ our first algorithm (Algorithm 1) which achieves OМғ(sp(vr ) d T ) regret      вҲҡ      and
        вҲ—
O(sp(vg ) d3 T ) constraint violation. Note that for the unconstrained tabular version, в„Ұ( T ) is the
lower bound for regret (Auer et al., 2008). Hence, our obtained bound is optimal in terms of regret
(nearly). Further, we show that we can attain zero violation while maintaining the same order in
regret with an additional assumption (Remark 1). In the following we describe our Algorithm and
point out the key modifications we have made over the unconstrained version.
From Lemma 1 and (3), we have                                  Z
                        П•(x, a)  T
                                     wвӢ„вҲ— = вӢ„(x, a) вҲ’ JвӢ„вҲ— +   vвӢ„вҲ— (xвҖІ )p(dxвҖІ |x, a)
                                                           X
Hence, the natural idea is to build an estimator wвӢ„,t for wвӢ„вҲ— from the data. However, we do not know
JвӢ„вҲ— , p, r, and g. Further, we also need to find ПҖ in order to obtain vвӢ„вҲ— (cf.(3)). In the following, we
describe how we address those challenges. First, in order to handle unknown p, and вӢ„, we use the
sample points till time t to estimate wвӢ„,t . In particular, if for a moment, if we assume JвӢ„вҲ— and ПҖ are
known then we can fit wвӢ„,t such that П•(x, a)T wвӢ„,t вүҲ вӢ„(xП„ , aП„ ) вҲ’ JвӢ„вҲ— + vвӢ„,t (xП„ +1 ). Then solving a
regularized least square problem with regularization term О»||wвӢ„,t ||2 gives a natural estimate of wвӢ„,t вҖ“
                                       tвҲ’1
                                       X
                    wвӢ„,t = (Оӣt )вҲ’1           (П•(xП„ , aП„ )(вӢ„(xП„ , aП„ ) вҲ’ JвӢ„вҲ— + vвӢ„,t (xП„ +1 ))              (7)
                                       П„ =1



                                                         4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023



                    P
where Оӣt = О»I +        П„ <t П•(xП„ , aП„ )П•(xП„ , aП„ ) is the empirical co-variance matrix.

Now, we replace vвӢ„,t (xП„ +1 ) with the expression vвӢ„,t (xП„ +1 ) = вҹЁПҖ(В·|xП„ +1 ), qвӢ„,t (xП„ +1 , В·)вҹ©A which
gives rise a fixed-point equation as qвӢ„,t (В·, В·) = П•(В·, В·)T wвӢ„,t . In order to incorporate uncertainty, we
introduce a slack variable bвӢ„,t with a bounded quadratic form ||bвӢ„,t ||Оӣt вүӨ ОІвӢ„ (ОІвӢ„ is a parameter for
вӢ„ = r, g). It will ensure that wвӢ„вҲ— is contained within wвӢ„,t + bвӢ„,t with high-probability. Now, we
discuss how we handle the unknown JвӢ„вҲ— and ПҖ.
We introduce JвӢ„,t and ПҖt as variables and design an optimization problem P1 which maximizes Jr,t
with the constraint Jg,t вүҘ b. We also restrict ПҖ to a class of soft-max policy О  (Definition 1) and
search for ПҖt over О .
Definition 1. We define the policy class as О  as the collection of soft-max policies О  = {ПҖ(В·|В·) вҲқ
exp(П•(В·, В·)T О¶), О¶ вҲҲ Rd , ||О¶||вүӨ L}.

We replace JвӢ„вҲ— in (7) with JвӢ„,t . Further, we add the slack variable bвӢ„,t to wвӢ„,t in (7) to obtain (8) in
Algorithm 1. This has similarity with the вҖңoptimism under uncertaintyвҖқ as the optimal (wвӢ„вҲ— , bвҲ—вӢ„ , JвӢ„вҲ— , ПҖ вҲ— )
for вӢ„ = r, g are feasible for the optimization problem with high probability (Lemma 2) if ПҖ вҲ— вҲҲ О .
Hence, it naturally entails that Jr,t вүҘ JrвҲ— . Wei et al. (2021a) also proposed an optimization problem
with fixed-point equation (Algorithm 1) to obtain wrвҲ— in the unconstrained setup. In the following, we
point out the main differences with the Algorithm 1 proposed in Wei et al. (2021a) and describe the
necessity of the introduction of policy space О .
First, we have an additional constraint where Jg,t вүҘ b since we consider CMDP. Second and more
importantly, in the unconstrained case (Wei et al., 2021a) the policy was greedy with respect to qr .
Since the greedy policy may not be feasible, we need to search over policy in the CMDP. However,
we restrict the policy to function class О . The main reason for introduction to О  is that the uniform
concentration bound (a key step for proving both regret and violation for model-free approach) for
value function class vвӢ„ can not be achieved unless the policy has smooth properties such as Lipschitz
continuous. In particular, we need to show that log Пө covering number for the class of vвӢ„ scales at
most O(log(T )). For the unconstrained case, we only need to obtain Пө-covering number for vr and
with greedy policy, Пө-covering number for the class of q-function was enough. However, we need to
obtain Пө-covering number for both vr and vg , hence, such a trick would not hold. In order to obtain
Пө-covering number for vвӢ„ , we use the smoothness of soft-max to show that log Пө-covering number for
the class of value function scales at most O(log(T )) (Lemma 7). In Appendix F.6 our analysis can
be extended to the class of policies which satisfy Lemma 8.
Also note that we update the parameters when the determinant of Оӣt doubles compared to ОӣstвҲ’1
where stвҲ’1 is the time step with the most recent update before the time t. This can happen only at
most O(d log T ) times. Similar to Wei et al. (2021a), our algorithm also does not allow any efficient
implementation due to the complicated nature of the optimization problem. However, we can show
that with high probability, the optimal solution and parameters вҲҡ are feasible of P1 by the careful choice
of the parameter ОІвӢ„ , and using the fact that ||wвӢ„вҲ— ||вүӨ sp(vвӢ„вҲ— ) d.
Lemma 2. With probability 1 вҲ’ 2Оҙ, Algorithm 1 ensures that Jr,t вүҘ JrвҲ— if ПҖ вҲ— вҲҲ О .

Using Lemma 2 we obtain the regret and violation bound for Algorithm 1 in the following
Theorem 1. With probability 1 вҲ’ 5Оҙ, the regret and violation bounds are
                                     вҲҡ                                            вҲҡ
    Regret(T ) вүӨ O(sp(vrвҲ— ) log(T /Оҙ) d3 T ), Violation(T ) вүӨ O(sp(vgвҲ— ) log(T /Оҙ) d3 T )

if the optimal policy ПҖ вҲ— вҲҲ О .
                                             вҲҡ
This is the first result which shows that OМғ( T ) regret and violation is achievable for infinite horizon
average reward linear вҲҡ CMDP under Assumption 1 using model-free approach. Recently, Chen et al.
(2022) obtained OМғ( T ) regret and violation for model-based tabular setup for weakly communicating
MDP. The proposed algorithm (Algorithm 4) in Chen et al. (2022) is also computationally inefficient.
Chen et al. (2022) also requires the knowledge of sp(vвӢ„вҲ— ) for вӢ„ = r, g.
                                                                 вҲҡ
For the unconstrained MDP, the lower bound of regret is в„Ұ( T ) (proved for tabular setup, (Auer
et al., 2008)). Hence, the regret order is optimal with respect to T . We also show that it is possible to
zero violation for large T under an additional set of Assumption (Remark 1).

                                                      5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Algorithm 1 Model Free Fixed-point Algorithm for Long-term Average Reward and Constraint
                                           p
 1: Initialization: ОІвӢ„ = 2d(2 + sp(vвӢ„вҲ— )) log(32Ld(2 + sp(vвӢ„вҲ— ))T /Оҙ) for вӢ„ = r, g.
 2: for t = 1, . . . , T do
 3:   if t = 1 or det(Оӣt ) вүҘ 2ОӣstвҲ’1 then
 4:      Set st = t.
 5:      Obtain wвӢ„,t for вӢ„ = r, g as the solution of the following optimization problem P1 :
                             max                      Jr,t
             wr,t ,wg,t ,br,t ,bg,t ,ПҖt ,Jr,t ,Jg,t
                                        tвҲ’1
                                        X
             s.t. wвӢ„,t = (Оӣt )вҲ’1              (П•(xП„ , aП„ )(вӢ„(xП„ , aП„ ) вҲ’ JвӢ„,t + vвӢ„,t (xП„ +1 )) + bj,t ), вӢ„ = r, g   (8)
                                        П„ =1
             Jg,t вүҘ b,     qвӢ„,t (x, a) = П•(x, a)T wвӢ„,t , vвӢ„,t (x) = вҹЁПҖt , qвӢ„,t вҹ©,         ПҖt вҲҲ О 
                                                            вҲҡ
             ||bвӢ„,t ||ОӣвҲ’1 вүӨ ОІвӢ„ , ||wвӢ„,t ||вүӨ (2 + sp(vвӢ„вҲ— )) d
                       t


 6:     Take action at вҲј ПҖt (В·|xt ) and observe xt+1 .
 7:     Update Оӣt+1 = Оӣt + П•(xt , at )П•(xt , at )T
3.2     A LGORITHM BASED ON E PISODIC P RIMAL -D UAL A LGORITHM

We now present another optimism-based algorithm which can be implemented efficiently albeit with
a sub-optimal regret and violation guarantee under the SlaterвҖҷs condition (Assumption 3).
Assumption 3. We assume the following, there exists ПҖМ„, v ПҖМ„ , q ПҖМ„ , JrПҖМ„ , and JgПҖМ„ such that (4) is satisfied;
and JgПҖМ„ вүҘ b + Оі with Оі > 0.

The above assumption states that there exists a stationary policy with strict feasibility. Strict feasibility
assumption is common both in the infinite horizon average reward (Wei et al., 2022; Chen et al.,
2022) and finite horizon episodic CMDP set up (Efroni et al., 2020; Ding et al., 2021). We only need
to know Оі rather than the strictly feasible policy.
In algorithm 1 the inefficiency arises since we do not know how to efficiently solve a fixed-point
equation and find the policy to solve the optimization problem. We show that we eliminate the above
inefficiencies by considering a finite-horizon problem. In particular, we divide the entire horizon T
into T /H episodes with H rounds and employ a finite-horizon primal dual optimistic LSVI-based
algorithm proposed in Ghosh et al. (2022). However, since the original problem is still infinite horizon
we need to bound the gap because of the finite-horizon truncation which we describe in the following.

3.2.1    O UR A PPROACH
We replace the time index t with the combination of the episode index k and the step index h,
t = (k вҲ’ 1)H + h. The k-th episode starts at time (k вҲ’ 1)H + 1. The agent chooses the policy ПҖhk
for the step h вҲҲ [H] at episode k вҲҲ [K]. Note that for finite-horizon setting, the policy needs not to
be stationary even though the optimal policy for the infinite horizon problem is stationary. As we
mentioned, the idea is here to obtain policy with good performance guarantee in the episodic setup
and then bound gap between the infinite horizon and episodic setup.
We now introduce the notations specific to the episodic setting.
               пЈ®                       пЈ№                         пЈ®                             пЈ№
                  H                                                H
      (x) = EПҖ пЈ°     вӢ„(xi , ai )|xh = xпЈ» , QПҖвӢ„,h (x, a) = EПҖ пЈ°
                 X                                                X
   ПҖ
 VвӢ„,h                                                                вӢ„(xi , ai )|xh = x, ah = aпЈ» .
                       i=h                                                      i=h

Note that since JgПҖ вүҘ b, the natural choice of the constraint in the episodic CMDP would be
  ПҖ
Vg,1  вүҘ Hb. However, in order to compare the best policy in the episodic setup with the optimal
policy in the infinite horizon setup we need to ensure that the optimal stationary policy for the infinite
horizon problem is feasible in the episodic setup. If we have Vg,1 ПҖ
                                                                      вүҘ Hb вҲ’ sp(vgвҲ— ) we can conclude
                                     вҲ—
that the optimal stationary policy ПҖ is also feasible for the episodic setup using the following lemma:
Lemma 3. If JвӢ„ПҖ (s) = JвӢ„ПҖ for вӢ„ = r, g, and any state s, stationary policy ПҖ, then
                                             ПҖ
                                          |VвӢ„,h вҲ’ (H вҲ’ h + 1)JвӢ„ПҖ |вүӨ sp(vвӢ„ПҖ )                                        (9)


                                                              6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Further, in order to apply the primal-dual algorithm we also need to show that there exists a strictly
feasible policy for the episodic setup. Again using Lemma 3 and from Assumption 3, we conclude
                                                                         ПҖ
that there exists a strictly feasible policy for the episodic setup if Vg,1 вүҘ Hb + Оі вҲ’ sp(vgПҖМ„ ). Thus, we
consider the following constraint Vg,1 вүҘ Hb вҲ’ Оә where Оә = max{sp(vgвҲ— ), sp(vgПҖМ„ ) вҲ’ Оі}.
                                        ПҖ


Lagrangian: We consider the composite value function as VhПҖ,Y (x) = Vr,h
                                                                      ПҖ            ПҖ
                                                                         (x) + Y Vg,h (x).
The following is proved in Ding et al. (2021).
                                                                                         вҲ—
                                                                                     VrПҖМғ (x1 ) вҲ’ VrПҖМ„ (x1 )   H
Lemma 4 (Boundedness of Y вҲ— ). The optimal dual-variable Y вҲ— вүӨ                                               вүӨ
                                                                                              HОі               HОі
where ПҖМ„ вҲ— is the optimal solution of the episodic CMDP.
Definition 2. We set Оҫ = 2/Оі. Оҫ is used to truncate the dual variable.

3.2.2   A LGORITHM
We now describe our proposed Algorithm 2 (Appendix D). First, note that the finite-horizon state-
action value function for linear MDP can be represented as the following linear form
                                                           Z
                QПҖвӢ„,h (x, a) = П•(x, a)T wвӢ„,h
                                         ПҖ
                                             = вӢ„h (x, a) +   VвӢ„,h+1 (xвҖІ )p(dxвҖІ |x, a)       (10)
                                                                       X
                                                 k      k
Hence, the natural estimates for the parameters wr,h , wg,h are obtained by solving the following
regularized least square problem
                         kвҲ’1
                         XX
      k
     wвӢ„,h вҶҗ arg min                  [вӢ„(xП„hвҖІ , aП„hвҖІ ) + VвӢ„,h+1
                                                          k
                                                               (xП„hвҖІ +1 ) вҲ’ wT П•(xП„hвҖІ , aП„hвҖІ )]2 + О»||w||22 ,   (11)
                  wвҲҲRd
                         П„ =1   hвҖІ

QkвӢ„,h (x, a) = вҹЁwвӢ„,h
                 k
                     , П•(x, a)вҹ© + ОІ||П•(x, a)||ОӣвҲ’1 where ОІ||П•(x, a)||ОӣвҲ’1 is the bonus term. Since we
                                               k                      k
are considering a finite-horizon, hence, we can recursively set VвӢ„,h+1 starting from VвӢ„,H+1 = 0.
Thus, we do not need to solve the fixed-point equation unlike in Algorithm 1. Another difference with
Algorithm 1 is that we introduce a pointwise bonus term for optimism. Finally, we use a primal-dual
adaptation unlike in Algorithm 1.
The policy is based on the soft-max. In particular, at step h, ПҖh,k (a|x) is computed based on the
soft-max policy on the composite Q-function vector {Qkr,h (x, a) + Yk Qkg,h (x, a)}aвҲҲA where Yk is
the lagrangian multiplier. The computation of policy is also efficient unlike in Algorithm 1 as we do
not need to search over the policy space. Note that the greedy policy with respect to the composite
Q-function vector fails to show that log Пө-covering number for the individual value function class is
at most log(T ) (Ghosh et al., 2022). Note that Ghosh et al. (2022) maintains different covariance
matrices at each step h, Оӣkh . But we maintain a single Оӣk for all h since the transition probability and
reward are the same across the steps. The last part (Step 15) of Algorithm 2 includes a dual-update
step. The dual variable increases if the estimated utility value function does not satisfy the constraint.
3.2.3   M AIN R ESULTS
Theorem 2. Under Assumptions 1, 2, and 3, with probability 1 вҲ’ 5Оҙ, the regret and constraint
violations are
                                                                               2(1 + Оҫ)
    Regret(T ) вүӨ O((1 + sp(vrвҲ— ))(dT )3/4 О№),             Violation(T ) вүӨ               OМғ((1 + Оә)(dT )3/4 О№)
                                                                                   Оҫ
where О№ = log(log(|A|)Оҫ2dT /Оҙ).

Unlike in Theorem 1, here, the optimal policy does not need to belong to О . Wei et al. (2022) proved
that the regret bound is OМғ(T 5/6 ) for the model-free RL algorithm in the tabular regime under a much
stronger Assumption compared to ours. Since linear CMDP contains a tabular setup, our approach
improves the upper bound for the tabular case as well. We show that it is possible to achieve zero
violation while maintaining the same order on regret under an additional Assumption (Remark 1).
Note that the regret is also OМғ((dT )3/4 ) for the unconstrained linear MDP (Wei et al., 2021a) for the
efficient implementation variant of the algorithm.


                                                           7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Analysis: The overall regret can be decomposed in
               T /H                          T /H                                T /H                      kH
               X                   вҲ—         X          вҲ—                        X                         X
Regret(T ) =          (HJrвҲ— вҲ’Vr,1
                               ПҖ
                                  (xk1 ))+             ПҖ
                                                    (Vr,1          ПҖk
                                                          (xk1 )вҲ’Vr,1 (xk1 ))+             ПҖk
                                                                                        (Vr,1 (xk1 )вҲ’                r(xt , at ))
               k=1                           k=1                                 k=1                    t=(kвҲ’1)H+1

The third term on the right-hand side can be bounded using the Azuma-Hoeffding inequality. Hence,
we focus on the first two terms of the right-hand side. The second part is exactly the same as the regret
for the episodic scenario. However, there is a subtle difference. We need to show that optimal policy
for the original infinite horizon is also feasible (see Appendix G.1) which we show using    вҲҡ the fact
that we have relaxed the constraint by Оә. We show that  вҲҡ the above is upper bounded   by OМғ(   d3 T H 2 ).
Note that compared to Ghosh et al. (2022), we have H improvement as in our case the transition
probability is independent of the time h unlike in Ghosh et al. (2022).
One may wonder why not set the length H too small. However, since our original problem is
about average-reward over infinite horizon, we need to argue that the best finite-horizon policy also
performs well under the infinite-horizon criteria. The first term characterizes the gap. We show that
the sub-optimality gap to the best finite horizon policy is bounded by T sp(vrвҲ— )/H using Lemma 3.
Hence, if we set too small H, the gap would increase. By setting H = T 1/4 /d3/4 we balance the
upper bounds on the first two terms of the right-hand side. As T increases, H also increases.
Constraint Violation: The violation term can also be decomposed as follows
                        T /H                                                 kH
                        X                  ПҖk              ПҖk
                                                                             X
    Violation(T ) =            (Hb вҲ’ Оә вҲ’ Vg,1 (xk1 )) + (Vg,1 (xk1 ) вҲ’                      g(xt , at )) + (T /H)Оә
                        k=1                                              t=(kвҲ’1)H+1

                                                   вҲҡ
We obtain the upper bound of the first term as OМғ( d3 H 2 T ). The second term can be bounded by
Azuma-Hoeffding inequality. The third term denotes the error incurred due to the introduction of Оә.
We obtain the final constraint violation bound by replacing H with T 1/4 /d3/4 .

4    P OLICY-BASED A LGORITHM
                                                                                          k
Even though Algorithm 2 is computationally efficient, still one needs to compute VвӢ„,h+1       for every
                                                вҲ’1
                                                                                                   вҲҡ
encountered state and needs to evaluate (Оӣk ) . We now show that it is possible to achieve OМғ( T )
regret and constraint violation under a different and relaxed set of assumptions using a computationally
less intensive algorithm. We propose a policy-based algorithm towards this end. First, we state the
assumptions and then we describe the algorithm and the results.
Assumption 4. There exists a constant tmix вүҘ 1 such that for any policy ПҖ, and any distribution
      ОҪ2 вҲҲ вҲҶX over the state-space ||PПҖ ОҪ1 вҲ’ PПҖ ОҪ2 ||T V вүӨ eвҲ’1/tmix ||ОҪ1 вҲ’ ОҪ2 ||T V where PПҖ ОҪ(xвҖІ ) =
ОҪR1 , P
        a ПҖ(a|x)P(x |x, a)dОҪ(x), T V is the total variation distance.
                   вҖІ
  X

Ergodic MDP satisfies the above assumption Hao et al. (2021). With the above assumption, we can
conclude the following, as shown in the unconstrained setup (Wei et al., 2021a)).
Lemma 5. Under Assumption 4, any stationary policy ПҖ satisfies (4).

Hence, under Assumption 4, the gain is constant, and any stationary policy indeed satisfies (4).
Assumption 5. Let О»min (В·) be minimum eigen value of a matrix. There exists Пғ > 0 such that for
any ПҖ, О»min X ( a ПҖ(a|x)П•(x, a)П•(x, a)T )dОҪ ПҖ (x) вүҘ Пғ
            R P


The assumption intuitively guarantees that every policy is explorative in the feature space. similar
assumptions are also made (Wei et al., 2021a; Abbasi-Yadkori et al., 2019) in the unconstrained case.
Similar to Wei et al. (2021a) we can relax this assumption to the setting where the above holds for
one known policy instead of all policies.
Lagrangian: JrПҖ + Y JgПҖ is the Lagrangian for the stationary policy ПҖ where Y is the dual variable.
                                                     вҲ—
                                            вҲ—     JrПҖ (x1 ) вҲ’ JrПҖМ„ (x1 )  1
Under Assumption 3, optimal dual-variable Y вүӨ                            вүӨ вүӨ Оҫ/2.
                                                            Оі             Оі

                                                            8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


4.1   A LGORITHM

We consider a primal-dual adaptation of MDP-EXP2 in Algorithm 3 (Appendix E). The algorithm
proceeds in epochs where each epoch consists of B = OМғ(dtmix /Пғ) steps. Within each epoch, we
collect B/2N trajectories where N = OМғ(tmix ). The update of policy ПҖk for k-th epoch is equivalent
to the online mirror descent (OMD), i.e.,                                1
                ПҖk (В·|В·) = arg maxвҹЁПҖ, qrkвҲ’1 (В·, В·) + YkвҲ’1 qgkвҲ’1 (В·, В·)вҹ© вҲ’ D(ПҖ||ПҖkвҲ’1 )            (12)
                                ПҖ                                        Оұ
where qвӢ„kвҲ’1 (x, a) = (wвӢ„kвҲ’1 )T П•(x, a). We consider a composite q-function which is the sum of the
qr and qg (scaled by the dual-variable). We estimate wвӢ„k from sample average reward Rk,m and
sample average utility Gk,m by utilizing Lemma 5 and the fact that qвӢ„ПҖ is linear in feature space.
Since we consider primal-dual adaptation of MDP-EXP2 in Wei et al. (2021a), we maintain two
different types of sample averages for the utility. Gk,m is used to estimate qgПҖk + N JgПҖk ; on the other
hand, JЛҶk is used to estimate JgПҖk . The dual update is based on the value of JЛҶk . Naturally, the analysis
also differs significantly (see Appendix H.1).
4.2   M AIN R ESULTS

Theorem 3. Under Assumptions 2, 4,5, and 3, Algorithm 2 ensures that with probability 1 вҲ’ 4Оҙ,
                                                                   2(1 + Оҫ)
                                   q                                                q
      Regret(T ) вүӨ (1 + Оҫ)OМғ(1/Пғ t3mix T ), Violation(T ) вүӨ                 OМғ(1/Пғ t3mix T )       (13)
                                 вҲҡ                                     Оҫ
Wei et al. (2021a) shows that OМғ( T ) regret is achieved in the expectation under Assumptions 4, and
5 in the unconstrained
                вҲҡ       setup. We show that even with a high probability, such a regret can be achieved
along with OМғ( T ) of violation. Assumption 2 can be relaxed to the scenarios where qвӢ„ПҖ is linear
(even though the underlyingвҲҡMDP is not linear) similar to unconstrained setup (Assumption 4 in Wei
et al. (2021a)). Hence, OМғ( T ) regret and violation can be achieved for any linear q ПҖ even if the
underlying MDP is not linear.
                            вҲҡ In the model-based tabular CMDP, Chen et al. (2022) shows that the
regret also scales with OМғ( T ) in the ergodic MDP. Also note that the regret scales with tmix and Оҫ
there as well (order of tmix is worst there). Note that the dependence on d is implicit as 1/Пғ = в„Ұ(d).
We need to know tmix , and Пғ in Algorithm 3. Similar to the unconstrained setup Wei et al. (2021a),
we can modify our algorithm to incorporate unknown tmix and Пғ with slightly worsened regret.
Remark 1. We can reduce the violation to 0 with sacrificing the regret a little bit (the order is the
same) under the Assumptions in Section 4 (Appendix H.5). The idea is the following, we consider
a tighter optimization problem where we add Пө in the right-hand side of the constraint in (2). We
then bound the difference of the optimal gains in the tighter problem and the original problem as a
function of Пө. The bound on regret and violation can be attained following our analysis for the tighter
optimization problem since it is a CMDP with b + Пө in place of b. Hence, by carefully choosing Пө, we
can show that it is strictly feasible, and achieves zero violation for large enough T (Lemma 36).
For the assumption in Section 3.2 and Section 3.1, we need an additional assumption (any stationary
policy satisfies BellmanвҖҷs equation (cf.(4)) to obtain zero constraint violation (Appendix H.5). The
idea is similar to the one as described in earlier paragraph. The additional assumption would help
us to bound the difference between the tighter and the original problem.

5     E XPERIMENTAL R ESULTS
We conduct numerical experiments to validate our theory on an environment similar to Chen et al.
(2022). We implement Algorithm 3 and observe that regret and violation indeed grow sub-linearly
even without the knowledge of tmix , and Пғ. Please see Appendix I for details.

6     C ONCLUSION AND F UTURE W ORK
In this work, we provide model-free RL algorithms under two different sets of Assumptions. To
the best of our knowledge, ours is the first work on the average reward-constrained linear MDP.
Our results improve the regret and violation bound even for the finite horizon tabular model-free
constrained RL setup. Whether we can develop a computationally efficient algorithm that achieves
optimal regret under Assumption 1 constitutes a future research question. Whether we can extend
the analysis to the non-linear function approximation is also an open question.


                                                    9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This work has been partly supported by NSF grants NSF AI Institute (AI-EDGE) 2112471, CNS-
2106933, 2007231, CNS-1955535, and CNS-1901057, and in part by Army Research Office under
Grant W911NF-21-1-0244.
Xingyu Zhou is supported in part by NSF CNS-2153220.

R EFERENCES
Arnob Ghosh, Xingyu Zhou, and Ness Shroff. Provably efficient model-free constrained rl with linear
  function approximation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2206.11889, 2022.

Chen-Yu Wei, Mehdi Jafarnia Jahromi, Haipeng Luo, Hiteshi Sharma, and Rahul Jain. Model-
  free reinforcement learning in infinite-horizon average-reward markov decision processes. In
  International conference on machine learning, pages 10170вҖ“10180. PMLR, 2020.

Liyu Chen, Rahul Jain, and Haipeng Luo. Learning infinite-horizon average-reward markov decision
  processes with constraints. arXiv preprint arXiv:2202.00150, 2022.

Honghao Wei, Xin Liu, and Lei Ying. A provably-efficient model-free algorithm for infinite-
  horizon average-reward constrained markov decision processes. In AAAI Conference on Artificial
 Intelligence, 2022.

Chen-Yu Wei, Mehdi Jafarnia Jahromi, Haipeng Luo, and Rahul Jain. Learning infinite-horizon
  average-reward mdps with linear function approximation. In International Conference on Artificial
  Intelligence and Statistics, pages 3007вҖ“3015. PMLR, 2021a.

OnГ©simo HernГЎndez-Lerma. Adaptive Markov control processes, volume 79. Springer Science &
  Business Media, 2012.

Martin L Puterman. Markov decision processes: discrete stochastic dynamic programming. John
 Wiley & Sons, 2014.

Peter L Bartlett and Ambuj Tewari. Regal: A regularization based algorithm for reinforcement
  learning in weakly communicating mdps. arXiv preprint arXiv:1205.2661, 2012.

Dongsheng Ding, Xiaohan Wei, Zhuoran Yang, Zhaoran Wang, and Mihailo Jovanovic. Provably
  efficient safe exploration via primal-dual policy optimization. In International Conference on
 Artificial Intelligence and Statistics, pages 3304вҖ“3312. PMLR, 2021.

Chi Jin, Zhuoran Yang, Zhaoran Wang, and Michael I Jordan. Provably efficient reinforcement
  learning with linear function approximation. In Conference on Learning Theory, pages 2137вҖ“2143.
  PMLR, 2020.

Dongruo Zhou, Jiafan He, and Quanquan Gu. Provably efficient reinforcement learning for discounted
  mdps with feature mapping. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pages 12793вҖ“
 12802. PMLR, 2021.

Peter Auer, Thomas Jaksch, and Ronald Ortner. Near-optimal regret bounds for reinforcement
  learning. Advances in neural information processing systems, 21, 2008.

Yonathan Efroni, Shie Mannor, and Matteo Pirotta. Exploration-exploitation in constrained mdps.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2003.02189, 2020.

Botao Hao, Nevena Lazic, Yasin Abbasi-Yadkori, Pooria Joulani, and Csaba Szepesvari. Adaptive
  approximate policy iteration. In International Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Statistics,
  pages 523вҖ“531. PMLR, 2021.

Yasin Abbasi-Yadkori, Peter Bartlett, Kush Bhatia, Nevena Lazic, Csaba Szepesvari, and GellГ©rt
  Weisz. Politex: Regret bounds for policy iteration using expert prediction. In International
  Conference on Machine Learning, pages 3692вҖ“3702. PMLR, 2019.


                                                 10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Tengyu Xu, Yingbin Liang, and Guanghui Lan. Crpo: A new approach for safe reinforcement
  learning with convergence guarantee. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pages
  11480вҖ“11491. PMLR, 2021.
Dongsheng Ding, Kaiqing Zhang, Tamer Basar, and Mihailo R Jovanovic. Natural policy gradient
  primal-dual method for constrained markov decision processes. In NeurIPS, 2020.
Qinbo Bai, Amrit Singh Bedi, Mridul Agarwal, Alec Koppel, and Vaneet Aggarwal. Achieving
  zero constraint violation for constrained reinforcement learning via primal-dual approach. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2109.06332, 2021.
Sven Koenig and Reid G Simmons. Complexity analysis of real-time reinforcement learning. In
  AAAI, pages 99вҖ“107, 1993.
Mohammad Gheshlaghi Azar, RГ©mi Munos, and Bert Kappen. On the sample complexity of
 reinforcement learning with a generative model. arXiv preprint arXiv:1206.6461, 2012.
Honghao Wei, Xin Liu, and Lei Ying. A provably-efficient model-free algorithm for constrained
  markov decision processes. arXiv preprint arXiv:2106.01577, 2021b.
KiantГ© Brantley, Miroslav Dudik, Thodoris Lykouris, Sobhan Miryoosefi, Max Simchowitz, Aleksan-
  drs Slivkins, and Wen Sun. Constrained episodic reinforcement learning in concave-convex and
  knapsack settings. arXiv preprint arXiv:2006.05051, 2020.
Krishna C Kalagarla, Rahul Jain, and Pierluigi Nuzzo. A sample-efficient algorithm for episodic
  finite-horizon mdp with constraints. arXiv preprint arXiv:2009.11348, 2020.
Tao Liu, Ruida Zhou, Dileep Kalathil, PR Kumar, and Chao Tian. Learning policies with zero or
  bounded constraint violation for constrained mdps. arXiv preprint arXiv:2106.02684, 2021.
Liyuan Zheng and Lillian Ratliff. Constrained upper confidence reinforcement learning. In Learning
  for Dynamics and Control, pages 620вҖ“629. PMLR, 2020.
Rahul Singh, Abhishek Gupta, and Ness B Shroff. Learning in markov decision processes under
  constraints. arXiv preprint arXiv:2002.12435, 2020.
Ling Pan, Qingpeng Cai, Qi Meng, Wei Chen, Longbo Huang, and Tie-Yan Liu. Reinforcement
  learning with dynamic boltzmann softmax updates. arXiv preprint arXiv:1903.05926, 2019.
Yasin Abbasi-Yadkori, DГЎvid PГЎl, and Csaba SzepesvГЎri. Improved algorithms for linear stochastic
  bandits. Advances in neural information processing systems, 24:2312вҖ“2320, 2011.
Roman Vershynin. Introduction to the non-asymptotic analysis of random matrices. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:1011.3027, 2010.
Qi Cai, Zhuoran Yang, Chi Jin, and Zhaoran Wang. Provably efficient exploration in policy optimiza-
  tion. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pages 1283вҖ“1294. PMLR, 2020.
Eitan Altman. Constrained Markov decision processes: stochastic modeling. Routledge, 1999.


                                               11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Organization of Appendix We provide related work in Appendix A. In Appendix B, we provide some
motivating examples. We summarize our results in Appendix C under various sets of Assumptions.
We describe Algorithm 2 in Appendix D. We formally describe Algorithm 3 in Appendix E. We prove
the results of Section 3.1 in Appendix F. We prove the results of Section 3.2 in Appendix G. We
prove the results of Section 4 in Appendix H. We show how Algorithm 3 can achieve zero constraint
violation while maintaining the same order on the regret bound (with respect to T ) in Appendix H.5.
In Appendix H.5 we also show how Algorithms 1 and 2 achieve zero violation while maintaining
the same order on regret (with respect to T ) with an additional assumption. We show numerical
experiments in Appendix I.


                                                12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


A    R ELATED W ORK

Model-free RL algorithms have been proposed (Xu et al., 2021; Ding et al., 2020; Bai et al., 2021) to
solve CMDP in the discounted infinite horizon setting. All of these works consider an easier setting
compared to standard RL in that they assume access to a simulator (Koenig and Simmons, 1993)
(a.k.a. a generative model (Azar et al., 2012)), which is a strong oracle that allows the agent to query
arbitrary state-action pairs and return the reward and the next state, hence greatly alleviating the
intrinsic difficulty of exploration in RL. Wei et al. (2021b) proposed a вҖҳtriple-QвҖҷ algorithm that does
not require a вҖҳsimulatorвҖҷ. However, it only considered the tabular setting and the episodic set-up.
To develop online sample-efficient algorithms for CMDPs, prior works have largely resorted to the
finite horizon setup (Efroni et al., 2020; Brantley et al., 2020; Kalagarla et al., 2020; Liu et al., 2021).
Model-based RL in the episodic linear kernel CMDP is considered in Ding et al. (2021). Model-based
infinite horizon average reward CMDP for tabular setup is also considered in Zheng and Ratliff
(2020); Singh et al. (2020).


B    M OTIVATING E XAMPLES

First, we provide some examples of constrained MDP.

вҖў Consider an intelligent agent taking an action to optimize the power consumption for a household.
  It would seek to minimize the overall cost while trying to maintain a minimum level of satisfaction
  (e.g., maintaining a certain temp., maintaining the charge of the electric vehicles). Here the reward
  can be cast as the negative of the cost for power consumption, while utility can be modeled as the
  satisfaction the user gets.

вҖў As another example, consider a sensor network where sensor nodes sample and send information
  to a server (fusion center) for processing. However, these sensor nodes also need to satisfy the
  energy constraint as they have limited battery capacity. Such a decision process can be modeled as
  CMDP where (i) the reward depends on the nature of the information and whether the information
  is successfully received or not and (ii) the cost corresponds to the cost for sampling and transmitting
  information.

We now provide some examples of CMDP that might run for a long-time where the average reward
CMDP would be the ideal candidate for modeling.

вҖў Consider the sensor network example provided earlier. Here, the sensor node continually takes
  decisions, and thus, an infinite horizon average reward CMDP is a natural choice.

вҖў As another example, consider that a server is scheduling jobs to different machines. The scheduler
  seeks to minimize the job completion time. The server wants to maintain a uniform queue length
  (i.e, the number of jobs waiting to be processed) across the machines which can only process
  jobs sequentially. The server is continually taking decisions, thus, it is maximizing the average
  reward while maintaining an average queue length below a certain threshold. This can be cast as
  the average reward CMDP. Another example is a controller in an autonomous system that takes
  a decision in order to maximize the average reward (objective) while trying to maintain system
  stability. We can model the system as an average reward CMDP where there is a utility of 1 if
  the system remains in the safe region at every step. The goal of the controller is to maximize the
  average reward while the system will be in one of the safe states for at least 1 вҲ’ Пө fraction of times
  for the desired choice of Пө > 0 . This can be cast as average reward CMDP where the controller
  seeks to maximize the average reward while the average utility is at least

Finally, we argue why we choose the function approximation setup. In many examples, provided
above, the state space is continuous or at least very large. For example, the state of the battery for a
sensor is continuous. Similarly, the length of the queue can be very large. Function approximation is
generally used to approximate the Q-function or policy in such a large state space. We consider linear
function approximation in our setup as a first step to handle the large state space.


                                                    13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


C    S UMMARY OF O UR R ESULTS IN A TABLE
We summarize our results in Table 1.

      Table 1: Regret and Constraint Violations on Linear MDP for our proposed algorithms

               A LGORITHM         R EGRET       V IOLATIONS           A SSUMPTIONS
                                    вҲҡ               вҲҡ
              A LGORITHM 1       OМғ( d3 T )      OМғ( d3 T )+         A SSUMPTION 1
                                       3/4              3/4 +
              A LGORITHM 2      OМғ((dT
                                     вҲҡ) )       OМғ((dT
                                                     вҲҡ ) *)      A SSUMPTIONS 1, AND 3
              A LGORITHM 3        OМғ( T )         OМғ( T )       A SSUMPTIONS 3,4, AND 5
               *
                 W E CAN REDUCE THE VIOLATION TO 0 FOR LARGE ENOUGH T (A P -
                 PENDIX H.5) WHILE MAINTAINING THE SAME ORDER OF REGRET WITH
                 RESPECT TO T .
               +
                 W E CAN REDUCE THE VIOLATION TO 0 FOR A LGORITHMS 1 AND 2 IF WE
                 ASSUME THAT ANY STATIONARY POLICY SATISFIES (4) (A PPENDIX H.5).


D    A LGORITHM 2
Here, we state Algorithm 2.

Algorithm 2 Model Free Primal-Dual Algorithm for Long-term Average Reward and Constraint
                                                                                                 вҲҡ
                                                          T 1/4                         log(|A|) KH
 1: Initialization: Y1 = 0, wвӢ„,h = 0, H = 3/4 , K = T /H, Оұ =                                         ,О· =
      вҲҡ                       p                           d                              2(1 + Оҫ + H)
    Оҫ/ KH 2 , ОІ = C1 dH log(2 log|A|ОҫdT /Оҙ)
 2: for episodes k = 1, . . . , K do
 3:   Receive the initial state xk1 .
              PkвҲ’1 P
 4:   Оӣk вҶҗ П„ =1 h П•(xП„h , aП„h )П•(xП„h , aП„h )T + О»I
 5:   for step h = H, H вҲ’ 1, . . . , 1 do
                             PkвҲ’1 PH
 6:        k
         wr,h  вҶҗ (Оӣk )вҲ’1 [ П„ =1 hвҖІ =1 П•(xП„hвҖІ , aП„h )[r(xП„hвҖІ , aП„hвҖІ ) + Vr,h+1
                                                                          k
                                                                                 (xП„hвҖІ +1 )]]
                                kвҲ’1    H
           k
                вҶҗ (Оӣk )вҲ’1 [ П„ =1 hвҖІ =1 П•(xП„hвҖІ , aП„hвҖІ )[g(xП„hвҖІ , aП„hвҖІ ) + Vg,h
                                                                           k          П„
                             P      P
 7:      wg,h                                                                 вҖІ +1 (xhвҖІ +1 )]]
           k                     k                          T   k вҲ’1        1/2
 8:      Qr,h (В·, В·) вҶҗ min{вҹЁwr,h , П•(В·, В·)вҹ© + ОІ(П•(В·, В·) (Оӣ ) П•(В·, В·)) , H}
 9:      Qkg,h (В·, В·) вҶҗ min{вҹЁwg,h k
                                    , П•(В·, В·)вҹ© + ОІ(П•(В·, В·)T (Оӣk )вҲ’1 П•(В·, В·))1/2 , H}
                         exp(Оұ(Qr,h (В·, a) + Yk Qkg,h (В·, a)))
                                    k
10:      ПҖh,k (a|В·) = P                k                  k
                          a exp(Оұ(Qr,h (В·, a) + Yk Qg,h (В·,     a)))
         Vr,h (В·) = a ПҖh,k (a|В·)Qr,h (В·, a), Vg,h (В·) = a ПҖh,k (a|В·)Qkg,h (В·, a)
           k                          k            k
                      P                                       P
11:
12:   for step h = 1, . . . , H do
13:      Compute Qkr,h (xkh , a), Qkg,h (xkh , a), ПҖ(a|xkh ) for all a.
14:      Take action akh вҲј ПҖh,k (В·|xkh ) and observe xkh+1 .
                                             k
15:   Yk+1 = max{min{Yk + О·(b вҲ’ Vg,1            (xk1 )), Оҫ}, 0}



E    A LGORITHM 3
Here, we describe Algorithm 3.

F    P ROOF OF THE R ESULT OF S ECTION 3.1
Notations: Without loss of generality, we assume that the first element of П•(В·, В·) is 1. Hence
П•(В·, В·)T e1 = 1 where e1 is вҲҡa d-dimensional vector where the first element is 1 and the rest are
0. Also recall that ||wвӢ„вҲ— ||вүӨ d(2 + sp(vвӢ„вҲ— )) from Lemma 1. As shown in Wei et al. (2021a) we


                                                   14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Algorithm 3 Model Free Primal-Dual Algorithm for Long-term Average Reward in Linear MDP
 1: Initialization: Y1 = 0, N = 8tmix log(T ) wвӢ„,1 = 0, B = 32N (log(dT ))/Пғ Оұ = min{1/(1 +
      вҲҡ                                     p
    Оҫ) T tmix , Пғ/(24N (1 + Оҫ))}, О· = Оҫ/ T /B.
 2: for epochs k = 1, . . . , T /B do
                                                                                PkвҲ’1
 3:   Define the policy ПҖk (a|x) such that ПҖk (a|x) вҲқ exp ОұП•(x, a)T ( j=1 wr,j + Yj wg,j ) , and
      initialize count JВҜk .
 4:   Execute ПҖk in the entire epoch.
 5:   for t = (k вҲ’ 1)B + 1, . . . , kB do
 6:      Execute at вҲј ПҖk (В·|xt ), observes, rt (xt , at ), gt (xt , at ), and xt+1 .
 7:      if t вүҘ (k вҲ’ 1)B + N + 1 then
 8:         Sum the constraint JВҜk = JВҜk + g(xt , at ).
 9:   for step m = 1, . . . , B/2N do
10:      Define
                                          П„k,m = (k вҲ’ 1)B + 2N (m вҲ’ 1) + N + 1
           as the start of the m-th trajectory.
11:        Compute
                                                               П„k,m +N вҲ’1
                                                                    X
                                                      Rk,m =                r(xt , at )
                                                                   t=П„k,m
                                                               П„k,m +N вҲ’1
                                                                    X
                                                      Gk,m =                g(xt , at )
                                                                   t=П„k,m


12:        Compute
                                       B/2N
                                        X X
                              Mk =                    ПҖ(a|xП„k,m )П•(xП„k,m , aП„k,m )П•(xП„k,m , aП„k,m )T
                                       m=1        a

13:       if О»min (Mk ) вүҘ BПғ/(24N ), then
                           PB/2N
14:          wr,k = MkвҲ’1 m=1 П•(xП„k,m , aП„k,m )Rk,m
                           PB/2N
15:          wg,k = MkвҲ’1 m=1 П•(xП„k,m , aП„k,m )Gk,m
16:       else
17:          wr,k , wg,k = 0.
18:    JЛҶk = JВҜk /(B вҲ’ N )
19:    Yk+1 = max{min{Yk + О·(b вҲ’ JЛҶk ), Оҫ}, 0}
                     1
have supx |vвӢ„вҲ— (x)|вүӨ sp(vвӢ„вҲ— ) without loss of generality. Without loss of generality, we assume
               вҲҡ     2                              вҲҡ             вҲҡ
||П•(x, a)||2 вүӨ 2 for all (x, a) вҲҲ S Г— A, ||Вө(S)||2 вүӨ d, ||Оёj ||2 вүӨ d for вӢ„ = r, g.

F.1   P ROOF -S KETCH OF T HEOREM 1

Note from (3) that for вӢ„ = r, g

                                              [qвӢ„вҲ— (xt , at ) вҲ’ ExвҖІ вҲјp(В·|xt ,at ) [vвӢ„вҲ— (xвҖІ )]]
                  X                         X
                      (JвӢ„вҲ— вҲ’ вӢ„(xt , at )) =                                                                            (14)
                        t                               t

We then show that
Lemma 6. With probability 1 вҲ’ Оҙ,
                                                  T                   T
                                                                        ExвҖІ вҲјp(В·|xt ,at ) [vst ,вӢ„ (xвҖІ ) вҲ’ vвӢ„вҲ— (xвҖІ )]
      X                                           X                   X
           qst ,вӢ„ (xt , at ) вҲ’ qвӢ„вҲ— (xt , at ) вүӨ     (JвӢ„вҲ— вҲ’ Jst ,вӢ„ ) +
       t                                          t=1                   t=1
                                                  p
                                            + O(ОІвӢ„ dT log(T ))                                                         (15)


                                                              15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


where st is the last time the optimization problem is solved before time t. (Jst ,вӢ„ , bst ,вӢ„ , wst ,вӢ„ , ПҖst )
are the solutions which also specify qst ,вӢ„ and vst ,вӢ„ .
The key step in proving the above lemma is that we need to show
                                  t вҲ’1
                                 sX
                                         П•(xП„ , aП„ )(vst ,вӢ„ (xвҖІ ) вҲ’ ExвҖІ вҲјp(В·|xt ,at ) vst ,вӢ„ (xвҖІ ))                        (16)
                                 П„ =1
                                                                                                      ОӣвҲ’1
                                                                                                       st


is upper bounded by O(log T ) with high probability. To this end, value-aware uniform concentration
is required to handle the dependence between vst ,вӢ„ and samples {xП„ }kвҲ’1
                                                                     П„ =1 , which renders the standard
self-normalized inequality infeasible in the model-free setting. The general idea here is to fix a
function class VвӢ„ in advance and then show that each possible value function in our algorithm vst ,вӢ„ is
within this class which has polynomial log Пө-covering number.
The idea is to show that the function class qst ,вӢ„ has log Пө covering number which is at most O(d log(1+
sp(vвӢ„вҲ— )/Пө)) (Lemma 7). Now, using the smoothness property of soft-max, we can also show that the
policy class also has log Пө-covering number which is at most d log(1 + 16L/Пө). Combining the above
we compute the Пө-covering number for the class VвӢ„ and show that (16) is upper bounded by log(T )
with high probability. The detailed proof is in Lemma 7.
Now, we divide the proof of Theorem 1 in two parts. First, we bound the regret and subsequently, we
bound the violation.
Proof of Regret: From Lemma 2 with probability 1 вҲ’ 2Оҙ, wrвҲ— , wgвҲ— , JgвҲ— , JrвҲ— , ПҖ вҲ— are feasible solution for
the optimization problem. Since we are maximizing Jr , thus, Jst ,r вүҘ JrвҲ— with probability 1 вҲ’ 2Оҙ.
Further, from Lemma 6 with probability 1 вҲ’ Оҙ,
                                                                          T
                                                                            ExвҖІ вҲјp(В·|xt ,at ) [vst ,r (xвҖІ ) вҲ’ vrвҲ— (xвҖІ )]
        X                                              X                  X
               qst ,r (xt , at ) вҲ’ qrвҲ— (xt , at ) вүӨ     (JrвҲ— вҲ’ Jst ,r ) +
         t                                              t                       t=1
                                                                p
                                                       + O(ОІr         dT log(T ))
Hence, from union bound, with probability 1 вҲ’ 3Оҙ,
                                                 T
                                                       Ex вҲјp(В·|x ,a ) [vs ,r (xвҖІ ) вҲ’ vrвҲ— (xвҖІ )] + O(ОІr dT log(T )) (17)
 X                                               X                                                          p
        qst ,r (xt , at ) вҲ’ qrвҲ— (xt , at ) вүӨ                вҖІ
                                                                  t    t    t
   t                                             t=1

By rearranging
 T
       (ExвҖІ вҲјp(В·|xt ,at ) [vrвҲ— (xвҖІ )] вҲ’ qrвҲ— (xt , at ))
 X

 t=1
       T
             (ExвҖІ вҲјp(В·|xt ,at ) [vst ,r (xвҖІ )] вҲ’ qst ,r (xt , at )) + O(ОІr
       X                                                                        p
 вүӨ                                                                                  dT log T )
       t=1
       T                                                              T
             (ExвҖІ вҲјp(В·|xt ,at ) [vst ,r (xвҖІ )] вҲ’ vst ,r (xt )) +
       X                                                              X                                          p
 =                                                                      (vst ,r (xt ) вҲ’ qst ,r (xt , at )) + O(ОІr dT log T )
       t=1                                                            t=1

We define Ft,2 as the Пғ-algebra generated by [(xП„ , aП„ )]tП„ =1 вҲӘ xt+1 . Then, E[vst ,вӢ„ (xt ) вҲ’
qвҲҡst ,вӢ„ (xt , at )|FtвҲ’1 ] = 0. Thus, vst ,вӢ„ (xt ) вҲ’ qst ,вӢ„ (xt , at ) is a Martingale difference. Since ||wst ,r ||вүӨ
   d(2 + sp(vrвҲ— )) (from   pthe optimization problem in Algorithm 1), hence, vst ,r (xt ) вҲ’ qst ,r (xt , at ) is
upper bounded by ОІr T log(T /Оҙ) with probability 1 вҲ’ Оҙ. Thus, from union bound, with probability
1 вҲ’ 4Оҙ, we have
                      T
                        (ExвҖІ вҲјp(В·|xt ,at ) [vrвҲ— (xвҖІ )] вҲ’ qrвҲ— (xt , at ))
                      X

                       t=1
                           T
                             (ExвҖІ вҲјp(В·|xt ,at ) [vst ,r (xвҖІ )] вҲ’ vst ,r (xt )) + O(ОІr dT log(T /Оҙ))
                           X                                                         p
                       вүӨ                                                                                                   (18)
                           t=1



                                                                      16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Notice that every time the algorithm updates (i.e., st Мё= stвҲ’1 ) it holds that det(Оӣt ) = det(Оӣst ) вүҘ
2det(ОӣstвҲ’1 ). Since det(ОӣT +1 )/det(Оӣ1 ) вүӨ (1 + T /О»)d , thus, it can not happen more than d log2 (1 +
T ) = O(d log T ) times. Thus, with probability 1 вҲ’ 4Оҙ,

   T
     (ExвҖІ вҲјp(В·|xt ,at ) [vrвҲ— (xвҖІ )] вҲ’ qrвҲ— (xt , at ))
   X

   t=1
       T
         (ExвҖІ вҲјp(В·|xt ,at ) [vst+1 ,r (xвҖІ )] вҲ’ vst+1 ,r (xt+1 )) + O(ОІr dT log(T /Оҙ) + ОІr d log T )
       X                                                               p
   вүӨ                                                                                                                (19)
       t=1

                                                                           p
The first term in the right-hand side of (19) can be bounded by O(sp(vrвҲ— ) dT log(T /Оҙ)) with
probability 1 вҲ’ Оҙ by Azuma-Hoeffding inequality. Hence, with probability 1 вҲ’ 5Оҙ,

                                         T
                                               (ExвҖІ вҲјp(В·|xt ,at ) [vrвҲ— (xвҖІ )] вҲ’ qrвҲ— (xt , at ))
                                         X

                                         t=1
                                                     p
                                         вүӨ O(ОІr          dT log(T /Оҙ) + ОІr d log T ),

where the last step holds via Azuma-Hoeffding inequality.
Hence, the result follows from the definition of ОІr , and (14).
Proof of Constraint Violation: From Lemma 6 with probability 1 вҲ’ Оҙ,
          X
                 qst ,g (xt , at ) вҲ’ qgвҲ— (xt , at )
             t
                                               T                   T
                                                                     ExвҖІ вҲјp(В·|xt ,at ) [vst ,g (xвҖІ ) вҲ’ vgвҲ— (xвҖІ )]
                       p                       X                   X
          вүӨ O(ОІg           dT log T ) +          (JgвҲ— вҲ’ Jst ,g ) +
                                               t=1                      t=1

Similar to (19) we obtain with probability 1 вҲ’ 3Оҙ

                           T
                                  (ExвҖІ вҲјp(В·|xt ,at ) [vgвҲ— (xвҖІ )] вҲ’ qgвҲ— (xt , at ))
                           X

                            t=1

                                         p                                           T
                                                                                     X
                            вүӨ O(ОІg           dT log(T /Оҙ) + ОІg d log T ) +                 (JgвҲ— вҲ’ Jst ,g )          (20)
                                                                                     t=1


Hence, rearranging (20) and from (14), we obtain

                 T
                 X                       T
                                         X                       p
                   (JgвҲ— вҲ’ g(xt , at )) вҲ’   (JgвҲ— вҲ’ Jst ,g ) вүӨ O(ОІg dT log T + ОІg d log T )
                 t=1                              t=1
                                   T
                                   X                                          p
                                         (Jst ,g вҲ’ g(xt , at )) вүӨ O(ОІg            dT log(T /Оҙ) + ОІg d log T )       (21)
                                   t=1

Note that we can not conclude that Jst ,g вүҘ JgвҲ— unlike the reward term. Nevertheless, since Jst ,g is
feasible, thus, from the optimization problem P1 in Algorithm 1, we have Jst ,g вүҘ b. Hence, from
(21) with probability 1 вҲ’ 3Оҙ,

       T
       X                     T
                             X                              p
         (b вҲ’ g(xt , at )) вүӨ   (Jst ,g вҲ’ g(xt , at )) вүӨ O(ОІg dT log(T /Оҙ) + ОІg d log(T /Оҙ))
       t=1                            t=1

Hence, the result follows.


                                                                  17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


F.2   P ROOF OF L EMMA 2

For вӢ„ = r, g,
                             tвҲ’1
                             X
             wвӢ„вҲ— = (Оӣt )вҲ’1          П•(xП„ , aП„ )П•(xП„ , aП„ )T wвӢ„вҲ— + О»ОӣвҲ’1 вҲ—
                                                                    t wвӢ„
                             П„ =1
                         tвҲ’1
                                П•(xП„ , aП„ )(вӢ„(xП„ , aП„ ) вҲ’ JвӢ„вҲ— + ExвҖІ вҲјp(В·|xП„ ,aП„ ) vвӢ„вҲ— (xвҖІ )) + О»ОӣвҲ’1
                         X
             = (Оӣt )вҲ’1                                                                              вҲ—
                                                                                                 t wвӢ„
                         П„ =1
                         tвҲ’1
                         X
             = (Оӣt )вҲ’1          П•(xП„ , aП„ )(вӢ„(xП„ , aП„ ) вҲ’ JвӢ„вҲ— + vвӢ„вҲ— (xП„ +1 )) + О»ОӣвҲ’1 вҲ—    вҲ—
                                                                                  t wвӢ„ + ПөвӢ„,t                           (22)
                         П„ =1

where
                                          tвҲ’1
                                                 П•(xП„ , aП„ )(ExвҖІ вҲјp(В·|xП„ ,aП„ ) vвӢ„вҲ— (xвҖІ ) вҲ’ vвӢ„вҲ— (xП„ +1 ))
                                          X
                   Пөt,вӢ„ = (Оӣt )вҲ’1                                                                                       (23)
                                          П„ =1

Let us denote ОөвҲ—П„,вӢ„ = ExвҖІ вҲјp(В·|xП„ ,aП„ ) vвӢ„вҲ— (xвҖІ ) вҲ’ vвӢ„вҲ— (xП„ +1 ) which is Martingale difference, then from the
self-concentration result with probability 1 вҲ’ 2Оҙ (Theorem 4),
                                               s
                                                        det(Оӣt )1/2 det(Оӣ0 )вҲ’1/2
                            ПөвҲ—t,вӢ„ вүӨ sp(vвӢ„вҲ— ) log[                                ]                        (24)
                                                                    Оҙ
Now, det(Оӣt ) вүӨ (О» + t)d , det(Оӣ0 ) вүҘ О»d . Thus,
                                                p
                                ПөвҲ—t,вӢ„ вүӨ sp(vвӢ„вҲ— ) d log((1 + T )/Оҙ)                                                      (25)
On the other hand, note that О»(Оӣt )вҲ’1 wвӢ„,t
                                        вҲ—
                                           вүӨ ОІвӢ„ /2, hence, by selecting bвӢ„,t = О»(Оӣt )вҲ’1 wвӢ„,t
                                                                                         вҲ—
                                                                                             + ПөвҲ—вӢ„,t
                                      вҲ—
(which is upper bounded by ОІвӢ„ ) and Jg вүҘ b we have the result.

F.3   P ROOF OF L EMMA 6

Proof. For notational simplicity, we denote st = s.
From the definition of ws,вӢ„
                                sвҲ’1
                                X
        ws,вӢ„ вҲ’ wвӢ„вҲ— = ОӣвҲ’1
                      s                П•(xП„ , aП„ )(вӢ„(xП„ , aП„ ) вҲ’ Js,вӢ„ + vs,вӢ„ (xП„ +1 )) + bs,вӢ„
                                П„ =1
                                sвҲ’1
                                       П•(xП„ , aП„ )(вӢ„(xП„ , aП„ ) вҲ’ JвӢ„вҲ— + ExвҖІ вҲјp(В·|xП„ ,aП„ ) vвӢ„вҲ— (xвҖІ )) вҲ’ О»ОӣвҲ’1
                                X
                    вҲ’ ОӣвҲ’1
                       s
                                                                                                           вҲ—
                                                                                                        s wвӢ„
                                П„ =1
                                sвҲ’1
                                       П•(xП„ , aП„ )(JвӢ„вҲ— вҲ’ Js,вӢ„ + ExвҖІ вҲјp(В·|xП„ ,aП„ ) [vs,вӢ„ (xвҖІ ) вҲ’ vвӢ„вҲ— (xвҖІ )])
                                X
                    = ОӣвҲ’1
                       s
                                П„ =1
                    + Пөs,вӢ„ + bs,вӢ„ вҲ’ О»ОӣвҲ’1 вҲ—
                                      s wвӢ„

where Пөs,вӢ„ is defined in (23).
                         sвҲ’1
                         X                                                          Z
   ws,вӢ„ вҲ’ wвӢ„вҲ— = ОӣвҲ’1
                 s              П•(xП„ , aП„ )П•(xП„ , aП„ )T (JвӢ„вҲ— e1 вҲ’ Js,вӢ„ e1 +               (vs,вӢ„ (xвҖІ ) вҲ’ vвӢ„вҲ— (xвҖІ ))dВө(xвҖІ ))
                         П„ =1                                                         X

                + Пөs,вӢ„ + bs,вӢ„ вҲ’ О»ОӣвҲ’1s wвӢ„
                                          вҲ—
                                      Z
                = JвӢ„вҲ— e1 вҲ’ Js,вӢ„
                              вҲ—
                                e1 +     (vs,вӢ„ (xвҖІ ) вҲ’ vвӢ„вҲ— (xвҖІ ))dВө(xвҖІ ) + Пөs,вӢ„ + bs,вӢ„
                                       X
                                             Z
                вҲ’ О»ОӣвҲ’1s  (J вҲ—
                           вӢ„ 1e вҲ’ J    e
                                    s,вӢ„ 1  +     (vs,вӢ„ (xвҖІ ) вҲ’ vвӢ„вҲ— (xвҖІ ))dВө(xвҖІ )) вҲ’ О»ОӣвҲ’1  вҲ—
                                                                                       s wвӢ„                             (26)
                                                        X

Therefore,


                                                               18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


   qs,вӢ„ (xt , at ) вҲ’ qвӢ„вҲ— (xt , at ) = П•(xt , at )T (ws,вӢ„ вҲ’ wвӢ„вҲ— )
  вүӨ (JвӢ„вҲ— вҲ’ Js,вӢ„
            вҲ—
                ) + ExвҖІ вҲјp(В·|xt ,at ) [vs,вӢ„ (xвҖІ ) вҲ’ vвӢ„вҲ— (xвҖІ )] + П•(xt , at )T (Пөs,вӢ„ + bs,вӢ„ + О»ОӣвҲ’1
                                                                                               s us,вӢ„ )                    (27)
where                                              Z
                    us,вӢ„ = вҲ’(JвӢ„вҲ— e1 вҲ’ Js,вӢ„ e1 +                (vs,вӢ„ (xвҖІ ) вҲ’ vвӢ„вҲ— (xвҖІ ))dВө(xвҖІ )) вҲ’ wвӢ„вҲ—                      (28)
                                                           X
We now bound the third term in the right hand side which will prove the lemma. From Lemma 21
with probability 1 вҲ’ Оҙ
                       sвҲ’1
                       X                                 вҲҡ q
                                                     вҲ—
      ||Пөs,вӢ„ ||Оӣs = ||     П•П„ ОөвӢ„,П„ ||ОӣвҲ’1
                                      s
                                         вүӨ4(2 + sp(v вӢ„ )) d d/2 log((s + О»)/О») + log(NПө,вӢ„ /Оҙ)
                       П„ =1
                                       p
                                   + 4 s2 Пө2 /О»                                                                            (29)
We now compute NПө,вӢ„ which is the Пө-covering number for the value function class vs,вӢ„ .
Lemma 7. The Пө-covering number for the class VвӢ„ = {vвӢ„ |vвӢ„ (x) = вҹЁПҖ(В·|x), qвӢ„ (x, В·)вҹ©A is upper
bounded by
                                                    вҲҡ !
                                    2(2 + sp(vвӢ„вҲ— )) 2d

                                                                            16L
               log NПө,вӢ„ вүӨ d log 1 +                        + d log 1 + вҖІ           .            (30)
                                            ПөвҖІ                               Пө
                     Пө                                                                           вҲҡ
where ПөвҖІ =                  вҲҡ , ПҖ вҲҲ О , and qвӢ„ (В·, В·) = wвӢ„T П•(В·, В·), where ||wвӢ„ ||вүӨ (2 + sp(vвӢ„вҲ— )) d.
                         вҲ—
           1 + (2 + sp(vвӢ„ )) 2d

Proof. Proof is in Appendix F.4.

                                         1
Hence, from (29) and putting Пө =           , we obtain
                                         T
                                               ||Пөs,вӢ„ ||Оӣs вүӨ O(ОІвӢ„ )                                                        (31)
with probability at least 1 вҲ’ Оҙ.
Now,
                                                     вҲҡ
            ||О»ОӣвҲ’1
                s us,вӢ„ ||Оӣs = О»||us,вӢ„ ||ОӣвҲ’1
                                         s
                                            вүӨ             О»||us,вӢ„ ||вүӨ O(1 + (2 + sp(vвӢ„вҲ— ))d) = O(ОІвӢ„ ).                     (32)
Further, ||bs,вӢ„ ||Оӣs вүӨ ОІвӢ„ .
Hence,
         П•(xt , at )T (Пөs,вӢ„ + bs,вӢ„ + О»ОӣвҲ’1
                                       s us,вӢ„ ) вүӨ ||П•(xt , at )||ОӣвҲ’1
                                                                  s
                                                                     ||Пөs,вӢ„ + bs,вӢ„ + О»ОӣвҲ’1
                                                                                       s us,вӢ„ ||Оӣs

                                                      вүӨ 2||П•(xt , at )||ОӣвҲ’1 ||Пөs,вӢ„ + bs,вӢ„ + О»ОӣвҲ’1
                                                                                              s us,вӢ„ ||Оӣs
                                                                            t

Thus,
      T                                      T                   T
                                                                   ExвҖІ вҲјp(В·|xt ,at ) [vst ,вӢ„ (xвҖІ ) вҲ’ vвӢ„вҲ— (xвҖІ )]
    X                                        X                   X
        (qs,вӢ„ (xt , at ) вҲ’ qвӢ„вҲ— (xt , at )) вүӨ   (J вҲ— вҲ’ Jst ,вӢ„ ) +
     t=1                                      t=1                         t=1
                                                      T
                                                      X
                                          + O(ОІвӢ„            ||П•(xt , at )||ОӣвҲ’1 )
                                                                            t
                                                      t=1
                                              T                   T
                                                                    ExвҖІ вҲјp(В·|xt ,at ) [vst ,вӢ„ (xвҖІ ) вҲ’ vвӢ„вҲ— (xвҖІ )]
                                              X                   X
                                          вүӨ     (JвӢ„вҲ— вҲ’ Jst ,вӢ„ ) +
                                              t=1                         t=1
                                                пЈ«  v                                            пЈ¶
                                                   u T
                                                вҲҡ  uX
                                          + O пЈӯОІ T t ||П•(x , a )||2
                                              пЈ¬                                                 пЈ·
                                                      вӢ„                     t     t       ОӣвҲ’1
                                                                                                пЈё
                                                                                           t
                                                                    t=1

                                              T                           T
                                                                                Ex вҲјp(В·|x ,a ) [vs ,вӢ„ (xвҖІ ) вҲ’ vвӢ„вҲ— (xвҖІ )]
                                              X                           X
                                          вүӨ         (JвӢ„вҲ— вҲ’ Jst ,вӢ„ ) +                 вҖІ
                                                                                                t   t   t
                                              t=1                         t=1
                                                     p
                                          + O(ОІвӢ„      dT log T )                                                           (33)


                                                               19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


where the second inequality follows
                               qP     from Cauchy-Schwarz inequality. The last inequal-
                                 T
                                                          p
                                                    2
ity follows from the fact that   t=1 ||П•(xt , at )||ОӣвҲ’1 вүӨ   2 log(det(ОӣT +1 )/(det(Оӣ1 ))), and
                                                            t
log(det(ОӣT +1 )) вүӨ d log(О» + T )

F.4   P ROOF OF L EMMA 7
                                вҲҡ
Proof. ||ws,вӢ„ ||вүӨ (2 + sp(vвӢ„вҲ— )) d. By Lemma 22, the covering number for ws,вӢ„ is
                                                           вҲҡ !d
                                            2(2 + sp(vвӢ„вҲ— )) d
                                         1+
                                                    Пө
                                             вҲҡ
Since qs,вӢ„ (В·, В·) = П•(В·, В·)T ws,вӢ„ and ||П•||вүӨ 2, Пө-covering number for ws,вӢ„ is also the Пө-covering
number for the class of state-action bias functions qs,вӢ„ is
                                                          вҲҡ !d
                                           2(2 + sp(vвӢ„вҲ— )) 2d
                                        1+                                                          (34)
                                                   Пө

with respect to вҲһ-norm.
For the policy-parameter class, note that ||О¶||вүӨ L. Hence, the Пө-covering number for the parameter
class is (1 + 2L/Пө)d from Lemma 22. We also use the following result where we show that the
1-norm of the difference between two policies is close if the parameters are close from the property
of soft-max.

Lemma 8. If ПҖ, ПҖМғ вҲҲ О  where ПҖ is parameterized by О¶ and ПҖМғ is parameterized by О¶Мғ, then for any
xвҲҲX
                             X
                                 |ПҖ(a|x) вҲ’ ПҖМғ(a|x)|вүӨ 8||О¶ вҲ’ О¶Мғ||                           (35)
                                    a

if ||О¶ вҲ’ О¶Мғ||вүӨ 1/2.

Proof. See Appendix F.5.

The value function class vs,вӢ„ is parameterized by (О¶, ws,вӢ„ ). Consider О¶Мғ such that ||О¶Мғ вҲ’ О¶||вүӨ Пө/8, then
from Lemma 8 for every state x
                                      X
                                          |ПҖ(a|x) вҲ’ ПҖМғ(a|x)|вүӨ Пө                                      (36)
                                         a


Further, consider wМғs,вӢ„ such that ||ws,вӢ„ вҲ’ wМғs,вӢ„ ||вүӨ Пө, then maxx,a |qs,вӢ„ (x, a) вҲ’ qМғs,вӢ„ (x, a)|вүӨ Пө where
qМғs,вӢ„ is parameterized by wМғs,вӢ„ . Now, vМғs,вӢ„ = вҹЁПҖМғ, qМғs,вӢ„ вҹ©, and vs,вӢ„ = вҹЁПҖ, qs,вӢ„ вҹ©.
Then, for any x,
                               vМғs,вӢ„ (x) вҲ’ vs,вӢ„ (x) = вҹЁПҖМғ, qМғs,вӢ„ вҹ© вҲ’ вҹЁПҖ, qs,вӢ„ вҹ©
                                      = вҹЁПҖ вҲ’ ПҖМғ, qs,вӢ„ вҹ© вҲ’ вҹЁПҖМғ, (qМғs,вӢ„ вҲ’ qs,вӢ„ )вҹ©
                                                                     вҲҡ
                                                 вүӨ Пө(2 + sp(vвӢ„вҲ— )) 2d + Пө                           (37)
                                Пө
Thus, consider ПөвҖІ =                     вҲҡ , then,
                      1 + (2 + sp(vвӢ„вҲ— )) 2d
                                                       вҲҡ !
                                        2(2 + sp(vвӢ„вҲ— )) 2d

                                                                      16L
                   log NПө,вӢ„ вүӨ d log 1 +                    + d log 1 + вҖІ    .                       (38)
                                                ПөвҖІ                     Пө


                                                     20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


F.5   P ROOF OF L EMMA 8

Proof. Dividing ПҖ(a|x) by ПҖМғ(a|x) yields
                                                P вҹЁП•(x,aвҖІ ),О¶Мғвҹ©
                     ПҖ(a|x)    eвҹЁП•(x,a),О¶вҹ©        вҖІ e
                             =                Г— Pa вҹЁП•(x,aвҖІ ),О¶вҹ©
                     ПҖМғ(a|x)   e вҹЁП•(x,a), О¶Мғвҹ©
                                                 aвҖІ e
                                                                               вҖІ
                                                 X          вҖІ           eвҹЁП•(x,a ),О¶вҹ©
                             = eвҹЁП•(x,a),О¶вҲ’О¶Мғвҹ© Г—     (eвҹЁП•(x,a ),О¶МғвҲ’О¶вҹ© ) P вҹЁП•(x,aМ„),О¶вҹ©
                                                 aвҖІ                      aМ„ e
                                               X                  вҖІ
                             = eвҹЁП•(x,a),О¶вҲ’О¶Мғвҹ©    ПҖ(aвҖІ |x)eвҹЁП•(x,a ),О¶МғвҲ’О¶вҹ©                                (39)
                                                aвҖІ

Since ||П•||вүӨ 1, and exponential is a strictly increasing function, thus,
                  ПҖ(a|x)              X
                          = e||О¶вҲ’О¶Мғ||    ПҖ(aвҖІ |x)e||О¶вҲ’О¶Мғ|| вүӨ e2||О¶вҲ’О¶Мғ|| вүӨ 1 + 4||О¶ вҲ’ О¶Мғ||               (40)
                  ПҖМғ(a|x)              вҖІ
                                       a

where the first inequality stems from the fact that aвҖІ ПҖ(aвҖІ |x) = 1. The second inequality stems
                                                   P
from the fact that ex вүӨ 1 + 2x if x вҲҲ (0, 0.5). Hence,

                                  ПҖ(a|x) вҲ’ ПҖМғ(a|x) вүӨ 4ПҖМғ(a|x)||О¶ вҲ’ О¶Мғ||                                 (41)

We can apply the similar argument with the roles О¶ and О¶Мғ reversed to conclude

                                  ПҖМғ(a|x) вҲ’ ПҖ(a|x) вүӨ 4ПҖ(a|x)||О¶ вҲ’ О¶Мғ||                                  (42)
Hence,
                     X                                    X
                          |ПҖ(a|x) вҲ’ ПҖМғ(a|x)| вүӨ 4||О¶ вҲ’ О¶Мғ||  max{ПҖ(a|x), ПҖМғ(a|x)}
                      a                                      a
                                                          X
                                             вүӨ 4||О¶ вҲ’ О¶Мғ|| {ПҖ(a|x) + ПҖМғ(a|x)}
                                                             a

                                             = 8||О¶ вҲ’ О¶Мғ||                                              (43)



F.6   C LASS OF P OLICIES

Note that we only use Lemma 8 to show Lemma 7 for the class of bias value function. Thus, our
analysis can be extended to any policy parameterized by О¶ such that
                         P
Definition 3. For any x, a |ПҖ(a|x) вҲ’ ПҖМғ(a|x)|вүӨ R||О¶ вҲ’ О¶Мғ|| holds for some ||О¶ вҲ’ О¶Мғ||вүӨ L1 where R
is constant and L1 > 0.

Obviously, soft-max policy is one such policy which satisfies the condition of the Definition 3.


G     P ROOF OF THE R ESULTS OF S ECTION 3.2

Organization: In Appendix G.1, we provide the proof sketch and subsequently we prove various
parts in Appendix E.2 to Appendix E.9. We formally prove Theorem 2 in Appendix G.10.
Notations for this Section: Throughout this section, we denote Qkr,h , Qkg,h , wr,hk     k
                                                                                      , wg,h , Оӣkh as the Q-
                                                             k                       k
value and the parameter values estimated at the episode k. Vj,h (В·) = вҹЁПҖh,k (В·|В·), Qj,h (В·, В·)вҹ©A . ПҖh,k (В·|x)
is the soft-max policy based on the composite Q-function at the k-th episode as Qkr,h + Yk Qkg,h . To
simplify the presentation, we denote П•kh = П•(xkh , akh ).
                                                                                                         вҲҡ
Without вҲҡ loss of generality, we assume ||П•(x, a)||2 вүӨ 1 for all (x, a) вҲҲ S Г— A, ||Вө(S)||2 вүӨ d,
||Оёj ||2 вүӨ d for вӢ„ = r, g.


                                                     21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


G.1     P ROOF S KETCH OF T HEOREM 2

We reiterate the decomposition of regret.
                                  T /H                                  T /H
                                     X                   вҲ—              X          вҲ—
                   Regret(T ) =            (HJrвҲ— вҲ’ Vr,1
                                                     ПҖ
                                                        (xk1 )) +                 ПҖ
                                                                               (Vr,1            ПҖk
                                                                                     (xk1 ) вҲ’ Vr,1 (xk1 ))
                                     k=1                                k=1
                                      T /H                             kH
                                       X        ПҖk
                                                                       X
                                  +          (Vr,1 (xk1 ) вҲ’                     r(xt , at ))                 (44)
                                       k=1    t=(kвҲ’1)H+1
The first term is bounded via Lemma 3 by (T /H)sp(vrвҲ— ) which we prove in Appendix G.3.
                                                                                    вҲҡ The
third-term is bounded using Azuma-Hoeffding inequality, and its upper bound is given by O( T HО№)
with probability 1 вҲ’ Оҙ. We bound the second term in Appendices G.4вҖ“G.8. In the following, we
describe a rough idea to bound the second term.
Note that in order to bound the second term we follow Ghosh et al. (2022) which bounds the regret
over an episodic setup. However, there are subtle differences. Ghosh et al. (2022) bounds the
regret with respect to the optimal solution for the episodic case, i.e., Ghosh et al. (2022) bounds the
following
                                      K
                                             ПҖМ„ вҲ—
                                      X                      ПҖk
                                          (Vr,1   (xk1 ) вҲ’ Vr,1 (xk1 ))
                                             k=1
where ПҖМ„ вҲ— is the optimal solution for the episodic case (cf.(46)). Instead, we are interested in bounding
                                               ПҖвҲ—
                                        X                    ПҖk
                                            (Vr,1 (xk1 ) вҲ’ Vr,1 (xk1 ))
                                              k
Note that the optimal solution for episodic case, ПҖМ„ вҲ— , can be different from ПҖ вҲ— , the optimal solution for
the infinite horizon average reward CMDP. Since we relax the constraint by subtracting Оә from Hb,
it would guarantee that ПҖ вҲ— is also feasible over the episodic case for any initial state xk1 by Lemma 3.
Hence,
                                           вҲ—              вҲ—
                                       V ПҖМ„ (xk1 ) вҲ’ V ПҖ (xk1 ) вүҘ 0
Thus,
                                 вҲ—
                                                                      ПҖМ„ вҲ—
                        X                     ПҖk
                                                                  X                   ПҖk
                                ПҖ
                             (Vr,1 (xk1 ) вҲ’ Vr,1 (xk1 )) вүӨ         (Vr,1   (xk1 ) вҲ’ Vr,1 (xk1 ))             (45)
                         k                                         k
Now, we invoke the analysis of Ghosh et al. (2022) to bound the right-hand side of (45).
Since we relax the constraint there will be an additional term Оә in the violation at each episode. By
summing over all the episodes the term will grow as (T /H)Оә. Since H = O(T 1/4 ), we can bound
that additional term by O(T 3/4 ).
Now, we bound the right-hand side of (45). We first state the episodic CMDP on which the Algorithm
is learning for completeness.
                                            ПҖ
                           maximize ПҖ Vr,1     (xk1 ) subject to Vg,1
                                                                   ПҖ
                                                                      (xk1 ) вүҘ Hb вҲ’ Оә         (46)
Similar to Ghosh et al. (2022), we first establish the following decomposition, which upper bounds
the sum of regret and violation (Lemma 9).
Lemma 9. For any Y вҲҲ [0, Оҫ], we have
              K
             X
                    ПҖМ„ вҲ—            ПҖk                            ПҖk            1 2 О·H 2 K
                 (Vr,1   (xk1 ) вҲ’ Vr,1 (xk1 )) + Y (Hb вҲ’ Оә вҲ’ Vg,1    (xk1 )) вүӨ    Y +      +
                                                                               2О·     2
             k=1
             K
                      ПҖМ„ вҲ—               ПҖМ„ вҲ—
             X
                    Vr,1   (xk1 ) + Yk Vg,1   (xk1 ) вҲ’ Vr,1
                                                         k
                                                            (xk1 ) + Yk Vg,1
                                                                          k
                                                                             (xk1 ) +
             k=1
             |                                     {z                                      }
                                                   T1
             K
             X                                    K
                                                  X
                      k             ПҖk                                ПҖk
                    Vr,1 (xk1 ) вҲ’ Vr,1 (xk1 ) + Y       k
                                                      Vg,1 (xk1 ) вҲ’ Vg,1 (xk1 )                              (47)
             k=1                                        k=1
             |                                     {z                                          }
                                                   T2


                                                             22
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Proof. See Appendix G.4.

This will serve as the basis when applying optimization tools to bound the violation as well. Note
that by making Y = 0, we can bound the regret.
Note that T1 is similar to the term related to optimism in the unconstrained case with the difference
being that we now have two value functions weighted by the dual variable Yk . Similarly, T2 is similar
to prediction error term with the additional weight by Y . Since the first term in the above inequality
can be easily bounded with a proper choice of О·, we are only left to bound T1 and T2 , respectively.
In order to bound T1 and T2 , we use the following result
Lemma 10. There exists a constant C2 such that for any fixed p вҲҲ (0, 1), if we let E be the event that
              kвҲ’1 H
                                          (xП„hвҖІ +1 ) вҲ’ PVj,h+1
              XX                                                                                  вҲҡ
                           П•П„j,hвҖІ [Vj,h+1
                                     k                    k
                                                               (xП„hвҖІ , aП„hвҖІ )]             вүӨ C2 dH ПҮ   (48)
              П„ =1 hвҖІ =1
                                                                                 (Оӣk )вҲ’1

for all j вҲҲ {r, g}, ПҮ = log[2(C1 + 1)Оҫ log(|A|)dT /Оҙ], for some constant C2 , then Pr(E) = 1 вҲ’ 2Оҙ.

Proof. Please see the proof of Lemma 8 in Ghosh et al. (2022).

The above lemma entails that for all (k, h) вҲҲ [K] Г— [H] with high probability
                   kвҲ’1
                                                    (xП„h+1 ) вҲ’ PVвӢ„,h+1
                   XX                       h                                      i
                               П•(xП„h , aП„h ) VвӢ„,h+1
                                               k                  k
                                                                       (xП„h , aП„h )
                   П„ =1 h
                                                                                            (Оӣk )вҲ’1
                                                     вҲҡ
is upper bounded by lower order term (e.g., O(d log T ). Similar to Algorithm 1 the general idea
here is to fix a function class VвӢ„,h in advance and then show that each possible value function in our
              k
algorithm VвӢ„,h    is within this class which has log-covering number which scales with log T .
Similar to Ghosh et al. (2022) we introduce soft-max policy and define the following corresponding
function classes to show that the value function class has log Пө-covering number which scales with
log T . We first definepthe following class for Q-function for вӢ„ = r, g. QвӢ„ = {QвӢ„ |QвӢ„ (В·, В·) =
min{вҹЁwвӢ„ , П•(В·, В·)вҹ© + ОІ П•(В·, В·)TP (Оӣh )вҲ’1 П•(В·, В·), H}. Then, we define the following value function
class VвӢ„ . VвӢ„ = {VвӢ„ |VвӢ„ (В·) = a ПҖ(a|В·)QвӢ„ (В·, a); QвӢ„ вҲҲ QвӢ„ , ПҖ вҲҲ О e }, where О e is given by the
following class О e = {ПҖ|ПҖ(a|В·) = S OFT-M AXaОұ ((Qr (В·, В·) + Y Qg (В·, В·)); вҲҖa вҲҲ A, Qr вҲҲ Qr , Qg вҲҲ
Qg , Y вҲҲ [0, Оҫ]}. As described in Ghosh et al. (2022) greedy algorithm with respect to the composite
Q-function fails to show that the log Пө-covering number for individual VвӢ„ scales at most O(log(T ))
as the greedy policy is not Lipschitz.
Using the above we show the following
                                                           вҲҡ
Lemma 11. There exists an absolute constant ОІ = C1 dH О№, О№ = log(log(|A|)Оҫ2dT /Оҙ), and for
any fixed policy ПҖ, on the event E defined in Lemma 10, we have
                          k
             вҹЁП•(x, a), wвӢ„,h  вҹ© вҲ’ QПҖвӢ„,h (x, a) = P(VвӢ„,h+1
                                                    k        ПҖ
                                                         вҲ’ VвӢ„,h+1 )(x, a) + вҲҶk (x, a)                  (49)
                                                p
for some вҲҶk (x, a) that satisfies |вҲҶk (x, a)|вүӨ ОІ П•(x, a)T (Оӣk )вҲ’1 П•(x, a).

Proof. See Appendix G.5.

The above lemma bounds the difference between the value function maintained in Algorithm 2
(without the bonus term) and the value function for any policy for both the reward and utility value
functions. We bound this using the expected difference at the next step plus an error term. The result
shows that this error term can be upper bounded by the bonus term with a high-probability.
Using the above, we can easily show the followingвҖ“
Lemma 12. With prob. 1 вҲ’ 2Оҙ, (for the event in E)
     QПҖr,h (x, a) + Yk QПҖg,h (x, a) вүӨ Qkr,h (x, a) + Yk Qkg,h (x, a) + P(Vh+1
                                                                          ПҖ,Yk    k
                                                                               вҲ’ Vh+1 )(x, a)          (50)


                                                         23
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Proof. See Appendix G.6.

Using the above, and the property of the soft-max (Lemma 19), we obtain
                                            H log(|A|)
Lemma 13. With probability 1 вҲ’ 2Оҙ, T1 вүӨ
                                                Оұ

Proof. See Appendix G.7.

Further, from Lemma 12, we obtain the following
Lemma 14. On the event defined in E in Lemma 10, we have
                                 H
                                 X                               H
                                                                 X           q
     k            ПҖk                     k        k
   VвӢ„,1 (x1 ) вҲ’ VвӢ„,1 (x1 ) вүӨ           (DвӢ„,h,1 + DвӢ„,h,2 )+              2ОІ       П•(xkh , akh )T (Оӣkh )вҲ’1 П•(xkh , akh )   (51)
                                 h=1                             h=1


where


         k
        DвӢ„,h,1 = вҹЁ(QkвӢ„,h (xkh , В·) вҲ’ QПҖвӢ„,h
                                        k
                                           (xkh , В·)), ПҖh,k (В·|xkh )вҹ© вҲ’ (QkвӢ„,h (xkh , akh ) вҲ’ QПҖвӢ„,h
                                                                                                 k
                                                                                                    (xkh , akh ))
         k
        DвӢ„,h,2 = Ph (VвӢ„,h+1
                       k        ПҖk
                            вҲ’ VвӢ„,h+1 )(xkh , akh ) вҲ’ [VвӢ„,h+1
                                                        k        ПҖk
                                                             вҲ’ VвӢ„,h+1 ](xkh+1 )                                          (52)

Proof. See Appendix G.8.

Using the above result, Azuma-Hoeffding inequality, and plugging the value of ОІ we obtain the
following
                                                   вҲҡ
Lemma 15. With probability 1 вҲ’ 4Оҙ, T2 вүӨ (Y + 1)O( d3 T H 2 О№2 )

Proof. See Appendix G.9.
                                                                  вҲҡ
Combining all the pieces: In (47), we replace Y with 0, and О· = Оҫ/ KH 2 . Then, by combining
(45),Lemmas 13 and 15 we bound the second term in (44) with probability 1 вҲ’ 4Оҙ. Thus, the final
result follows from the union bound ( Appendix G.10).
Constraint Violation: The violation term can be decomposed as the following
              K
              X                                  K
                                                 X                           kH
                                                                             X                            K
                                                                                                          X
                                ПҖk                        ПҖk
                    (Hb вҲ’ Оә вҲ’ Vg,1 (xk1 )) +           (Vg,1 (xk1 ) вҲ’                    g(xt , at )) +         Оә        (53)
              k=1                                k=1                    t=(kвҲ’1)H+1                        k=1

where K = T /H. Note that the thirdвҲҡterm is equivalent to (T /H)Оә. The second term can be bounded
by Azuma Hoeffding inequality OМғ( T HО№) with probability 1 вҲ’ Оҙ. We now describe how to bound
the first term.
Note from Lemma 9
              K
              X         вҲ—
                       ПҖМ„            ПҖk                         ПҖk                        1 2 О·H 2 K
                    (Vr,1 (xk1 ) вҲ’ Vr,1 (xk1 )) + Y (Hb вҲ’ Оә вҲ’ Vg,1 (xk1 )) вүӨ                Y +      +
                                                                                         2О·     2
              k=1
              K
                        ПҖМ„ вҲ—               ПҖМ„ вҲ—
              X
                      Vr,1   (xk1 ) + Yk Vg,1   (xk1 ) вҲ’ Vr,1
                                                           k
                                                              (xk1 ) + Yk Vg,1
                                                                            k
                                                                               (xk1 ) +
              k=1
              |                                  {z                                         }
                                                 T1
              K
              X                                     K
                                                    X
                        k             ПҖk                                ПҖk
                      Vr,1 (xk1 ) вҲ’ Vr,1 (xk1 ) + Y       k
                                                        Vg,1 (xk1 ) вҲ’ Vg,1 (xk1 )                                        (54)
              k=1                                       k=1
              |                                   {z                                         }
                                                  T2



                                                            24
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                      Оҫ
Now, using О· = вҲҡ              , Y вүӨ Оҫ, Lemma 13 and 15 we obtain with probability 1 вҲ’ 4Оҙ
                     KH 2
              K
                     ПҖвҲ—
              X                    ПҖk                         ПҖk
                                                                             p
                  (Vr,1 (xk1 ) вҲ’ Vr,1 (xk1 )) + Y (Hb вҲ’ Оә вҲ’ Vg,1 (xk1 )) вүӨ O( d3 Оҫ 2 T О№2 )                            (55)
              k=1

Now, from the result of convex optimization (Corollary 1) we obtain that with probability 1 вҲ’ 3Оҙ,
                              K
                              X               ПҖk                       2(1 + Оҫ) вҲҡ 3 2
                                  (Hb вҲ’ Оә вҲ’ Vg,1 (xk1 )) вүӨ                     O( d T О№ )
                                                                           Оҫ
                              k=1

Thus, we obtain bound for the second term. The final result is obtained from the bounds of each
individual term in (53).

G.2   P RELIMINARY R ESULTS

Lemma 16. Under Assumption 2, for any fixed policy ПҖ, let whПҖ be the corresponding weights such
that QПҖj,h = вҹЁП•(x, a), wj,h
                        ПҖ
                            вҹ©, for j вҲҲ {r, g}, then we have for all h вҲҲ [H],
                                                ПҖ
                                                         вҲҡ
                                            ||wj,h ||вүӨ 2H d                                (56)

Proof. From the linearity of the action-value function, we have
                    QПҖj,h (x, a) = jh (x, a) + PVj,hПҖ
                                                      (x, a)
                                                      Z
                                 = вҹЁП•(x, a), Оёj,h вҹ© +      ПҖ
                                                         Vj,h+1 (xвҖІ )вҹЁП•(x, a), dВө(xвҖІ )вҹ©
                                                                   S
                                                 ПҖ
                                    = вҹЁП•(x, a), wj,h вҹ©                                                                 (57)
        ПҖ                 ПҖ
                               (xвҖІ )dВө(xвҖІ ).
                          R
where wj,h   = Оёj,h + S Vj,h+1
                вҲҡ                                      вҲҡ
                              ПҖ
                                    (xвҖІ )dВөh (xвҖІ )||вүӨ H d. Thus, the result follows.
                         R
Now, ||Оёj,h ||вүӨ d, and || S Vj,h+1
                                      k
Lemma 17. For any (k, h), the weight wj,h  satisfies
                                      k
                                                   p
                                   ||wj,h ||вүӨ 2H dkH/О»                                                                 (58)

Proof. For any vector v вҲҲ Rd we have
                          kвҲ’1
                          XX  H                                               X
|v T wj,h
      k
          |= |v T (Оӣ)вҲ’1
                     k                 П•П„h (xП„hвҖІ , aП„hвҖІ )(j(xП„hвҖІ , aП„hвҖІ ) +       ПҖh+1,k (a|xП„hвҖІ +1 )Qkj,h+1 (xП„hвҖІ +1 , a))|
                          П„ =1 hвҖІ =1                                          a
                                                                                                                       (59)
here ПҖh,k (В·|x) is the Soft-max policy.
Note that Qkj,h+1 (x, a) вүӨ H for any (x, a). Hence, from (59) we have
                                    kвҲ’1
                                    XX
                    |v T wj,h
                          k
                              |вүӨ               |v T (Оӣk )вҲ’1 П•П„hвҖІ |.2H
                                    П„ =1 hвҖІ
                                  v             v
                                  ukвҲ’1          ukвҲ’1
                                  uX X          uX X
                                вүӨ t     T  k вҲ’1
                                       v (Оӣ ) v t    П•П„ вҖІ (Оӣk )вҲ’1 П•П„ вҖІ .2H          h           h
                                        П„ =1 hвҖІ                         П„ =1 hвҖІ
                                         вҲҡ
                                           dkH
                                вүӨ 2H||v|| вҲҡ                                                                            (60)
                                            О»
                                                            k
We use Observation 1 to bound the second term. Note that ||wj,h ||= maxv:||v||=1 |v T wj,h
                                                                                       k
                                                                                           |. Hence,
the result follows.


                                                              25
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


G.3      P ROOF OF L EMMA 3

Proof. We prove the result for вӢ„ = r. The proof for вӢ„ = g is similar.
For any x, and h вҲҲ [H],
                                                            H
                        (x) вҲ’ (H + h вҲ’ 1)JrПҖ = E[
                                                            X
                     ПҖ
                   Vr,h                                            r(xвҖІh , aвҖІh ) вҲ’ JrПҖ |ПҖ, xh = x]
                                                           hвҖІ =h
                           H
                    = E[         qrПҖ (xвҖІh , aвҖІh ) вҲ’ PvrПҖ (xвҖІh , aвҖІh )|ПҖ, xh = x]
                           X

                         hвҖІ =h
                           H
                    = E[
                           X
                                 (vrПҖ (xhвҖІ ) вҲ’ vrПҖ (xhвҖІ +1 )|ПҖ, xh = x]
                         hвҖІ =h
                    = vrПҖ (x) вҲ’ E[vrПҖ (xH+1 )]
                                                                       1
          ПҖ
Hence, |Vr,h (x) вҲ’ (H + h вҲ’ 1)JrПҖ |вүӨ sp(vrПҖ ) since |vrПҖ |вүӨ              sp(vrвҲ— ).
                                                                       2

G.4      P ROOF OF L EMMA 9

We first state and prove the following result which is similar to the one proved in Ding et al. (2021).
Lemma 18. For Y вҲҲ [0, Оҫ],
                           K
                           X
                                                     k                     Y2   О·H 2 K
                                (Y вҲ’ Yk )(Hb вҲ’ Оә вҲ’ Vg,1 (xk1 )) вүӨ             +                         (61)
                                                                           2О·     2
                           k=1


Proof.
                  |Yk+1 вҲ’ Y |2 = |P roj[0,Оҫ] (Yk + О·(b вҲ’ Vg,1
                                                           k
                                                              (xk1 ))) вҲ’ P roj[0,Оҫ] (Y )|2
                                   k
                   вүӨ (Yk + О·(b вҲ’ Vg,1 (x1 ))) вҲ’ Y )2
              вүӨ (Yk вҲ’ Y )2 + О· 2 H 2 + 2О·(Yk вҲ’ Y )(b вҲ’ Vg,1
                                                         k
                                                            (xk1 ))                                     (62)
Summing over k, we obtain
                                                    K
                                                    X
                            2                2                        k
          0 вүӨ |YK+1 вҲ’ Y | = |Y1 вҲ’ Y | +2О·                 (Hb вҲ’ Оә вҲ’ Vg,1 (xk1 ))(Yk вҲ’ Y ) + О· 2 H 2 K
                                                    k=1
           K
           X
                               k                 |Y1 вҲ’ Y |2   О·H 2 K
               (Y вҲ’ Yk )(b вҲ’ Vg,1 (xk1 )) вүӨ                 +                                           (63)
                                                     2О·         2
           k=1
Since Y1 = 0, we have the result.

Now, we prove Lemma 9.

Proof. Note that
  XK                           K
                               X
                  ПҖk
Y     (Hb вҲ’ Оә вҲ’ Vg,1 (xk1 )) =                        k
                                 (Y вҲ’ Yk )(Hb вҲ’ Оә вҲ’ Vg,1 (xk1 )) + Yk (Hb вҲ’ Оә) вҲ’ Yk Vg,1
                                                                                      k
                                                                                         (xk1 )
  k=1                                k=1
                                        k             ПҖk
                                 + Y (Vg,1 (xk1 ) вҲ’ Vg,1 (xk1 ))
                                                               K
                                      1 2 О· 2    X
                                                                             k               ПҖk
                                 вүӨ      Y + H K+   (Yk (Hb вҲ’ Оә) + (Y вҲ’ Yk )Vg,1 (xk1 ) вҲ’ Y Vg,1 (xk1 ))
                                     2О·    2
                                                               k=1
                                                               K
                                      1 2 О· 2    X
                                                         ПҖвҲ—                                               ПҖk
                                 вүӨ      Y + H K+   (Yk Vg,1 (xk1 ) вҲ’ Yk Vg,1
                                                                          k
                                                                             (xk1 ) + Y Vg,1
                                                                                          k
                                                                                             (xk1 ) вҲ’ Y Vg,1 (xk1 ))
                                     2О·    2
                                                               k=1
where the first inequality follows from Lemma 18, and the second inequality follows from the fact
       ПҖвҲ—
that Vg,1 (xk1 ) вүҘ Hb вҲ’ Оә. Hence, the result simply follows from the above inequality.


                                                          26
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


G.5    P ROOF OF L EMMA 11

Proof. We only prove for вӢ„ = r, the proof for вӢ„ = g is similar.
Note that QПҖr,h (x, a) = вҹЁП•(x, a), wr,h
                                    ПҖ
                                        вҹ© = rh (x, a) + PVr,h+1
                                                           ПҖ
                                                                (x, a).
               ПҖ
We can write wr,h = (Оӣk )вҲ’1 Оӣk wr,h
                                ПҖ
                                    .
                   kвҲ’1
Now, Оӣk = О»I + П„ =1 hвҖІ П•(xП„hвҖІ , aП„hвҖІ )П•(xП„hвҖІ , aП„hвҖІ )T (See the algorithm 1, line 3). Hence,
                 P     P
                     PkвҲ’1 P
 ПҖ
wr,h = (Оӣk )вҲ’1 (О»I + П„ =1 hвҖІ П•(xП„hвҖІ , aП„hвҖІ )П•(xП„hвҖІ , aП„hвҖІ )T )wr,h
                                                               ПҖ

                                 ПҖ
Finally, from the definition of wr,h , П•(xП„h , aП„h )T wr,h
                                                       ПҖ
                                                           = rh (xП„h , aП„h ) + PVr,h+1 (xП„h , aП„h ) (from Lemma
4).
                                             PkвҲ’1 P
Hence, wr,hПҖ
             = (Оӣk )вҲ’1 О»Iwr,hПҖ
                                + (Оӣk )вҲ’1 П„ =1 hвҖІ П•(xП„hвҖІ , aП„hвҖІ )(rh (xП„hвҖІ , aП„hвҖІ ) + PVr,h+1   ПҖ
                                                                                                       (xП„hвҖІ , aП„hвҖІ ))
Hence, we have
                                       kвҲ’1
                                       XX  H
            k
           wr,h    ПҖ
                вҲ’ wr,h = (Оӣk )вҲ’1                      П•П„hвҖІ [r(xП„hвҖІ , aП„hвҖІ ) + Vr,h+1
                                                                                k
                                                                                     (xП„hвҖІ +1 )] вҲ’ wr,h
                                                                                                    ПҖ

                                       П„ =1 hвҖІ =1
                                                      kвҲ’1
                                                                             (xП„hвҖІ +1 ) вҲ’ PVr,h+1
                                                      XX
           = вҲ’О»(Оӣk )вҲ’1 (wr,h
                         ПҖ
                             ) + (Оӣk )вҲ’1                        П•П„hвҖІ [Vr,h+1
                                                                        k                    k
                                                                                                  (xП„hвҖІ , aП„hвҖІ )]
                                                      П„ =1 hвҖІ
                        kвҲ’1
                                  П•П„hвҖІ [PVr,h+1 (xП„hвҖІ , aП„hвҖІ ) вҲ’ PVr,h+1
                        XX
           + (Оӣk )вҲ’1                       k                        ПҖ
                                                                         (xП„hвҖІ , aП„hвҖІ )]                            (64)
                        П„ =1 hвҖІ


Now, we bound each term in the right hand side of expression in (64). We call those terms as q1 , q2 ,
and q3 respectively.
First, note that
                          |вҹЁП•(x, a), q1 вҹ©| = |О»вҹЁП•(x, a), (Оӣk )вҲ’1 (wr,h
                                                                   ПҖ
                                                                       )вҹ©|
                                             вҲҡ     ПҖ
                                                        q
                                           вүӨ О»||wr,h  || П•(x, a)T (Оӣk )вҲ’1 П•(x, a)                                   (65)

Second, from Lemma 10, for the event in E, we have
                                            вҲҡ
                                               q
                    |вҹЁП•(x, a), q2 вҹ©|вүӨ CdH ПҮ П•(x, a)T (Оӣk )вҲ’1 П•(x, a)                                                (66)

where ПҮ = log(2(C1 + 1) log(|A|)ОҫdT /p). Third,
                                        kвҲ’1
                                                      П•П„hвҖІ [P(Vr,h+1
                                        XX
вҹЁП•(x, a), q3 вҹ© = вҹЁП•(x, a), (Оӣk )вҲ’1                              k        ПҖ
                                                                     вҲ’ Vr,h+1 )(xП„hвҖІ , aП„hвҖІ )]вҹ©
                                        П„ =1 hвҖІ
                        kвҲ’1
                        XX                        Z
= вҹЁП•(x, a), (Оӣk )вҲ’1               П•П„hвҖІ (П•П„hвҖІ )T           k
                                                       (Vr,h+1     ПҖ
                                                               вҲ’ Vr,h+1 )(xвҖІ )dВө(xвҖІ )вҹ©
                        П„ =1 hвҖІ
               Z                                                                     Z
= вҹЁП•(x, a),           k
                   (Vr,h+1     ПҖ
                           вҲ’ Vr,h+1 )(xвҖІ )dВө(xвҖІ )вҹ© вҲ’ вҹЁП•(x, a), О»(Оӣk )вҲ’1                     k
                                                                                         (Vr,h+1     ПҖ
                                                                                                 вҲ’ Vr,h+1 )(xвҖІ )dВө(xвҖІ )вҹ©
                                                                                                                    (67)
The last term in (67) can be bounded as the following
                       Z                                     вҲҡ q
  |вҹЁП•(x, a), О»(Оӣk )вҲ’1 (Vr,h+1
                            k        ПҖ
                                 вҲ’ Vr,h+1 )(xвҖІ )dВө(xвҖІ )вҹ©|вүӨ 2H dО» П•(x, a)T (Оӣk )вҲ’1 П•(x, a) (68)
                                               вҲҡ              вҲҡ
                          )(xвҖІ )dВө(xвҖІ )||2 вүӨ 2H d as ||Вө(S)||вүӨ d. The first term in (67) is equal to
        R k          ПҖ
since || (Vr,h+1 вҲ’ Vr,h+1

                                           P(Vr,h+1
                                               k        ПҖ
                                                    вҲ’ Vr,h+1 )(x, a)                                                (69)


                                                                27
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                     k
Note that вҹЁП•(x, a), wr,h вҹ© вҲ’ QПҖr,h (x, a) = вҹЁП•(x, a), wr,h
                                                        k      ПҖ
                                                           вҲ’ wr,h вҹ© = вҹЁП•(x, a), q1 + q2 + q3 вҹ©. Since
О» = 1, we have from (65), (66,(68), and (69)

                вҹ© вҲ’ QПҖr,h (x, a) вҲ’ P(Vr,h+1
                                                                       вҲҡ
                                                                          q
            k                           k         ПҖ
|вҹЁП•(x, a), wr,h                              вҲ’ Vr,h+1  )(x, a)|вүӨ C3 dH ПҮ П•(x, a)T (Оӣk )вҲ’1 П•(x, a)
                                                                                                 (70)

for some constant C3 which is independent of C1 . Finally, note that
                                вҲҡ    p
                              C3 ПҮ = log(2(C1 + 1) log(|A|)ОҫdT /p)
                                       p
                                   = C3 О№ + log(C1 + 1)
                                       вҲҡ
                                   вүӨ C1 О№                                                                (71)

where О№ = log(2 log(|A|)ОҫdT /p). The last inequality follows from the fact p that О№ вҲҲ [log 2, вҲһ) as
|A|вүҘ
  вҲҡ  2, and C 3 is independent   of C  1 . Hence, we   can  always pick C 3 log 2 + log(C1 + 1) вүӨ
C1 log 4 which satisfies (71) for all values of О№ вҲҲ [log 2, вҲһ).

G.6     P ROOF OF L EMMA 12

Proof. From Lemma 11, we have w.p. 1 вҲ’ 2Оҙ,
                                                                                        q
QПҖr,h (x, a) + Yk QПҖg,h (x, a) вүӨ вҹЁП•(x, a), wr,h
                                            k                     k
                                                вҹ© + Yk вҹЁП•(x, a), wg,h вҹ© + (1 + Yk )ОІ        П•(x, a)T (Оӣk )вҲ’1 П•(x, a)
                              + P(Vr,h+1
                                    ПҖ           ПҖ
                                         + Yk Vg,h+1     k
                                                     вҲ’ Vr,h+1        k
                                                              вҲ’ Yk Vg,h+1 )(x, a)
                              = Qkr,h (x, a) + Yk Qkg,h (x, a) + P(Vh+1
                                                                    ПҖ,Yk    k
                                                                         вҲ’ Vh+1 )(x, a)


G.7     P ROOF OF L EMMA 13

First, we state and prove a supporting result which bounds the value functions corresponding to the
greedy policy and the soft-max policy at a given step. We show that this gap can be controlled by the
parameter Оұ.
                                      log|A|
Lemma 19. VМ„hk (x) вҲ’ Vhk (x) вүӨ
                                        Оұ
where
Definition 4. VМ„hk (В·) = maxa [Qkr,h (В·, a) + Yk Qkg,h (В·, a)].

VМ„hk (В·) is the value function corresponds to the greedy-policy with respect to the composite Q-function.


Proof. Note that
                                      X
                          Vhk (x) =        ПҖh,k (a|x)[Qkr,h (x, a) + Yk Qkg,h (x, a)]                    (72)
                                       a

where

                                       exp(Оұ[Qkr,h (x, a) + Yk Qkg,h (x, a)])
                         ПҖh,k (a|x) = P           k                k
                                                                                                         (73)
                                       a exp(Оұ[Qr,h (x, a) + Yk Qg,h (x, a)])


Denote ax = arg maxa [Qkr,h (x, a) + Yk Qkg,h (x, a)]


                                                      28
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Now, recall from Definition 4 that VМ„hk (x) = [Qkr,h (x, ax ) + Yk Qkg,h (x, ax )]. Then,

                         VМ„hk (x) вҲ’ Vhk (x) = [Qkr,h (x, ax ) + Yk Qkg,h (x, ax )]
                             X
                          вҲ’       ПҖh,k (a|x)[Qkr,h (x, a) + Yk Qkg,h (x, a)]
                              a
                                                                           !
                            log( a exp(Оұ(Qkr,h (x, a) + Yk Qkg,h (x, a))))
                                P
                         вүӨ
                                                     Оұ
                           X
                         вҲ’    ПҖh,k (a|x)[Qkr,h (x, a) + Yk Qkg,h (x, a)]
                              a
                           log(|A|)
                         вүӨ                                                                                 (74)
                              Оұ
where the last inequality follows from Proposition 1 in Pan et al. (2019).

We are now ready to show Lemma 13.

Proof. We prove the lemma by Induction.
First, we prove for the step H.
Note that QkвӢ„,H+1 = 0 = QПҖвӢ„,H+1 .
Under the event in E as described in Lemma 10 and from Lemma 11, we have for j = r, g,
                                                         q
                           k
               |вҹЁП•(x, a), wвӢ„,H (x, a)вҹ© вҲ’ QПҖвӢ„,H (x, a)|вүӨ ОІ П•(x, a)T (Оӣk )вҲ’1 П•(x, a)

Hence, for any (x, a),
                                                              q
               QПҖвӢ„,H (x, a) вүӨ min{вҹЁП•(x, a), wвӢ„,H
                                             k
                                                 вҹ©+ОІ              П•(x, a)T (Оӣk )вҲ’1 П•(x, a), H}
                             = QkвӢ„,H (x, a)                                                                (75)

Hence, from the definition of VМ„hk ,
                                                             X
      VМ„Hk (x) = max[Qkr,H (x, a) + Yk Qkg,h (x, a)] вүҘ            ПҖ(a|x)[QПҖr,H (x, a) + Yk QПҖg,H (x, a)]
                   a
                                                             a

              = VHПҖ,Yk (x)                                                                                 (76)
for any policy ПҖ. Thus, it also holds for ПҖ вҲ— . Hence, from Lemma 19, we have
                                           вҲ—                      log(|A|)
                                      VHПҖМ„ ,Yk (x) вҲ’ VHk (x) вүӨ
                                                                     Оұ

Now, suppose that it is true till the step h + 1 and consider the step h.
Since, it is true till step h + 1, thus, for any policy ПҖ,

                             P(Vh+1
                                ПҖ,Y    k
                                    вҲ’ Vh+1
                                       k
                                           )(x, a) вүӨ
                                                     (H вҲ’ h) log(|A|)
                                                           Оұ
                                                                                                           (77)

From (50) in Lemma 12 and the above result, we have for any (x, a)
                                                                                (H вҲ’ h) log(|A|)
           QПҖr,h (x, a) + Yk QПҖg,h (x, a) вүӨ Qkr,h (x, a) + Yk Qkg,h (x, a) +                               (78)
                                                                                      Оұ
Hence,
                                                            (H вҲ’ h) log(|A|)
                                  VhПҖ,Yk (x) вүӨ VМ„hk (x) +                                                  (79)
                                                                  Оұ


                                                      29
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                                                           log(|A|)
Now, again from Lemma 19, we have VМ„hk (x) вҲ’ Vhk (x) вүӨ                              . Thus,
                                                                              Оұ
                                                                (H вҲ’ h + 1) log(|A|)
                                     VhПҖ,Yk (x) вҲ’ Vhk (x) вүӨ                                                              (80)
                                                                        Оұ
Now, since it is true for any policy ПҖ, it will be true for ПҖ вҲ— . From the definition of V ПҖ,Yk , we have
            вҲ—                                                        (H вҲ’ h + 1) log(|A|)
               ПҖМ„             ПҖМ„ вҲ—          k               k
            Vr,h  (x) + Yk Vg,h    (x) вҲ’ Vr,h   (x) + Yk Vg,h  (x) вүӨ                                   (81)
                                                                                   Оұ
Hence, the result follows by summing over K and considering h = 1.

G.8       P ROOF OF L EMMA 14

Proof. By Lemma 11, for any x, h, a, k
                                                        q
                           k
                         вҹЁwвӢ„,h                    П•(x, a)T (Оӣk )вҲ’1 П•(x, a) вҲ’ QПҖвӢ„,h
                               (x, a), П•(x, a)вҹ© + ОІ                             k


                         вүӨ P(VвӢ„,h+1
                                                         q
                               k        ПҖk
                                    вҲ’ VвӢ„,h+1 )(x, a) + 2ОІ П•(x, a)T (Оӣk )вҲ’1 П•(x, a)                                       (82)
Thus,

                                (x, a) вүӨ P(VвӢ„,h+1
                                                                         q
           QkвӢ„,h (x, a) вҲ’ QПҖвӢ„,h
                              k               k        ПҖk
                                                   вҲ’ VвӢ„,h+1  )(x, a) + 2ОІ П•(x, a)T (Оӣk )вҲ’1 П•(x, a)

   P(VвӢ„,h+1
                                        q
                     ПҖk
         k
               вҲ’ VвӢ„,h+1   )(x, a) + 2ОІ П•(x, a)T (Оӣk )вҲ’1 П•(x, a) вҲ’ (QkвӢ„,h (x, a) вҲ’ QПҖвӢ„,h
                                                                                      k
                                                                                        (x, a)) вүҘ 0
                                                                                                  (83)
          k
                        P                k                ПҖk           P              ПҖk
Since VвӢ„,h  (x) =          a ПҖh,k (a|x)QвӢ„,h (x, a) and VвӢ„,h (x) =        a ПҖh,k (a|x)QвӢ„,h (x, a) where
                           a    k          k
ПҖh,k (a|В·) = S OFT-M AXОұ (Qr,h + Yk Qg,h ) вҲҖa.
Thus, from (83),
                ПҖk
                               X
  k
VвӢ„,h (xkh ) вҲ’ VвӢ„,h (xkh ) =           ПҖh,k (a|xkh )[QkвӢ„,h (xkh , a) вҲ’ QПҖвӢ„,h
                                                                         k
                                                                            (xkh , a)]
                                 a
    X
вүӨ          ПҖh,k (a|xkh )[QkвӢ„,h (xkh , a) вҲ’ QПҖвӢ„,h
                                              k
                                                 (xkh , a)]
      a

           П•(xkh , akh )T (Оӣk )вҲ’1 П•(xkh , akh ) + P(VвӢ„,h+1
          q
                                                               ПҖk
+ 2ОІ                                                  k
                                                           вҲ’ VвӢ„,h+1 )(xkh , akh ) вҲ’ (QkвӢ„,h (xkh , akh ) вҲ’ QПҖвӢ„,h
                                                                                                             k
                                                                                                                (xkh , akh ))
                                                                                                                (84)

Thus, from (84), we have
                                                                                                q
  k             ПҖk                                        ПҖk
VвӢ„,h (xkh ) вҲ’ VвӢ„,h (xkh ) вүӨ DвӢ„,h,1
                             k        k
                                   + DвӢ„,h,2      k
                                            + [VвӢ„,h+1 вҲ’ VвӢ„,h+1 ](xkh+1 ) + 2ОІ                       П•(xkh , akh )T (Оӣk )вҲ’1 П•(xkh , akh )
                                                                                                                         (85)
Hence, by iterating recursively, we have
                                 H
                                 X                              H
                                                                X          q
            k            ПҖk              k        k
          VвӢ„,1 (x1 ) вҲ’ VвӢ„,1 вүӨ          (DвӢ„,h,1 + DвӢ„,h,2 )+            2ОІ    П•(xkh , akh )T (Оӣk )вҲ’1 П•(xkh , akh )         (86)
                                 h=1                            h=1

The result follows.

G.9       P ROOF OF L EMMA 15

Proof. Note from Lemma 14, we have with probability 1 вҲ’ 2Оҙ,
K
X                                    K X
                                     X H                                K X
                                                                        X H             q
        k            ПҖk                          k        k
      VвӢ„,1 (x1 ) вҲ’ VвӢ„,1 (x1 ) вүӨ                (DвӢ„,h,1 + DвӢ„,h,2 )+                 2ОІ    П•(xkh , akh )T (Оӣk )вҲ’1 П•(xkh , akh )
k=1                                  k=1 h=1                            k=1 h=1
                                                                                                                         (87)


                                                              30
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


We, now, bound the individual terms. First, we show that the first term corresponds to a Martingale
difference.
                                            k
For any (k, h) вҲҲ [K] Г— [H], we define Fh,1      as Пғ-algebra generated by the state-action sequences,
reward, and constraint values, {(xi , ai )}(П„,i)вҲҲ[kвҲ’1]Г—[H] вҲӘ {(xki , aki )}iвҲҲ[h] .
                                  П„    П„

                                k
Similarly, we define the Fh,2       as the Пғ-algebra generated by {(xП„i , aП„i )}(П„,i)вҲҲ[kвҲ’1]Г—[H] вҲӘ
   k k                k       k
{(xi , ai )}iвҲҲ[h] вҲӘ {xh+1 }. xH+1 is a null state for any k вҲҲ [K].
                                           k
A filtration is a sequence of Пғ-algebras {Fh,m }(k,h,m)вҲҲ[K]Г—[H]Г—[2] in terms of time index
                              t(k, h, m) = 2(k вҲ’ 1)H + 2(h вҲ’ 1) + m                                         (88)
                             kвҖІ
                  k
which holds that Fh,m вҠӮF     hвҖІ ,mвҖІ      for any t вүӨ tвҖІ .
                                        k        k        k        k
Note from the definitions in (52) that DвӢ„,h,1 вҲҲ Fh,1 and DвӢ„,h,2 вҲҲ Fh,2 . Thus, for any (k, h) вҲҲ
[K] Г— [H],
                            E[DвӢ„,h,1
                               k       k
                                     |FhвҲ’1,2 ] = 0, E[DвӢ„,h,2
                                                       k       k
                                                             |Fh,1 ]=0                                      (89)
                                                               k      kвҲ’1                     1
Notice that t(k, 0, 2) = t(k вҲ’ 1, H, 2) = 2(H вҲ’ 1)k. Clearly, F0,2 = FH,2 for any k вүҘ 2. Let F0,2
be empty. We define a Martingale sequence
                          kвҲ’1
                          XX  H                                  hвҲ’1
                                                                 X                           m
                                                                                             X
              k                        П„        П„                        k        k                 k
             MвӢ„,h,m =                (DвӢ„,i,1 + Dj,i,2 )+               (DвӢ„,i,1 + DвӢ„,i,2 )+         Dj,h,l
                          П„ =1 i=1                               i=1                         l=1
                                               X
                                                                         П„
                     =                                                  DвӢ„,i,l                              (90)
                          (П„,i,l)вҲҲ[K]Г—[H]Г—[2],t(П„,i,l)вүӨt(k,h,m)

where t(k, h, m) = 2(k вҲ’ 1)H + 2(h вҲ’ 1) + m is the time index. Clearly, this martingale is adopted
                    k
to the filtration {Fh,m }(k,h,m)вҲҲ[K]Г—[H]Г—[2] , and particularly
                                  K X
                                  X H
                                                 k        k          K
                                               (Dj,h,1 + Dj,h,2 ) = MвӢ„,H,2                                  (91)
                                  k=1 h=1

        K                                            K                   k          k
Thus, MвӢ„,H,2 is a Martingale difference satisfying |MвӢ„,H,2 |вүӨ 4H since |DвӢ„,h,1 |, |DвӢ„,h,2 |вүӨ 2H
From the Azuma-Hoeffding inequality, we have
                                      K                                     s2
                                  Pr(MвӢ„,H,2 > s) вүӨ 2 exp(вҲ’                        )                         (92)
                                                                          16T H 2
With probability 1 вҲ’ 2Оҙ at least for any вӢ„ = r, g,
                               XX                  p
                                           K
                                        Mj,H,2  вүӨ 16T H 2 log(2/Оҙ)                                          (93)
                                     k     h

Now, we bound the second term. Note that the minimum eigen value of Оӣkh is at least О» = 1 for all
(k, h) вҲҲ [K] Г— [H]. By Lemma 20,
                         K X
                                                         "            #
                        X
                                   k T   k вҲ’1 k            det(ОӣK+1 )
                                 (П•h ) (Оӣh ) П•h вүӨ 2 log                                     (94)
                                                            det(Оӣ0 )
                        k=1 h
                                 Pk P
Moreover, note that ||ОӣK+1 ||= || П„ =1 h П•kh (П•kh )T + О»I||вүӨ О» + T , hence,
                        K X
                        X
                                  k T   k вҲ’1 k             О»+T
                               (П•h ) (Оӣ ) П•h вүӨ 2d log             вүӨ 2dО№                     (95)
                                                             О»
                          k=1 h
Now, by Cauchy-Schwartz inequality, we have
               K XH q                             K X
                                                    H
              X                              вҲҡ    X
                        (П•kh )T (Оӣk )вҲ’1 П•kh вүӨ KH[     (П•kh )T (Оӣk )вҲ’1 П•kh ]1/2
                k=1 h=1                                              k=1 h=1
                                                         вҲҡ
                                                     вүӨ       2dT О№                                          (96)


                                                            31
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023



                   вҲҡ
Note that ОІ = C1 dH О№.
Thus, we have with probability 1 вҲ’ 4Оҙ,
                     K
                     X                                          K
                                                                X
                               k             ПҖk                                      ПҖk
                             Vr,1 (xk1 ) вҲ’ Vr,1 (xk1 ) + Y             k
                                                                    (Vg,1 (xk1 ) вҲ’ Vg,1 (xk1 ))
                     k=1                                        k=1
                                                   p                       вҲҡ
                                      вүӨ (Y + 1)[       2T H 2 log(4/p) + C4 d3 H 2 T О№2 ]             (97)
Hence, the result follows.

G.10    P ROOF OF T HEOREM 2

Note from Lemma 9, Lemma 13, and Lemma 15, we have w.p. 1 вҲ’ 4Оҙ,
                    K                                           K
                    X             вҲ—                             X
                               ПҖМ„           ПҖk                                    ПҖk
                            (Vr,1 (x1 ) вҲ’ Vr,1 (x1 )) + Y             (Hb вҲ’ Оә вҲ’ Vg,1 (xk1 ))
                    k=1                                         k=1
                         Y   2
                             О·       HK log|A|             вҲҡ
                    вүӨ       + H 2K +           + OМғ((Y + 1) d3 H 2 T О№2 )                             (98)
                         2О·  2          Оұ

Replacing Y with 0 in (98), we have
              K                                                       вҲҡ
              X
                     ПҖМ„ вҲ—
                                   ПҖk        О· 2        HK log|A|
                  (Vr,1 (xk1 ) вҲ’ Vr,1 (xk1 ) вүӨ H K+               + O( d3 H 2 T О№2 )
                                             2             Оұ
              k=1
                                               вҲҡ
                        Оҫ               log|A| KH
By noting that О· = вҲҡ        , and Оұ =                , we have
                       KH 2             2(1 + Оҫ + H)
        K                               вҲҡ
                                       Оҫ KH 2 вҲҡ                            вҲҡ
              ПҖМ„ вҲ—
       X                   ПҖk
                   k            k
           (Vr,1 (x1 ) вҲ’ Vr,1 (x1 )) вүӨ          + KH(2(1 + Оҫ + H)) + O( d3 T H 2 О№2 )
                                          2
       k=1
                                            вҲҡ
                                       = OМғ( d3 T H 2 )                                               (99)
where the last equality follows from the fact that KH = T .
Now, observe the third term in (47). Note from Azuma-Hoeffding inequality (since E[Vr,1 (ПҖ k )(xk1 )вҲ’
PkH
  t=(kвҲ’1)H+1 (r(xh , ah ))] = 0 with respect to the Filtration FkвҲ’1 ). Hence, with probability 1 вҲ’ Оҙ

                 T /H                          kH
                  X        ПҖk
                                               X                               p
                        (Vr,1 (xk1 ) вҲ’                   (r(xh , ah ))) вүӨ H     T /H log(2/Оҙ)
                  k=1                     t=(kвҲ’1)H+1
                                                                              вҲҡ
                                                                          вүӨ O( T HО№)                 (100)
Now, using Lemma 3, (45), (99), and (100), in (44) we obtain with probability 1 вҲ’ 5Оҙ,
                                                     вҲҡ                вҲҡ
                 Regret(T ) вүӨ (T /H)sp(vrвҲ— ) + OМғ( d3 T H 2 ) + OМғ( T H)                             (101)

Since H = T 1/4 /d3/4 , we obtain with probability 1 вҲ’ 5Оҙ,
            Regret(T ) вүӨ T 3/4 d3/4 sp(vrвҲ— ) + OМғ((dT )3/4 ) = (1 + sp(vrвҲ— ))OМғ((dT )3/4 )           (102)
                                                                                вҲҡ
                                                            Оҫ             log|A| KH
Now, we bound Violation. By noting that О· = вҲҡ                   , and Оұ =              , we have from (98),
                                                           KH 2           2(1 + Оҫ + H)
                  K                                          K
                  X           вҲ—                              X
                           ПҖМ„           ПҖk                                   ПҖk
                        (Vr,1 (x1 ) вҲ’ Vr,1 (xk1 )) + Y           (Hb вҲ’ Оә вҲ’ Vg,1 (xk1 ))
                  k=1                                        k=1
                        вҲҡ               вҲҡ                               вҲҡ
                  вүӨОҫ        KH 2 +          KH(2(1 + Оҫ + H)) + O((Оҫ + 1) d3 H 2 T О№2 )               (103)


                                                           32
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


From the convex optimization result (Corollary 1), we obtain
                       K
                      X                 ПҖk           2(1 + Оҫ) вҲҡ 3 2
                          (Hb вҲ’ Оә вҲ’ Vg,1   (xk1 )) вүӨ         OМғ( d H T )                        (104)
                                                         Оҫ
                          k=1

Also note from Azuma-Hoeffding inequality, w.p. 1 вҲ’ Оҙ
                   T /H                       kH
                   X         ПҖk
                                              X                            p
                          (Vg,1 (xk1 ) вҲ’                g(xt , at )) вүӨ H    T /H log(2/Оҙ)       (105)
                   k=1                     t=(kвҲ’1)H+1
Hence, combining (104) and (105), we obtain w.p. 1 вҲ’ 5Оҙ,
   K                          T /H                     kH
   X              ПҖk   k
                              X ПҖ                      X                         (1 + Оҫ) вҲҡ 3
      (Hb вҲ’ Оә вҲ’ Vg,1 (x1 )) +      (Vg,1k (xk1 ) вҲ’            g(xt , at )) вүӨ OМғ(          d T H 2)
                                                                                    Оҫ
   k=1                        k=1                  t=(kвҲ’1)H+1

                                       (1 + Оҫ) вҲҡ 3
   Violation(T ) вүӨ (T /H)Оә + OМғ(                d T H 2)
                                          Оҫ
                 (1 + Оҫ)
   = (1 + Оә)OМғ(           (dT )3/4 )                                                            (106)
                     Оҫ
where the last equality follows from the fact that H = T 1/4 /d3/4 .

G.11    D IFFERENCES IN A NALYSIS FOR A LGORITHMS 1 AND 2

Note that we also need to show that log Пө-covering number for v function class is also log(T ) in
Algorithm 1. However, since Algorithm 1 and Algorithm 2 are different, the analysis is also different.
In particular, in Algorithm 2 we consider a primal-dual type algorithm, hence, the policy is based on
the combined state-action value function. Thus, we need to show that the log Пө-covering number for
individual value function scales at most with log(T ) even though the policy is based on the composite
Q-function. On the other hand, in Algorithm 1, we directly search for the policy which solves a
constrained optimization problem. In Algorithm 2 the policy is itself a function of QвӢ„ and dual
variable Yk . Thus, we obtain the result only using the property of the function class of QвӢ„ and the
boundedness of Yk . On the other hand a separate policy function class is defined for Algorithm 1 and
we obtain the result by exploiting of the smoothness property of the function class. Thus, our analysis
would work for any policy class with smoothness property (Appendix F.6) unlike Algorithm 2. We
need that the optimal policy should also belong to О  in Algorithm 1. In contrast, in Algorithm 2 we
consider an unconstrained version of the episodic CMDP setup. Carefully crafted Soft-max policy
enables us to bound the gap with the optimal policy in the episodic setup. Hence, we do not need to
search over a feasible policy space unlike in Algorithm 1.

G.12    S UPPORTING R ESULTS

The following result is shown in Abbasi-Yadkori et al. (2011) and in Lemma D.2 in Jin et al. (2020).
Lemma 20. Let {П•t }tвүҘ0 be a sequence in в„ңd satisfying suptвүҘ0 ||П•t ||вүӨ 1. For any t вүҘ 0, we define
            PK P
ОӣK = Оӣ0 + k=1 h П•kh (П•kh )T . Then if the smallest eigen value of Оӣ0 be at least 1, we have
                                 X K X
                      det(ОӣK )              k T     kвҲ’1 вҲ’1 k             det(ОӣK )
                log              вүӨ        (П•h ) (Оӣ      ) П•h вүӨ 2 log                          (107)
                      det(Оӣ0 )                                           det(Оӣ0 )
                                           k=1 h
Theorem 4. [Concentration of Self-Normalized Process Abbasi-Yadkori et al. (2011)] Let {Пөt }вҲһ   t=1
be a real-valued stochastic process with corresponding filtration {Ft }вҲһ
                                                                       t=0 . Let Пөt |FtвҲ’1 be a zero
mean and Пғ sub-Gaussian, i.e., E[Пөt |FtвҲ’1 ] = 0, and
                                   вҲҖО¶ вҲҲ в„ң,         E[eО¶Пө |FtвҲ’1 ] вүӨ eО¶ Пғ /2 .
                                                        t
                                                                      2    2
                                                                                                (108)
Let {П•t }вҲһ           d
                                       process where П•t вҲҲ FtвҲ’1 . Assume Оӣ0 вҲҲ в„ңdГ—d is a positive-
         t=1 be a в„ң -valued Stochastic P
                                         k
define matrix, let, t = kH, Оӣt = Оӣ0 + j=1 h П•jh (П•jh )T . Then for any Оҙ > 0 with probability at
                                             P
least 1 вҲ’ Оҙ, we have
                             t
                                                     "                          #
                           X
                                        2       2      det(Оӣt )1/2 det(Оӣ0 )вҲ’1/2
                         ||     П•s Пөs ||ОӣвҲ’1 вүӨ 2Пғ log                                            (109)
                            s=1
                                          t                        Оҙ


                                                        33
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


The next result characterizes the covering number of an Euclidean ball (Lemma 5.2 in Vershynin
(2010)).
Lemma 21. Let {xt }вҲһ   t=1 be a stochastic process on state space X with corresponding filtration {Ft },
                                                                                          PtвҲ’1
{П•t } be a Rd -values stochastic process where П•t вҲҲ FtвҲ’1 and ||П•t ||вүӨ 1, Оӣt = О»I + s=1 П•s П•Ts ,
and V be an arbitrary set of functions defined on X with NПө be its Пө-covering number with respect to
dist(V, V вҖІ ) = supx |V (x) вҲ’ V вҖІ (x)| for some fixed Пө > 0. Then for any Оҙ > 0 with probability 1 вҲ’ Оҙ
for any t, v вҲҲ V so that supx |v(x)|вүӨ H, we have
                                             2                 "                                     #
    tвҲ’1
          П•s (v(xs ) вҲ’ E[v(xs )|FtвҲ’1 ])

    X
                                                           2       d           t+О»                NПө
                                                    вүӨ 4H             log                    + log      + 8t2 Пө2 /О»2   (110)
    s=1
                                                                   2            О»                 Оҙ
                                             ОӣвҲ’1
                                              t
                             PkвҲ’1 P             П„    П„ T                          П„     d
Observation 1. Let Оӣk =          П„ =1       hвҖІ П•hвҖІ (П•hвҖІ ) + О»I, where О» > 0, and П•hвҖІ вҲҲ R , then
                                         kвҲ’1
                                         XX
                                                    (П•П„hвҖІ )T (Оӣk )вҲ’1 П•П„hвҖІ вүӨ d
                                         П„ =1 hвҖІ

                   PkвҲ’1 P            П„ T    k вҲ’1 П„
                                                          PkвҲ’1 P                 П„ T   k вҲ’1 П„
Proof. We have
PkвҲ’1 P                 П„ =1    hвҖІ (П•hвҖІ ) (Оӣ )    П•hвҖІ =      П„ =1        hвҖІ tr((П•hвҖІ ) (Оӣ )    П•hвҖІ ). Further,
                  П„ T      k вҲ’1 П„                  вҲ’1
                                                      PkвҲ’1 P        П„      П„ T
  П„ =1    вҖІ tr((П•
         h P h P   вҖІ )  (Оӣ  )    П• hвҖІ ) = tr((Оӣk )     П„ =1   h вҖІ П• h вҖІ (П• hвҖІ ) ). Given the eigen value de-
                kвҲ’1          П„     П„ T                            T
composition, П„ =1 hвҖІ П•hвҖІ (П•hвҖІ ) = Udiag(О»1 , . . . , О»d )U . Thus, Оӣk = Udiag(О»1 +О», . . . , О»d +
О»)UT .
                   PkвҲ’1 P                         Pd
Hence, tr((Оӣk )вҲ’1 П„ =1 hвҖІ П•П„hвҖІ (П•П„hвҖІ )T ) = l=1 О»l /(О»l + d) вүӨ d.
Lemma 22. [Covering Number of Euclidean Ball] For any Пө > 0, the Пө-covering number of the
Euclidean ball in Rd with radius R is upper bounded by (1 + 2R/Пө)d .

We have used the following result from the optimization which is proved in Lemma 9 in Ding et al.
(2021).
Lemma 23. Let Y вҲ— be the optimal dual variable of the episodic CMDP (46), and C вүҘ 2Y вҲ— , then, if
                                 вҲ—
                              ПҖМ„            ПҖk                  ПҖk
                            Vr,1 (xk1 ) вҲ’ Vr,1 (xk1 ) + C(b вҲ’ Vg,1 (xk1 )) вүӨ Оҙk                                       (111)
then
                                                    ПҖk  2Оҙk
                                             [b вҲ’ Vg,1 (xk1 )]+ вүӨ
                                                            .                                                         (112)
                                                         C
Corollary 1. Let Y вҲ— be the optimal dual variable, and C вүҘ 2Y вҲ— , if
                           K
                           X         вҲ—
                                   ПҖМ„            ПҖk                  ПҖk
                                 Vr,1 (xk1 ) вҲ’ Vr,1 (xk1 ) + C(b вҲ’ Vg,1 (xk1 )) вүӨ Оҙ                                   (113)
                           k=1

then
                                             K
                                             X            ПҖk                   2Оҙ
                                                   (b вҲ’ Vg,1 (xk1 )) вүӨ                                                (114)
                                                                               C
                                             k=1

                      вҲ—         ПҖk                  ПҖk
                  ПҖМ„
Proof. Let Оҙk = Vr,1 (xk1 ) вҲ’ Vr,1 (xk1 ) + C(b вҲ’ Vg,1 (xk1 ), then from Lemma 23,

                                        ПҖk                  ПҖk                           2Оҙk
                                 (b вҲ’ Vg,1 (xk1 )+ вүӨ (b вҲ’ Vg,1 (xk1 )) вүӨ                                              (115)
                                                                                          C
By summing over k, we obtain
                                     K                              X 2Оҙk
                                     X            ПҖk                                    2Оҙ
                                           (b вҲ’ Vg,1 (xk1 )) вүӨ                      вүӨ                                 (116)
                                                                           C            C
                                     k=1                             k
                                                                P
where the last inequality follows from the fact that                k Оҙk вүӨ Оҙ.


                                                           34
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


H     P ROOF OF R ESULTS IN S ECTION 4
Organization: We, first, provide a proof sketch of Theorem 3 in (Appendix H.1). Subsequently, we
provide a detailed proof. We show that how we can achieve zero constraint violation via tweaking the
algorithm in Appendix H.5.
Notations for this Section: As shown in Appendix A of Wei et al. (2021a), we assume that
                                                                                T
||П•(x, a)||2 вүӨ 1. Without loss of generality,
                                           вҲҡ we assumeвҲҡthat we represent П•(x, a) e1 = 1 for some
vector e1 for every (x, a). ||Вө(S)||2 вүӨ d, ||Оёj ||2 вүӨ вҲҡd for j = r, g. Also, for every policy ПҖ,
q ПҖ (x, a) can be written as П•(x, a)T wПҖ . ||wПҖ ||вүӨ 6tmix d (by Lemma 34). We denote qjk (x, a) as
(wjk )T П•(x, a).

H.1   P ROOF S KETCH OF T HEOREM 3

Regret can be decomposed as the following
                                 K
                                 X                          X    kB
                                                                 X
                  Regret(T ) =         B[JrвҲ— вҲ’ JrПҖk ] + [                  (JrПҖk вҲ’ r(xt , at ))]   (117)
                                 k=1                        k t=(kвҲ’1)B+1

In the following, we bound each of the two terms at the right hand side. Unlike the unconstrained
setup Wei et al. (2021a), here the decision depends on both qrk and qgk , thus, the analysis will also be
                                                                    PT /B
different. In particular, in order to bound the first term, we bound k=1 B[JrвҲ— вҲ’JrПҖk ]+BY (bвҲ’JgПҖk ).
Specifically, since JgвҲ— вүҘ b, we obtain for any Y вҲҲ [0, Оҫ]
       T /B
       X
              B[JrвҲ— вҲ’ JrПҖk ] + BY (b вҲ’ JgПҖk ) вүӨ
       k=1
           T /B
           X
       B     [JrвҲ— + Yk JgвҲ— вҲ’ JrПҖk вҲ’ Yk JgПҖk ] + (Y вҲ’ Yk )B(JЛҶk вҲ’ JgПҖk ) +B (Y вҲ’ Yk )(b вҲ’ JЛҶk )
                                                                           |      {z        }
         k=1
                                                |        {z          }
       |                {z                 }              T2                      T3
                          T1

Note that since the above expression is true for any Y вҲҲ [0, Оҫ], we can recover the bound on regret by
setting Y = 0.
For T1 , we employ the value-difference lemma. This step may  Pseem similar to the one considered for
the unconstrained version (Wei et al., 2021a) which bounds k (JrвҲ— вҲ’ JrПҖk ). However, there are two
important differences. We have an additional constraint term scaled by the dual variable Yk which
also changes over time. Second, we provide high probability bound instead of expectation bound in
Wei et al. (2021a). We utilize the one-step decent result of OMD from Lemma 3.3 in Cai et al. (2020),
Azuma-Hoeffding inequality, and the boundedness of ||wвӢ„k || using Assumption 6 to bound the term.
The final result is shown in Lemma 24.
Lemma 24. With probability 1 вҲ’ Оҙ,
                                                                    B
                               T1 вүӨ BKO(Оұ(1 + Оҫ)2 N 2 /Пғ 2 ) +        log(|A|)                     (118)
                                                                    Оұ

Proof. See Appendix H.1.1.

Note that in the unconstrained setup the term T2 does not arise. For T2 , we rely on the fact Ek (JЛҶk вҲ’
JgПҖk ) are close since the way we collected samples JЛҶk is close to an unbiased estimator for JgПҖk
(Lemma 33). Using the fact that |Y вҲ’ Yk |вүӨ Оҫ, we bound T2 as the following
Lemma 25. With probability 1 вҲ’ Оҙ,
                                           Оҫ     p
                                    T2 вүӨ + Оҫ T B log(2/Оҙ)                                         (119)
                                           T

Proof. See Appendix H.1.2.


                                                       35
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


In order to bound T3 , we utilize
                            вҲҡ the result from the dual-domain analysis (Corollary 3). We show that
the upper bound of T3 вүӨ Оҫ T B.
Hence, we have with probability 1 вҲ’ 2Оҙ,
                  T /B
                  X
                         B[JrвҲ— вҲ’ JrПҖk ] + BY (b вҲ’ JgПҖk ) вүӨ
                  k=1
                                               B log(|A|)          p
                  BKO(Оұ(1 + Оҫ)2 N 2 /Пғ 2 ) +                 + O(Оҫ T B log(2/Оҙ))              (120)
                                                      Оұ
 In order to bound the second term in (117), we need to show that policy between two epochs change
slowly. Here, we use the value of the hyper-parameter Оұ, and the upper bound of the dual variable to
bound the term
Lemma 26. With probability 1 вҲ’ 2Оҙ,
                            kB
                            X                                       q
                                   (JrПҖk вҲ’ r(xt , at )) вүӨ OМғ((1 + Оҫ) T t3mix )                (121)
                         t=(kвҲ’1)B+1


Proof. See Appendix H.2

Hence, combining the above, setting Y = 0 and replacing (120) in (117) we obtain with probability
1 вҲ’ 4Оҙ
                                                  B
                                                                          q
             Regret(T ) вүӨ K OМғ(Оұ(1 + Оҫ)2 /Пғ 2 ) + log(|A|) + OМғ((1 + Оҫ) T t3mix            (122)
                                                  Оұ
Now, replacing the value of Оұ, and B, we obtain
                                                        q
                               Regret(T ) вүӨ OМғ((1 + Оҫ)/Пғ T t3mix )                         (123)
Constraint Violation: Similar to the regret step, we decompose the violation in the following form
                         X                       X               B
                                                                 X
                               B(b вҲ’ JgПҖk ) +     (JgПҖk вҲ’                  g(xt , at ))
                           k                     k            t=(kвҲ’1)B+1

The second term can be upper bounded in the similar way as the second term in (117) with probability
1 вҲ’ 2Оҙ. For the first term, we observe
                                X                  X
                                    B(b вҲ’ JgПҖk ) вүӨ    B(JgвҲ— вҲ’ JgПҖk )                          (124)
                                     k                    k
Now, from (120), we have with probability 1 вҲ’ 2Оҙ
              X                                                p
                  B[JrвҲ— вҲ’ JrПҖk ] + BY (b вҲ’ JgПҖk ) вүӨ O((1 + Оҫ)/Пғ T B log(2/p))                   (125)
                 k
Finally, by replacing B and applying Corollary 4, we obtain with probability 1 вҲ’ 2Оҙ
                                                2(1 + Оҫ)
                             X                              q
                                B(b вҲ’ JgПҖk ) вүӨ           OМғ( T t3mix )                          (126)
                                                   ОҫПғ
                                 k
Hence, the result follows.

H.1.1    P ROOF OF L EMMA 24
We, first, state Lemmas 27,28,29 which will be useful for proving Lemma 24.
Lemma 27. Using the value difference lemma (Lemma 15) in Wei et al. (2020), we have
                                  Z X
                                                                                               вҲ—
  JrвҲ— + Yk JgвҲ— вҲ’ JrПҖk вҲ’ Yk JgПҖk =      (ПҖ вҲ— (a|x) вҲ’ ПҖk (a|x))(qrПҖk (x, a) + Yk qgПҖk (x, a))dОҪ ПҖ (x)
                                         S   a
                                                                                                (127)
         вҲ—
where ОҪ ПҖ (x) is the stationary distribution corresponding to the stationary policy ПҖ вҲ— .


                                                     36
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                 вҲ—
                                     (a|x) вҲ’ ПҖk (a|x))N (JrПҖk + Yk JgПҖk ) = 0 since JвӢ„ПҖk is constant.
                       P
Also note that            a (ПҖ

From Lemma 15 in Wei et al. (2021a)
Lemma 28. Let E[В·|П„k,m ] denote the expectation conditioned on (xП„k,m , aП„k,m ) and all the history
before П„k,m , then

                                     |E[Rk,m |П„k,m ] вҲ’ (qrПҖk (xП„k,m , aП„k,m ) + N JrПҖk )|вүӨ
                                                                                           1
                                                                                          T7
                                     |E[Gk,m |П„k,m ] вҲ’ (qgПҖk (xП„k,m , aП„k,m ) + N JgПҖk )|вүӨ 7
                                                                                           1
                                                                                                               (128)
                                                                                          T

Thus, Rk,m and Gk,m are close to the unbiased estimator of qrПҖk +N JrПҖk and qgПҖk +N KgПҖk respectively.
Also from Lemma 16 in Wei et al. (2021a)
Lemma 29. For вӢ„ = r, g,

                                              ||Ek [wвӢ„k ] вҲ’ (wвӢ„ПҖk + N JвӢ„ПҖk e1 )||вүӨ
                                                                                     1
                                                                                                               (129)
                                                                                     T2
where Ek is the expectation conditioned on all history before epoch k.

Now, we are ready to prove Lemma 24.
Proof From Lemma 27, We express T1 in (117) as
  XX
B        (ПҖ вҲ— (a|x) вҲ’ ПҖk (a|x))(qrПҖk (x, a) + Yk qgПҖk (x, a) + N JrПҖk + Yk N JgПҖk ) =
      k       a

    (ПҖ вҲ— (a|x) вҲ’ ПҖk (a|x))((qrПҖk (x, a) + Yk qgПҖk (x, a) + N JrПҖk + Yk N JgПҖk ) вҲ’ Ek [qrk (x, a) + Yk qgk (x, a)])
  XX
B
      k       a
  |                                                                     {z                                              }
                                                                        T4

                      (ПҖ вҲ— (a|x) вҲ’ ПҖk (a|x))(Ek [qrk (x, a) + Yk qgk (x, a)] вҲ’ (qrk (x, a) + Yk qgk (x, a)))
          XX
+B
              k   a
          |                                                    {z                                         }
                                                               T5
          XX
+B                    (ПҖ вҲ— (a|x) вҲ’ ПҖk (a|x))(qrk (x, a) + Yk qgk (x, a))                                       (130)
              k   a
          |                                   {z                          }
                                              T6

Bounding T4 : The bound of T4 is similar to the unconstrained case Wei et al. (2021a). The only
difference is that since we have extra term corresponding to Yk qgk , there is an additional scaling factor
of (1 + Оҫ). The details are in the followingвҖ“
Note that qвӢ„ПҖk (x, a) = (wвӢ„ПҖk )T П•(x, a), JвӢ„ПҖk = JвӢ„ПҖk eT1 П•(x, a),and qвӢ„k (x, a) = (wвӢ„k )T П•(x, a).
From Lemma 29, we obtain that
   |Ek [wвӢ„k ]T П•(x, a) вҲ’ (wвӢ„ПҖk + N JвӢ„ПҖk e1 )T П•(x, a)|вүӨ ||Ek [wвӢ„k ] вҲ’ (wвӢ„ПҖk + N JвӢ„ПҖk e1 )T ||||П•(x, a)||
        1
    вүӨ 2
      T
Hence,
(ПҖ вҲ— (a|x) вҲ’ ПҖk (a|x))((qrПҖk (x, a) + Yk qgПҖk (x, a) + N JrПҖk + Yk N JgПҖk ) вҲ’ Ek [qrk (x, a) + Yk qgk (x, a)]) вүӨ
||ПҖ вҲ— (В·|x) вҲ’ ПҖk (В·|x)||1 ||(qrПҖk (x, a) + Yk qgПҖk (x, a) + N JrПҖk + Yk N JgПҖk ) вҲ’ Ek [qrk (x, a) + Yk qgk (x, a)]||вҲһ
       1+Оҫ
 вүӨ2 2
         T
Hence,
                                                                    1+Оҫ
                                                           T4 вүӨ 2                                              (131)
                                                                     T


                                                                37
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Bounding T5 : Since we are providing high probability bound instead unlike the expected regret
bound in Wei et al. (2021a), we need to bound T5 whereas such a term did not arise in Wei et al.
(2021a).
T5 is Martingale difference with respect to the Filtration FkвҲ’1 which contains all the histories till
epoch k. |qrk (x, a) + Yk qgk (x, a)|вүӨ (1 + Оҫ)N/Пғ (From Lemma 31). Hence, from Azuma-Hoeffding
inequality, we obtain w.p. 1 вҲ’ Оҙ,

             (ПҖ вҲ— (a|x) вҲ’ ПҖk (a|x))(Ek [qrk (x, a) + Yk qgk (x, a)] вҲ’ (qrk (x, a) + Yk qgk (x, a)))
     XX

       k       a
                                                                                    p
                                                              вүӨ O(2(1 + Оҫ)N/Пғ           2T /B log(2/Оҙ))        (132)

Thus, multiplying the above with B, we obtain
                                                               p
                                      T5 вүӨ O(2(1 + Оҫ)N/Пғ           T B log(2/Оҙ))                               (133)

with probability 1 вҲ’ Оҙ.
Bounding T6 : In the unconstrained case Wei et al. (2021a) bounds E[ k a (ПҖ вҲ— (a|x) вҲ’
                                                                                P P
ПҖk (a|x))qrk (x, a)] (Lemma 19 in Wei et al. (2021a)). T6 may seem similar to the above expres-
sion, however, there are subtle differences. First, we do not have expectation since we need to
consider high-probability bound. Second, we have additional Yk qgk term where Yk is changing over k.
Thus, we need to use different techniques compared to Wei et al. (2021a). In particular, we rely
on the analysis of OMD and one-step decent result from Lemma 3.3 in Cai et al. (2020) to bound T6 .
In particular, we use the result from Lemma 3.3 in Cai et al. (2020), to obtain
                                                1                           1
    вҹЁПҖ вҲ— вҲ’ ПҖkвҲ’1 , qrkвҲ’1 + YkвҲ’1 qgkвҲ’1 вҹ© вүӨ          Оұ||qrkвҲ’1 + Yk qgkвҲ’1 ||2вҲһ + (D(ПҖ вҲ— |ПҖkвҲ’1 ) вҲ’ D(ПҖ вҲ— |ПҖk ))
                                                2                           Оұ
Now, by the construction of wrkвҲ’1 and wgkвҲ’1 , we have ||qrkвҲ’1 + Yk qgkвҲ’1 ||вҲһ = O((1 + Оҫ)2 N 2 /Пғ 2 )
(Lemma 31). Finally, by telescope summing over k and using the fact that D(В·) is non-negative,
we have the result. The details can be found in Lemma 30. Specifically, we use the result from
Lemma 30 to bound T6 вҖ“
                                                                        B
                                   T6 вүӨ T O(Оұ(1 + Оҫ)2 N 2 /Пғ 2 ) +        log(|A|)                             (134)
                                                                        Оұ
since KB = T .
Hence, we have with probability 1 вҲ’ Оҙ,
       K X
       X
   B               (ПҖ вҲ— (a|x) вҲ’ ПҖk (a|x))(qrПҖk (x, a) + Yk qgПҖk (x, a))
       k=1 a
       2(1 + Оҫ)                                 B                         Np
       вүӨ          + T O(Оұ(1 + Оҫ)2 N 2 /Пғ 2 ) + log(|A|) + O((1 + Оҫ)           T B log(2/Оҙ)) (135)
          T                                     Оұ                          Пғ
                         Пғ                Пғ
Since Оұ = min{           вҲҡ        ,              }, N = 8tmix log(T ), B = 32N log(dT )Пғ вҲ’1 , then,
                  (1 + Оҫ) T tmix 24(1 + Оҫ)N
   XX                                                                         q
 B         (ПҖ вҲ— (a|x) вҲ’ ПҖk (a|x))(qrПҖk (x, a) + Yk qgПҖk (x, a)) вүӨ OМғ((1 + Оҫ)/Пғ T t3mix )
       k       a
 XZ                X                                                            вҲ—
                                                                                                          q
               B       (ПҖ вҲ— (a|x) вҲ’ ПҖk (a|x))(qrПҖk (x, a) + Yk qgПҖk (x, a))dОҪ ПҖ (x) вүӨ OМғ((1 + Оҫ)/Пғ         T t3mix )
   k       X       a

                                                                                                      вҲ—
                                                                                                   dОҪ ПҖ (x) = 1.
                                                                                              R
where the last inequality follows from the dominated convergence theorem and                   X
Hence, we have with probability 1 вҲ’ Оҙ,
                                                                q
                                           T1 вүӨ OМғ((1 + Оҫ)/Пғ        T t3mix )


                                                         38
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


H.1.2    P ROOF OF L EMMA 25
Proof. We can decompose T2 as
                   B(Y вҲ’ Yk )(Ek (JЛҶk ) вҲ’ J ПҖk ) + B(Y вҲ’ Yk )(JЛҶk вҲ’ Ek (JЛҶk ))
                X
                                                                                                                     (136)
                     k


From Lemma 33, |Ek (JЛҶk ) вҲ’ J ПҖk |вүӨ 7 . Also note that (Y вҲ’ Yk )(JЛҶk вҲ’ Ek (JЛҶk )) is a Martingale
                                     2
                                    T
sequence where JЛҶk вүӨ 1. Further, |Y вҲ’ Yk |вүӨ Оҫ. Thus, we have with probability 1 вҲ’ Оҙ,
                         K
                               B(Y вҲ’ Yk )(JЛҶk вҲ’ Ek (JЛҶk )) вүӨ BОҫ
                         X                                                  p
                                                                                2T /B log(2/Оҙ)                       (137)
                         k=1

Since K = T /B, hence, with probability 1 вҲ’ Оҙ
                                                    Оҫ     p
                                          T2 вүӨ       6
                                                       + Оҫ T B log(2/Оҙ)
                                                   T


                                    Оҫ
From Corollary 3 and О· = p                , we have
                                   T /B
                                                           вҲҡ
                                                     T3 вүӨ Оҫ T B                                                      (138)
where recall that T3 is the third term in (117).

H.2     P ROOF OF L EMMA 26

Proof. Note that
         kB
                                                                    (qrПҖk (xt , at ) вҲ’ Ext+1 вҲјP(В·|(xt ,at )) (vrПҖk (xt+1 )))
X        X                                   X          X
                 (JrПҖk вҲ’ r(xt , at )) =
 k t=(kвҲ’1)B+1                                k t=(kвҲ’1)B+1
    X       X                                            X           X
=                    (qrПҖk (xt , at ) вҲ’ vrПҖk (xt )) +                           (vrПҖk (xt ) вҲ’ vrПҖk (xt+1 ))
      k t=(kвҲ’1)B+1                                           k t=(kвҲ’1)B+1

                                        Ex
    X       X
+                    vrПҖk (xt+1 ) вҲ’       t+1 вҲј   P(В·|xt ,at ) (vrПҖk (xt+1 ))
      k t=(kвҲ’1)B+1
    X       X                                            X
=                    (qrПҖk (xt , at ) вҲ’ vrПҖk (xt )) +           (vrПҖk (xk1 ) вҲ’ vrПҖkвҲ’1 (xk1 )) + vrПҖ1 (x11 ) вҲ’ vrПҖK (xK
                                                                                                                     KB )
      k t=(kвҲ’1)B+1                                       k=2

                     vrПҖk (xt+1 ) вҲ’ Ext+1 вҲјP(В·|xt ,at ) (vrПҖk (xt+1 ))
    X       X
+
      k t=(kвҲ’1)B+1

Note that |v ПҖ1 (x11 )|вүӨ O(tmix ), and |v ПҖK (xK
                                               KB )|вүӨ O(tmix ), thus, we have

        X       kB
                X
                          (JrПҖk вҲ’ r(xt , at ))
         k t=(kвҲ’1)B+1
            X      X                                                X
        =                      (qrПҖk (xt , at ) вҲ’ vrПҖk (xt )) +          (vrПҖk (xk1 ) вҲ’ vrПҖkвҲ’1 (xk1 )) + O(tmix )
            k t=(kвҲ’1)B+1                                            k=2

                                                Ex
            X      X
        +                      vrПҖk (xt+1 ) вҲ’        t+1 вҲј   P(В·|xt ,at ) (vrПҖk (xt+1 ))                             (139)
            k t=(kвҲ’1)B+1

The first term is a Martingale sequence. Hence, with prob. 1 вҲ’ Оҙ, we have
                   X       X                                            p
                                  (qrПҖk (xt , at ) вҲ’ vrПҖk (xt )) вүӨ 6tmix 2T log(2/Оҙ)                                 (140)
                     k t=(kвҲ’1)B+1



                                                              39
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


For the second term, since |ПҖk (a|x) вҲ’ ПҖkвҲ’1 (a|x)|вүӨ O(Оұ((1 + Оҫ)N/Пғ)ПҖkвҲ’1 (a|x)) (by Lemma 32),
then, by Lemma 7 in Wei et al. (2020), we have
                               vrПҖk (x) вҲ’ vrПҖkвҲ’1 (x) = O(Оұ(1 + Оҫ)N 3 /Пғ)                                  (141)

The third term is again a Martingale sequence. Hence, we have with probability 1 вҲ’ Оҙ,

                         vrПҖk (xt+1 ) вҲ’ Ext+1 вҲјP(В·|xt ,at ) (vrПҖk (xt+1 )) вүӨ 6tmix 2T log(2/Оҙ)
        X        X                                                                p

          k t=(kвҲ’1)B+1

Hence, we have with probability 1 вҲ’ 2Оҙ,
   X       kB
           X                                                                            p
                     (JrПҖk вҲ’ r(xt , at )) вүӨ (T /B)O(Оұ(1 + Оҫ)N 3 /Пғ) + 12tmix                2T log(2/Оҙ)   (142)
      k t=(kвҲ’1)B+1

Now, using the value of Оұ, we obtain with probability 1 вҲ’ 2Оҙ,
                                 kB
                                 X                                   q
                                           (JrПҖk вҲ’ r(xt , at )) вүӨ OМғ( T t3mix )                           (143)
                             t=(kвҲ’1)B+1


H.3    C ONSTRAINT V IOLATION B OUND

From (120), and the value of Оұ, N , and B, we have with probability 1 вҲ’ 2Оҙ
                  X                                                   q
                      B(JrвҲ— вҲ’ JrПҖk ) + Y B(b вҲ’ JgПҖk ) вүӨ OМғ((1 + Оҫ)/Пғ T t3mix )                            (144)
                      k


Now, from Corollary 4
                                                          2(1 + Оҫ)
                               X                                     q
                                    B(b вҲ’ JgПҖk ) вүӨ OМғ(                   T t3mix )                        (145)
                                                             ОҫПғ
                                k


On the other hand similar to Lemma 26, we can also show that
Corollary 2. With prob. 1 вҲ’ 2Оҙ,
                                 kB
                                 X                                   q
                                           (JgПҖk вҲ’ g(xt , at )) вүӨ OМғ( T t3mix )                           (146)
                             t=(kвҲ’1)B+1


Hence, we obtain with probability 1 вҲ’ 4Оҙ,
                                                       3(1 + Оҫ)
                                                                  q
                                Violation(T ) вүӨ OМғ(                T t3mix )                              (147)
                                                          ОҫПғ

H.4    S UPPORTING R ESULTS

Similar to Lemma 18, we can show the following
Corollary 3. For any Y вҲҲ [0, Оҫ]
                                    X                           Y2   О·K
                                        (Y вҲ’ Yk )(b вҲ’ JЛҶk ) вүӨ      +                                      (148)
                                                                2О·    2
                                    k

Lemma 30.
                K
                X                                                                    1
                      вҹЁПҖ вҲ— вҲ’ ПҖk , qrk + Yk qgk вҹ© вүӨ KO(Оұ(1 + Оҫ)2 N 2 /Пғ 2 ) +           log(|A|)           (149)
                                                                                     Оұ
                k=1


                                                     40
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Proof. Now, from the composition of the algorithm (12), we obtain
                                                                       1
                             ПҖk = arg maxвҹЁПҖ, qrkвҲ’1 + YkвҲ’1 qgkвҲ’1 вҹ© вҲ’      D(ПҖ|ПҖkвҲ’1 )                   (150)
                                        ПҖ                              Оұ
From Lemma 3.3 in Cai et al. (2020),
                                               1                           1
    вҹЁПҖ вҲ— вҲ’ ПҖkвҲ’1 , qrkвҲ’1 + YkвҲ’1 qgkвҲ’1 вҹ© вүӨ         Оұ||qrkвҲ’1 + Yk qgkвҲ’1 ||2вҲһ + (D(ПҖ вҲ— |ПҖkвҲ’1 ) вҲ’ D(ПҖ вҲ— |ПҖk ))
                                               2                           Оұ
                                                                                                       (151)

Now, from Lemma 31, ||qrkвҲ’1 + Yk qgkвҲ’1 ||2вҲһ вүӨ O((1 + Оҫ)2 N 2 /Пғ 2 )
Now, by summing from k = 2 to K + 1, and shifting k вҲ’ 1 to k, we obtain from (151),
    K
    X                                                              1
         вҹЁПҖ вҲ— вҲ’ ПҖk , qrk + Yk qgk вҹ© вүӨ KO(Оұ(1 + Оҫ)2 N 2 /Пғ 2 ) +      (D(ПҖ вҲ— |ПҖ1 ) вҲ’ D(ПҖ вҲ— |ПҖK+1 ))    (152)
                                                                   Оұ
    k=1

By PinskerвҖҷs inequality
                                   вҲ’D(ПҖ вҲ— |ПҖK+1 ) вүӨ вҲ’||ПҖ вҲ— вҲ’ ПҖK+1 ||21 вүӨ 0                            (153)
On the other hand, since ПҖ1 is uniformly random, thus,
                                              D(ПҖ вҲ— |ПҖ1 ) вүӨ log(|A|)                                  (154)
Hence, from (152),
                   K
                   X                                                             log(|A|)
                       вҹЁПҖ вҲ— вҲ’ ПҖk , qrk + Yk qgk вҹ© вүӨ KO(Оұ(1 + Оҫ)2 N 2 /Пғ 2 ) +
                                                                                    Оұ
                   k=1



Lemma 31. For any x, and a
                               |П•(x, a)T (wrkвҲ’1 + YkвҲ’1 wgk )|вүӨ O((1 + Оҫ)N/Пғ)                          (155)

Proof.
                     П•(x, a)T (wrkвҲ’1 + YkвҲ’1 wgk ) вүӨ ||П•(x, a)||||wrkвҲ’1 + YkвҲ’1 wgk ||                  (156)
Note that from the construction of the parameter,
                                                          24N B вҲҡ
                                            ||wвӢ„kвҲ’1 ||вүӨ           dN                                  (157)
                                                          BПғ 2N
Hence, we have
                                П•(x, a)T (wrkвҲ’1 + YkвҲ’1 wgk ) вүӨ O((1 + Оҫ)N/Пғ)                          (158)


Lemma 32. For any a, x
                                                                       ОұN
                             |ПҖk (a|x) вҲ’ ПҖkвҲ’1 (a|x)|вүӨ ПҖkвҲ’1 (a|x)O(        (1 + Оҫ))                    (159)
                                                                        Пғ

Proof.
                         ПҖkвҲ’1 (a|x) exp(ОұП•(x, a)T (wrkвҲ’1 + YkвҲ’1 wgkвҲ’1 ))
ПҖk (a|x) вҲ’ ПҖkвҲ’1 (a|x) = P                             kвҲ’1
                                                                          вҲ’ ПҖkвҲ’1 (a|x)
                                                   T
                          b ПҖkвҲ’1 (b|x) exp(ОұП•(x, b) (wr   + YkвҲ’1 wgkвҲ’1 ))
    ПҖkвҲ’1 (a|x) exp(ОұП•(x, a)T (wrkвҲ’1 + YkвҲ’1 wgkвҲ’1 )
вүӨ                   P                              exp(вҲ’Оұ min П•(x, b)T (wrkвҲ’1 + YkвҲ’1 wgkвҲ’1 )) вҲ’ ПҖkвҲ’1 (a|x)
                     b ПҖ kвҲ’1 (b|x)                         b

вүӨ ПҖkвҲ’1 (a|x)(exp(max 2ОұП•(x, b)T (wrkвҲ’1 + YkвҲ’1 wgkвҲ’1 )) вҲ’ 1)
                         b


                                                          41
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Note that Оұ maxb |П•(x, b)T (wrkвҲ’1 + YkвҲ’1 wgkвҲ’1 )|вүӨ 1 as long as Оұ вүӨ Пғ/(24(1 + Оҫ)N ). Combining
with the fact that exp(2x) вүӨ 1 + 8x for x вҲҲ [0, 1].

    exp(max 2ОұП•(x, b)T (wrkвҲ’1 + YkвҲ’1 wgkвҲ’1 )) вҲ’ 1 вүӨ 8Оұ max|П•(x, b)T (wrkвҲ’1 + YkвҲ’1 wgkвҲ’1 )|
           b                                                      b
                                                                  (1 + Оҫ)N
                                                         = O(Оұ             )
                                                                      Пғ
Hence, the result follows.

Lemma 33. For any k,

                                         |Ek [JЛҶk ] вҲ’ JgПҖk |вүӨ 7
                                                              1
                                                                                                   (160)
                                                             T

Proof. Let PПҖk (xt , x1 ) denote the probability that the learner reaches the state xkt at time t within
epoch k when the epoch starts with the state xk1 . Hence,

                                ||PПҖk (xt , x1 )||T V = ||PПҖk Оҙx1 (x)||TtвҲ’1
                                                                         V                         (161)
where Оҙx1 (x) is 1 when x = x1 , and 0 otherwise.


  |Ek [JЛҶk ] вҲ’ JgПҖ |=
                k



               B
                          ПҖk (at |xt )g(xt , at )dP (xt , x1 ) вҲ’
                     Z X                                         Z X
      1       X
                                                   ПҖk
  |                 (                                                 ПҖk (xt |at )g(xt , at )dОҪ ПҖk (x)|
    BвҲ’N               X a                                         X a
            t=N +1
            B
              2||PПҖk (xkt , xk1 ) вҲ’ PПҖk ОҪ ПҖk ||tвҲ’1
         1  X
   =|                                          TV |
        BвҲ’N
               t=N +1
            B
         1  X
   вүӨ|         2eвҲ’N/tmix |
        BвҲ’N
               t=N +1
     2
   вүӨ 7                                                                                             (162)
    T
where the second last inequality follows from Assumption 4. The last inequality follows from the
definition of N .

Similar to Corollary 1, we can show the following
Corollary 4. For C вүҘ 2Y вҲ— ,
                                 K
                                 X       вҲ—
                                     (JrПҖ вҲ’ JrПҖk ) + C(b вҲ’ JgПҖk ) вүӨ Оҙ                              (163)
                                 k=1

then
                                          X              2Оҙ
                                           (b вҲ’ JgПҖk ) вүӨ                                           (164)
                                                         C
                                             k


Finally, we state some results which are proved in Wei et al. (2021a) (Lemma 6 and 14, respectively).
Lemma 34. For any stationary policy ПҖ, and x |v ПҖ (x)|вүӨ 4tmix , and |q ПҖ (x, a)|вүӨ 6tmix for any
(x, a).
Lemma 35.
                                  q ПҖ (x, a) = (wПҖ + J ПҖ e1 )T П•(x, a)                             (165)


                                                    42
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


H.5   Z ERO C ONSTRAINT V IOLATION

We show that by considering a Пө-tighter optimization problem, and by carefully choosing Пө, one can
obtain zero constraint violation while maintaining the same order on the regret.
First,we introduce some notations. Consider the Пө-tighter optimization problem
                               maximize JrПҖ      subject to JgПҖ вүҘ b + Пө                               (166)
where in the constraint b + Пө replaces b. If Пө вүӨ Оі/2, then SlaterвҖҷs condition is satisfied as ПҖМ„ would
still be strictly feasible for the Пө-tighter CMDP (Assumption 3). The optimal dual variable is bounded
by Y вҲ— вүӨ 2/Оі for this tighter optimization problem. Since we need Оҫ вүҘ 2Y вҲ— , we make Оҫ = 4/Оі.
                                                                                              Пө,вҲ—
We denote the optimal policy of the Пө-tighter optimization problem as ПҖ Пө,вҲ— . We denote J ПҖ as the
optimal constant gain of the tighter optimization problem (166).
Now, we are ready to state the result for the set of Assumptions in Section 4.
Lemma 36. In Algorithm 3 replace b with b + Пө, and Оҫ with 4/Оі, then under Assumptions 3,2, 4, and
5, with probability 1 вҲ’ 4Оҙ
                                                                            TПө
                                                             q
                               Regret(T ) вүӨ OМғ((1 + Оҫ)/Пғ T t3mix ) +
                                                                             Оі
                                                   2(1 + Оҫ)
                                                             q
                             Violation(T ) вүӨ OМғ(               T t3mix ) вҲ’ T Пө.                  (167)
                                                      ПғОҫ
                                p
                      2(1 + Оҫ) T t3mix log(dT )2 /Оҙ
where Пө = min{C6 (                                      ), Оі/2} for some absolute constant C6 .
                          ПғОҫ               T
                               p
                    2(1 + Оҫ) T t3mix
Note that when OМғ(                       ) вүӨ Оі/2, then violation becomes 0. Hence, for some constant
                        ПғОҫ         T                p
                                          2(1 + Оҫ) T t3mix log(dT )2 /Оҙ
C6 , we obtain violation 0 when C6 (                                          вүӨ Оі/2. Also note that by
                                              ПғОҫ               T       вҲҡ
plugging in the value of Пө, the upper bound on regret is still OМғ( T ). Hence,  вҲҡ even when for large
enough T (still finite), the violation is 0, while the regret bound is still OМғ( T ).
Proof : First, we prove the upper bound on regret. The regret can be decomposed as the following -
                                    T                             T
                                    X        вҲ—         Пө,вҲ—        X            Пө,вҲ—
                     Regret(T ) =         (JrПҖ вҲ’ JrПҖ         )+         (JrПҖ         вҲ’ r(xt , at ))   (168)
                                    t=1                           t=1

The first term can be bounded with the help of the following lemma (the proof for finite state is in
Wei et al. (2022) and for episodic setup is in Wei et al. (2021b), we provide the proof at the end of
this section)вҖ“
Lemma 37. If each stationary policy ПҖ induces a stationary state-action distribution ОҪ ПҖ (x, a), every
stationary policy satisfies (4), and ПҖ Пө,вҲ— is the optimal solution of (166), then
                                                вҲ—      Пө,вҲ—   Пө
                                            JrПҖ вҲ’ JrПҖ вүӨ .                                        (169)
                                                             Оі

Under uniform mixture assumption (Assumption 4, the conditions of the Lemma can be verified.
Since the tighter optimization problem is also CMDP, we note that the second term in the right hand
side of (168) is essentially the regret of the tighter CMDP.
Hence, from Theorem 3 and Lemma 37 we obtain the expression of the regret bound in Lemma 36.
Constraint Violation: Again applying Theorem 3 to the tighter optimization problem (166), we
obtain
                        T
                                                       2(1 + Оҫ)
                       X                                        q
                           (b + Пө вҲ’ g(xt , at )) вүӨ OМғ(            T t3mix )
                       t=1
                                                          ПғОҫ


                                                   43
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Thus,
                            T
                                                            2(1 + Оҫ)
                            X                                            q
                                  (b вҲ’ g(xt , at )) вүӨ OМғ(                     T t3mix ) вҲ’ T Пө
                            t=1
                                                               ПғОҫ
Thus, the result follows.
Now, we show that zero violation can be attained under the set of Assumptions in Theorem 2 and one
additional assumption:
Assumption 6. Every stationary policy ПҖ satisfies (4), and induces a state-action stationary distribu-
tion ОҪ ПҖ (x, a).

For uniform mixture assumption (Assumption 4), one can show that Assumption 6 holds. Note that
Wei et al. (2022) which studies the infinite horizon average reward CMDP for the finite state space
setup assumes the above assumption inherently in their work. We are now ready to state and prove
the main result.
                                                                         Пө,вҲ—
Lemma 38. Replace b with b + Пө in Algorithm 2, Оә = max{sp(vrПҖМ„ , sp(vrПҖ )}, and Оҫ = 4/Оі, then,
under Assumptions 3,2, 1, and 6,
                                                                       Пө
                           Regret(T ) вүӨ OМғ((1 + sp(vrвҲ— )(dT )3/4 ) + T
                                                                       Оі
                                   Violation(T ) вүӨ OМғ((1 + Оә)(dT )3/4 ) вҲ’ T Пө                                      (170)
                              ((1 + Оә)(dT )3/4 )О№
where Пө       =     min{C7                        , Оі/2} for absolute constant C7 ,                        and О№      =
                                      T
log(2 log(|A|)dT /Оҙ).

                  OМғ((1 + Оә)(dT )3/4 )
Note that when                           вүӨ Оі/2, the violation becomes 0. Hence, there exists some
                            T
                                  ((1 + Оә)(dT )3/4 )О№
constant C7 such that when C7                           вүӨ Оі/2, then the violation becomes 0. Hence, for
                                          T
large enough T (Still finite), the violation indeed becomes 0. On the other hand, by plugging in the
value of Пө, we note that the regret bound is still OМғ((dT )3/4 ) (in fact it is OМғ((1 + Оә + sp(vrвҲ— ))(dT )3/4 ).

Proof. First, we prove the upper bound on regret. The regret can be decomposed as the following -
                                         T                             T
                                         X        вҲ—         Пө,вҲ—        X            Пө,вҲ—
                      Regret(K) =              (JrПҖ вҲ’ JrПҖ         )+         (JrПҖ         вҲ’ r(xt , at ))           (171)
                                         t=1                           t=1

The first term is bounded from Lemma 37 since we assume that every stationary policy satisfies (4).
Hence,
                                         вҲ—     Пө,вҲ—   Пө
                                      JrПҖ вҲ’ JrПҖ вүӨ .                                         (172)
                                                     Оі
Since the tighter optimization problem is also CMDP, we note that the second term in the right hand
side of (171) is essentially the regret of the tighter CMDP.
Hence, from Theorem 2 and Lemma 37 we obtain the expression of the regret bound in Lemma 38.
Constraint Violation: Again applying Theorem 2 to the tighter optimization problem (166), we
obtain
                              T
                              X
                                (b + Пө вҲ’ g(xt , at )) вүӨ OМғ((1 + Оә)(dT )3/4 )
                              t=1

Thus,
                             T
                             X
                                   (b вҲ’ g(xt , at )) вүӨ OМғ((1 + Оә)(dT )3/4 ) вҲ’ T Пө
                             t=1


                                                       44
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


We can also obtain that zero violation
                               вҲҡ       for Theorem 1 in a similar way while maintaining same order
of regret by picking Пө = O(1/ T ) in the tighter CMDP.
Here, we show the proof of Lemma 37.

Proof. Let ОҪ ПҖ (x, a) be the stationary state-action occupation distribution corresponding to the sta-
tionaryR policy ПҖ. According to Assumption,
                                          R for every policy induces a stationary distribution. Hence,
JrПҖ = x,a r(x, a)dОҪ ПҖ (x, a), and JgПҖ = x,a g(x, a)dОҪ ПҖ (x, a).
                                                                      вҲ—
Consider the state-action distribution ОҪ Пө (В·, В·) = (1 вҲ’ Пө/Оі)ОҪ ПҖ (В·, В·) + Пө/ОіОҪ ПҖМ„ (В·, В·). There exists a policy
ПҖМғ which induces the state-action distribution ОҪ Пө Altman (1999). Now,
      Z                                       Z                              Z
                      Пө                                      ПҖвҲ—
           g(x, a)dОҪ (x, a) = (1 вҲ’ Пө/Оі)            g(x, a)dОҪ (x, a) + Пө/Оі            g(x, a)dОҪ ПҖМ„ (x, a)
        x,a                                       x,a                                           x,a
                               вүҘ (1 вҲ’ Пө/Оі)b + Пө/Оі(b + Оі) = b + Пө                                                            (173)
Thus, such a state-action occupation measure is feasible for the tighter optimization problem (166).
Further,
      Z                                        Z                                            Z
                                                                  вҲ—
              r(x, a)dОҪ Пө (x, a) = (1 вҲ’ Пө/Оі)            r(x, a)dОҪ ПҖ (x, a) + Пө/Оі                      r(x, a)dОҪ ПҖМ„ (x, a)
        x,a                                x,a                                               x,a
                                           вҲ—
                               вүҘ (1 вҲ’ Пө/Оі)Jr                                                                                (174)
                                                                      Пө,вҲ—
Since the state-action measure ОҪ Пө (x, a) is feasible, then JrПҖ                           r(x, a)dОҪ Пө (x, a). Hence, from
                                                                                R
                                                                            вүҘ       x,a
(174), we have
                                                  Пө,вҲ—
                                            JrПҖ         вҲ’ JrвҲ— вүҘ вҲ’Пө/Оі
Hence, the result follows.


I   E XPERIMENTS

We evaluate Algorithm 3 on a similar model described in Chen et al. (2022); Singh et al. (2020)вҖ“
a wireless node is continuously transmitting packets. The node consists of a queue where the
maximum capacity is 9. At time t, the node needs to choose a transmission power at вҲҲ {0.1, 0.9}
as action. Higher transmission power results in higher probability of successful transmission. The
number of packets arriving at the node at time t is given by Yt . We assume Yt вҲҲ {0, 1, 2, 3}, and
the corresponding probabilities are (0.65, 0.2, 0.1, 0.05). The channel reliability is 0.9, i.e., each
attempted transmission has success probability of 0.9. The dynamics of the queue is the following
Qt+1 = min{9, max{Qt + Yt вҲ’ Dt , 0}} where Dt is 1 with probability at pr , and 0 otherwise. The
goal is to maintain a short queue length with small transmission power. At time t, the node gets a
reward 1 вҲ’ at . Reward decreases as at increases. On the other hand, it gets a utility if the state of the
queue is low. Specially, the utility is g(Qt ) = 1 вҲ’ 0.1Qt . We seek to ensure that the average utility
is kept at least 0.7, i.e., the goal is to keep average queue length less than or equal to 3. Compared
to Chen et al. (2022), we use a different utility function. First, we ensure that the utility is bounded
between 0 and 1. Further, Chen et al. (2022) considers the constraint as a cost function where we
consider it as utility function. Hence, we need to provide higher utility for lower state and vice versa
unlike in Chen et al. (2022). Further, our algorithm is model-free unlike in Chen et al. (2022).
Note that the setup can be represented in a tabular form. Since linear MDP contains tabular form,
the feature space representation becomes simple, in particular, П•(s, a) = es,a where es,a is 1 for the
state-action pair (s, a), and 0 otherwise. The dimension of the feature space is |S||A|.
We run Algorithm вҲҡ  3 for 5 Г— 105 time
                                   p steps. The parameter we used are the followings: B = 200,
N = 10, Оұ = 1/ T , О· = 10/ T /B. Note that we do not know tmix or Пғ, yet, we achieve
sub-linear regret and a violation which approaches zero. We have used BПғ/(24N ) = 0.05 which we
obtain by tuning. Hence, our algorithm can work well even if we do not know the MDP dependent
parameters.


                                                          45
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                           0.2
          Average Regret
                                                                                                 0.4


                                                                             Average Violation
                                                                                                 0.2


                       0.04                                                                       0
                                 0   1   2       3   4        5                                        0   1   2       3   4     5
                                             T           105                                                       T           105

Figure 1: The plot for average regret (Regret divided by no. of steps) and average constraint violation
(Violation(T )/T ) as a function of T (x-axis) for Пө = 0.01. The x-axis is in the order of 105 . Each
plot is an average of 5 trials.
      Average Regret


                                                                       Avg. Violation
                  0.22                                                                   0.3
                                                                                         0.2
                                                                                         0.1
                  0.05                                                                           0
                                 0   1   2       3   4        5                                      0     1   2       3   4     5
                                             T           10   5                                                    T           105

Figure 2: The plot for average regret (Regret(T )/T ) and average constraint violation
(Violation(T )/T ) as a function of T (x-axis) for Пө = 0.1. The x-axis is in the order of 105 .
Each plot is an average of 5 trials.
In Fig. 1 we plot the average regret and average violation as a function of T for Пө = 0.01 (the
tightness for constrained introduced in Remark 1). As predicted by our theory, our algorithm achieves
sub-linear regret and sub-linear violation as both the average regret and average violation decrease to
0 as T increases. Initially, the regret decreases fast since we start with an infeasible policy (violation
increases, Fig. 3). Subsequently, the regret increases as our algorithm seeks to reduce the violation by
making the dual variable high (the policy would be sub-optimal). The average violation decreases
rapidly (Fig. 2). Eventually, the regret again decreases when T вүҲ 1 Г— 105 as our algorithm finds the
dual variable which balances the regret and violation. In this regime, the average violation slowly
approaches 0 as T grows.
In Fig. 2 we plot the average regret and average violation as a function of T for Пө = 0.1. Again it is
apparent that the regret and violation grow sub-linearly as the average regret and average violation
decrease to 0. Since Пө is high, from Fig. 3 we observe that the violation indeed eventually becomes
0. From Fig. 3, we observe that the violation starts decreasing after T вүҲ 0.5 Г— 105 as opposed to
T вүҲ 105 for smaller value of Пө. The variation of regret is similar to Fig. 1 as the regret first decreases
rapidly and then increases till T вүҲ 0.5 Г— 105 . The regret eventually decreases steadily as T increases
further. Note that the regret starts to decrease much earlier (at T вүҲ 0.5 Г— 105 ) in this scenario
compared to the scenario where Пө is smaller. Intuitively, since Пө is higher, the dual variable increases
at a higher rate which helps in finding the feasible solution at a faster rate. The regret then starts
decreasing as once we find the dual variable which balances between the regret and violation.
We would like to point out the difference with Chen et al. (2022). The violation in Chen et al. (2022)
oscillates, and never approaches 0. On the other hand, in our evaluation, we observe that the violation
                                                                                                 вҲҡ
eventually approaches 0. This is due to the fact that we have a learning rate О· (which is O(1/ T ))
in the dual-update step whereas in Chen et al. (2022) the learning rate is 1, hence, in Chen et al.
(2022) the dual variable oscillates more compared to our approach. Further, Chen et al. (2022) only
guarantees constant violation, whereas we can achieve zero violation.


                                                                  46
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                                                                    104
                                                                           1
                 6000
     Violation


                                                                          0.5
                 4000
                                                                           0
                                                              Violation


                 2000
                                                                    -0.5
                   0
                        0   1   2       3   4        5                    -1
                                    T                5
                                                10
                                                                    -1.5
                                                                                0         1   2       3   4     5
                                                                                                  T           105


Figure 3: The plot for violation a function of T (x-axis). The left-hand figure is for Пө = 0.01 and the
right-hand figure is for Пө = 0.1.


                                                         47
