Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


I NTEGRATING E PISODIC AND G LOBAL N OVELTY
B ONUSES FOR E FFICIENT E XPLORATION
 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                             A BSTRACT

         Exploration in environments which differ across episodes has received increasing
         attention in recent years. Current methods use some combination of global novelty
         bonuses, computed using the agent’s entire training experience, and episodic nov-
         elty bonuses, computed using only experience from the current episode. However,
         the use of these two types of bonuses has been ad-hoc and poorly understood. In
         this work, we first shed light on the behavior these two kinds of bonuses on hard
         exploration tasks through easily interpretable examples. We find that the two types
         of bonuses succeed in different settings, with episodic bonuses being most effec-
         tive when there is little shared structure between environments and global bonuses
         being effective when more structure is shared. We also find that combining the two
         bonuses leads to more robust behavior across both of these settings. Motivated by
         these findings, we then investigate different algorithmic choices for defining and
         combining function approximation-based global and episodic bonuses. This re-
         sults in a new algorithm which sets a new state of the art across 18 tasks from the
         MiniHack suite used in prior work. Our code is public at web-link.


1   I NTRODUCTION
Balancing exploration and exploitation is a long-standing challenge in reinforcement learning (RL).
A large body of research has studied this problem within the Markov Decision Processes (MDP)
framework (Sutton & Barto, 2018), both from a theoretical standpoint (Kearns & Singh, 2002; Braf-
man & Tennenholtz, 2002; Agarwal et al., 2020) and an empirical one. This has led to practical
exploration algorithms such as pseudocounts (Bellemare et al., 2016b), intrinsic curiosity modules
(Pathak et al., 2017) and random network distillation (Burda et al., 2019), yielding impressive results
on hard exploration problems like Montezuma’s Revenge and PitFall (Bellemare et al., 2012).
More recently, there has been increasing interest in algorithms which move beyond the MDP frame-
work. The standard MDP framework assumes that the agent is initialized in the same environment at
each episode (we will refer to these MDPs as singleton MDPs). However, several studies have found
that agents trained in singleton MDPs exhibit poor generalization, and that even minor changes to the
environment can cause substantial degradation in agent performance (Zhang et al., 2018b; Justesen
et al., 2018; Zhang et al., 2018a; Cobbe et al., 2019; Kirk et al., 2021a). This has motivated the use of
contextual MDPs (CMDPs, (Hallak et al., 2015)), where different episodes correspond to different
environments which nevertheless share some structure. Examples of CMDPs include procedurally-
generated environments (Chevalier-Boisvert et al., 2018; Samvelyan et al., 2021; Küttler et al., 2020;
Juliani et al., 2019; Cobbe et al., 2020; Beattie et al., 2016; Hafner, 2021; Petrenko et al., 2021) or
embodied AI tasks where the agent must generalize across different physical spaces (Savva et al.,
2019; Shen et al., 2020; Gan et al., 2020; Xiang et al., 2020).
While exploration is well-studied in the singleton MDP case, it becomes more nuanced when deal-
ing with CMDPs. For singleton MDPs, a common and successful strategy consists of defining an
exploration bonus which is added to the reward function being optimized. This exploration bonus
typically represents how novel the current state is, where novelty is computed with respect to the
entirety of the agent’s experience across all episodes. However, it is unclear to what extent this strat-
egy is applicable in the CMDP setting—if two environments corresponding to different episodes
are very different, we might not want the experience gathered in one to affect the novelty of a state
observed in the other.


                                                   1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


An alternative to using global bonuses is to use episodic ones. Episodic bonuses define novelty
with respect to the experience gathered in the current episode alone, rather than across all episodes.
Recently, several works (Stanton & Clune, 2018; Raileanu & Rocktäschel, 2020; Flet-Berliac et al.,
2021; Zhang et al., 2021b; Henaff et al., 2022) have used episodic bonuses, with Henaff et al. (2022)
showing that this is an essential ingredient for solving sparse reward CMDPs. However, as we will
show, an episodic bonus alone may not be optimal if there is considerable shared structure across
different episodes in the CMDP.
In this work, we study how to best define and integrate episodic and global novelty bonuses for
exploration in CMDPs. First, through a series of easily interpretable examples using episodic and
global count-based bonuses, we shed light on the strengths and weaknesses of both types of bonuses.
In particular, we show that global bonuses, which are commonly used in singleton MDPs, can be
poorly suited for CMDPs that share little structure across episodes; however, episodic bonuses,
which are commonly used in contextual MDPs, can also fail in certain classes of singleton MDPs
where knowledge transfer across episodes is crucial. Second, we show that by multiplicatively
combining episodic and global bonuses, we are able to get robust performance on both contex-
tual MDPs that share little structure across episodes and singleton MDPs that are identical across
episodes. Third, motivated by these observations, we comprehensively evaluate different combina-
tions of episodic and global bonuses which do not rely on counts, as well as strategies for integrating
them, on a wide array of tasks from the MiniHack suite (Samvelyan et al., 2021). Our investigations
yield a new algorithm which combines the elliptical episodic bonus of Henaff et al. (2022) and the
NovelD global bonus of Zhang et al. (2021b), which sets a new state of the art across 18 tasks from
the MiniHack environment, solving the majority of them. Our code is available at web-link.


2     BACKGROUND

2.1   C ONTEXTUAL MDP S

We consider a contextual Markov Decision Process (CMDP) defined by (S, A, C, P, r, µC , µS )
where S is the state space, A is the action space, C is the context space, P is the transition function,
µS is the initial state distribution conditioned on context and µC is the context distribution. At each
episode, we first sample a context c ⇠ µC and an initial state s0 ⇠ µS (·|c). At each step t in the
episode, the next state is then sampled according to st+1 ⇠ P (·|st , at , c) and the reward is given
by rt = r(st , at , c). Let dc⇡ represent the distribution over states induced by following policy ⇡
with context c. The goal is to learn a policy which maximizes the expected return, averaged across
contexts:
                                    R = Ec⇠µC ,s⇠dc⇡ ,a⇠⇡(·|s) [r(s, a)]
Examples of CMDPs include procedurally-generated environments, such as ProcGen (Cobbe
et al., 2020), MiniGrid (Chevalier-Boisvert et al., 2018), NetHack (Küttler et al., 2020), or Mini-
Hack (Samvelyan et al., 2021), where each context c corresponds to the random seed used to gener-
ate the environment; in this case, the number of contexts |C| is effectively infinite (we will slightly
abuse notation and denote this case by |C| = 1). Other examples include embodied AI environ-
ments (Savva et al., 2019; Szot et al., 2021; Gan et al., 2020; Shen et al., 2020; Xiang et al., 2020),
where the agent is placed in different simulated houses and must navigate to a location or find an
object. In this setting, each context c 2 C represents a house identifier and the number of houses |C|
is typically between 20 and 1000. More recently, CARL (Benjamins et al., 2021) was introduced as
a benchmark for testing generalization in contextual MDPs. However, their focus is on using privi-
leged information about the context c to improve generalization, which we do not assume access to
here. For an in-depth review of the literature on CMDPs and generalization in RL, see Kirk et al.
(2021b). Singleton MDPs are a special case of contextual MDPs with |C| = 1.

2.2   E XPLORATION B ONUSES

At a high level, exploration bonuses operate by estimating the novelty of a given state, and assigning
a high bonus if the state is novel according to some measure. The exploration bonus is then combined
with the extrinsic reward provided by the environment, and the result is optimized using RL. More
precisely, the reward function optimized by the agent is given by:


                                                   2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                    r̄(s, a) = r(s, a) + ↵ · b(s, a)                                (1)

where r(s, a) is the extrinsic reward, b(s, a) is the exploration bonus, and ↵ is a parameter governing
the balance between exploration and exploitation. Some bonuses do not depend on a or additionally
depend the next state s0 , which will be clear from the context. To account for the sometimes wide
variation in the scale of exploration bonuses across different environments and different points in
time during training, the exploration bonus is sometimes divided by a running estimate of its standard
deviation, as is done in Burda et al. (2019).
In tabular domains p with a small number of discrete states, a common choice is to use the inverse
counts: b(s) = 1/ N (s) (Strehl & Littman, 2006), where N (s) is the number of times state s
has been encountered by the agent. However, in many settings of interest the number of possible
states is large or infinite, and many states will not be seen more than once, rendering this bonus
ineffective since all states will be rewarded by the same amount. This has motivated alternative
approaches using function approximation. The methods below have proven successful on sparse
reward singleton MDPs (RND) and/or sparse reward CMDPs (RIDE, AGAC, NovelD and E3B).
Random Network Distillation (RND) (Burda et al., 2019) randomly initializes a neural network
f¯ : S ! Rk , and then trains a second neural network f with the same architecture to predict the
outputs of f¯ on states encountered by the agent. The exploration bonus associated with a given state
s is given by the MSE:
                                   bRND (st ) = kf (st ) f¯(st )k22                               (2)
The intuition is that for states similar to ones previously encountered by the agent, the error will be
low, whereas it will be high for very different states. RND has performed well on hard singleton
MDPs and is a commonly used component of other exploration algorithms.
Novelty Difference (NovelD) (Zhang et al., 2021b) uses the difference between RND bonuses at
two consecutive time steps, regulated by an episodic count-based bonus. Specifically, its bonus is:
                                     h                           i
            bNovelD (st , a, st+1 ) = bRND (st+1 ) c · bRND (st ) · I[Ne (st+1 ) = 1]            (3)
                                                                        +

Here bRND represents the RND bonus defined above, and Ne (s) represents the number of times s
has been encountered within the current episode. The first term is a global novelty bonus, which
measures novelty with respect to cross-episode experience, whereas the second term is an episodic
novelty bonus, which measures novelty with respect to experience within the current episode only.
Adversarially Guided Actor-Critic (AGAC) (Flet-Berliac et al., 2021) also combines global and
episodic novelty bonuses. Its bonus is defined by:
                                                                     1
                       bAGAC (st ) = DKL (⇡(·|st )k⇡adv (·|st )) + p                                (4)
                                                                    Ne (st )
where ⇡adv is a policy trained to mimic the behavior policy ⇡ (usually with a smaller learning rate).
The motivation is that this will encourage the policy to adopt different behaviors as it tries to remain
different from the adversary. The second term is an episodic bonus based on Ne (s), the number of
times the state s has been encountered within the current episode.
Rewarding Impact-Driven Exploration (RIDE) (Raileanu & Rocktäschel, 2020) uses an episodic
novelty bonus which is the product of two terms: a count-based reward and the difference between
two consecutive state embeddings:
                                                1
                             bRIDE (st ) = p              k (st+1 )    (st )k2                      (5)
                                               Ne (st )

Here the embedding is learned using a combination of inverse and forward dynamics models. The
motivation for the second term in the bonus is to reward the agent for taking actions which cause
significant changes in the environment. RIDE does not use a global novelty bonus.
Exploration via Elliptical Episodic Bonuses (E3B) (Henaff et al., 2022) also uses an episodic
novelty bonus only, and is motivated by the following observation: while the count-based episodic
bonuses used in NovelD, RIDE and AGAC are essential for good performance, they do not scale to


                                                    3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


complex environments where a given state is unlikely to be seen more than once within an episode.
E3B uses a feature extractor learned using an inverse dynamics model, and defines the episodic
bonus as follows:
                                                                           t 1
                                                                           X
                   bE3B (st ) = (st )> Ct 11 (st ),               Ct 1 =          (si ) (si )> + I   (6)
                                                                           i=t0

Here t0 denotes the start of the current episode. This can be seen as a generalization of an episodic
count-based bonus to continuous state spaces.

3       W HEN ARE E PISODIC AND G LOBAL N OVELTY B ONUSES U SEFUL ?

Although RIDE, NovelD, AGAC and E3B all use different combinations of episodic and global
novelty bonuses, their use in CMDPs has been largely heuristic. The RIDE and NovelD papers
simply state that the episodic bonus is included to prevent the agent from going back and forth
between a sequence of states within the same episode. Furthermore, the global novelty bonuses are
justified using the singleton MDP case, but it is unclear to what extent these justifications carry over
to the CMDP case. Therefore, a closer investigation of when episodic and global novelty bonuses
are useful in CMDPs is required. Details for all experiments in this section are in Appendix D.

3.1       A DVANTAGES OF E PISODIC B ONUSES

We begin by providing an example of CMDPs
where global novelty bonuses fail and episodic
bonuses succeed. Consider the procedurally-
generated MiniHack environment shown in Figure
1. Here, each episode corresponds to a different
map where the agent must navigate from the start-
ing location to the goal. The agent only receives
reward if it reaches the goal, and the episode ter-
minates if it touches the walls which are made of
lava. Because of this, random exploration has a
very small chance of reaching the goal before the
episode ends, and exploration bonuses are needed.
We ask the question: are global or episodic nov-
elty bonuses more appropriate here? For simplic-
ity, we consider bonuses based on counts of (x, y) Figure 1: Two different contexts of the
locations, which are commonly used in prior work MultiRoom-N6-Lava environment. Leg-
(Flet-Berliac et al., 2021; Samvelyan et al., 2021; end: @ : agent, < : start, > : goal, } : lava
Zhang et al., 2021b) to avoid the issue of each state
being unique:

                                            1
                    bglobal (s) = p                 ,           bepisodic (s) = I[Ne ( (s)) = 1]1    (7)
                                         N ( (s))

Here N represents counts over all the agent’s experience, and Ne represents counts only within the
current episode, while is a feature extractor which extracts the (x, y) coordinates of the agent from
the state. In general, methods which do not require handcrafted features are preferable, and we focus
on them in Section 4. However, this simple bonus facilitates interpretability, which is the focus of
this section.
Using the global novelty bonus encourages the agent to learn a sequence of policies which, together,
cover all the (x, y) locations. This is appropriate when the map is the same across all episodes:
eventually, one of the policies will cover the (x, y) location corresponding to the goal and the agent
will receive reward. However, this is not appropriate in this CMDP setting where the environment
    1
        We also tried p 1       for the episodic bonus, but it didn’t work as well.
                       Ne (s)



                                                            4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


changes each episode. To see this, note since the goal location changes along with the rest of the
map each episode, it can find itself in a region whose global bonus has already been depleted. The
more uniform the goal sampling is, the less likely it is the global bonus will be useful.
In contrast, the episodic bonus encourages the agent to visit as many (x, y) locations as possible
within each episode. Since each episode corresponds to its own map, a well-optimized policy will
thus have a high chance of visiting a region close to the goal, which in turn will increase the chance
of reaching the goal and receiving reward.
To verify this argument, we train agents us-
ing the global and episodic bonuses in equa-
tion 7 over different numbers of contexts |C| on
the MiniHack-MultiRoom-N6-Lava en-
vironment shown in Figure 1. The number
of contexts represents the number of distinct
maps, and one of them is chosen at random at
the start of each episode. Results are shown
in Figure 2. The agent using the global bonus
obtains perfect performance for the singleton
MDP setting where |C| = 1, but performance
steadily degrades as the number of contexts in-
creases. In contrast, when using the episodic      Figure 2: Mean performance for global and
bonus, performance remains high as the num-        episodic count-based exploration bonuses with
ber of contexts increases. We found that per-      different numbers of contexts (i.e. maps). Shaded
formance remains high (0.86 ± 0.1) even when       region indicates standard deviation over 5 seeds.
|C| = 1 (no two maps are repeated during
training).                                                               Episodic bonus
We provide further evidence for this ar-
gument with experiments on Habitat, a
photorealistic simulator of indoor environ-                    Global bonuses
ments. Habitat is conceptually similar to
the MiniHack-MultiRoom environment in
the sense that at each episode, the agent
finds itself in a different indoor space con-
sisting of connected rooms. However, the
maps in Habitat are considerably more com-
plex and the observations are pixel-based.
Here we compare global and episodic bonuses
based on function approximation, since counts      Figure 3: Habitat exploration with |C| = 1000.
are not meaningful with high-dimensional im-
ages. We use the reward-free exploration setup described in (Henaff et al., 2022). Results are shown
in Figure 3. We see that, similarly to MiniHack-MultiRoom, the global bonuses (ICM and RND)
perform poorly whereas the episodic bonus (E3B) performs well. See Appendix D for details.
                                                                                          M corridors

                                                                                       +1 reward
3.2   A DVANTAGES OF G LOBAL B ONUSES

                                                                                          ….
Does this mean that we should always prefer an episodic bonus to a
global one? Unfortunately, the answer is not so clear-cut. We now
provide an example where the episodic bonus fails but the global
                                                                                  ….


                                                                                          ….



                                                                                                   ….

                                                                                                        ….


bonus succeeds. Consider a singleton MDP with M corridors which T steps
can be crossed in T steps, with a single one containing reward at the
end (shown in Figure 4). If the episode length is T , then any policy                     ….
which goes to the end of any of the M corridors will get equivalent
episodic bonus, and hence the chance of success will be 1/M . On
the other hand, a global bonus will solve the task: after visiting one
of the corridors, the global bonus there will eventually become de-                     start

pleted and the agent will move on to another one, eventually visiting
the corridor with the reward.                                          Figure 4: Simple example
                                                                       where episodic bonus fails.
                                                   5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


We illustrate this argument using a singleton version of the MiniHack-Corridors-R5 envi-
ronment (shown in Figure 5a), where the agent must explore different corridors to find its way to
the exit. This is similar to the example in Figure 4 in the sense that the agent will likely need to
explore multiple dead ends before finding the goal. Figure 5b shows results for agents trained with
the episodic and global bonus. In contrast to the previous example, but consistent with our argument
above, the global bonus succeeds across all seeds whereas the episodic bonus produces inconsistent
performance across seeds, leading to poor performance overall.


                        (a)                                                 (b)

Figure 5: a) Example map for MiniHack-Corridors-R5 enviroment. @ indicates agent, #
corridors connecting rooms, < start location and > goal. b) Performance of agents trained with the
global bonus and the episodic bonus on a singleton version of the environment. Error bars represent
the standard deviation across 5 random seeds.

Are global bonuses only useful in the special case of singleton MDPs? We next show that this is
not the case, and that global bonuses can also be useful in general CMDPs with large |C|, provided
they exhibit certain shared structures across contexts. We consider the MiniHack-KeyRoom-S10
environment, illustrated in Figure 6a. In this environment, the agent must pick up a key and use it
to open a door to a small room and reach the exit. Here different contexts correspond to different
placements of the agent, key, room, door and exit. A property of this environment is that when the
agent visits certain states along the optimal trajectory, it receives messages which are common across
all contexts. For example, whenever the agent moves to the key location in any context, it receives
the same message “You see here a key named The Master Key of Thievery”. Similarly, when picking
up the key, it receives the same message, “g - a key named The Master Key of Thievery.” Here, we
define the feature extractor in equation 7 to extract the message rather than the (x, y) coordinates.
Results in Figure 6b show that both the global and episodic bonuses work well for |C| = 1. This
can be explained by the fact that regardless of the context, a policy which activates both of these
messages aligns with the optimal policy. A global bonus will encourage the agent to explore diverse
messages throughout training, eventually activating the two messages above which bring it close to
the optimal policy. An episodic bonus will encourage the agent to activate diverse messages within
each episode, which in this case similarly brings it close to the optimal policy.

3.3   C OMBINING G LOBAL AND E PISODIC B ONUSES

Taken together, the above examples suggest that global and episodic bonuses have complementary
strengths and weaknesses, and that their effectiveness depends on the amount of shared structure
among different contexts in the CMDP. At one end of the spectrum, singleton MDPs have complete
sharing of structure among contexts (since they are all identical), and global episodic bonuses are
best suited. At the other end of the spectrum, CMDPs such as the MultiRoom environment share
little structure between contexts and episodic bonuses are preferred. The KeyRoom environment
sits somewhere in between, where contexts are different but there is nevertheless shared structure
between them, and both types of bonus are effective.
This raises the question: is there a bonus which works well across all of these different settings? We
hypothesize that multiplying the episodic and global bonuses together would be more effective than


                                                  6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                       (a)                                            (b)

Figure 6: a) Two example maps for MiniHack-KeyRoom-S10 enviroment. @ indicates agent,
 ( key, + door, < start location and > goal. b) Performance of agents trained with the global
bonus and the episodic bonus. Error bars represent the standard deviation across 5 random seeds.


either of them alone, and would work well across a wide range of CMDPs with differing amounts
of common structure across episodes. The resulting combined bonus is given by:

                                                                       1
                         bcombined (st ) = I[Ne ( (st )) = 1] · p                                  (8)
                                                                    N ( (st ))

This is motivated by the following observations. First, let us consider the MDP in Fig-
ure 4: note that following any of the corridors will maximize the episodic bonus by pro-
viding an episodic bonus of 1 at each step. The total combined bonus in equation 8
is then equal to the global bonus, and optimizing the global bonus causes the agent to
visit each of the corridors until it reaches the one with the reward, solving the MDP.
Now let us consider the MultiRoom environ-
ment. If the agent is initialized roughly uniformly
throughout the map, the global bonus will de-
cay roughly uniformly across regions over time.
This means that the bonus in equation 8 will be
roughly equal to the episodic bonus (scaled by a
constant), which we know is effective. Finally,
as noted previously, in KeyRoom-S10 both the
episodic and global bonuses will assign high nov-
elty to messages associated with picking up the
key, which aligns with the optimal policy, sug-
gesting that their product will also be effective.
                                                     Figure 7: Performance of combined bonus. Er-
Empirical results for all three environments are
                                                     ror bars indicate standard deviation over 5 seeds.
shown in Figure 7 (we use the same feature ex-
tractor as in previous experiments for each envi-
ronment). We see that the combined bonus obtains good performance on all three environments,
which suggests that it retains the advantages of both the global and episodic bonus.


4   D ESIGN C HOICES FOR E PISODIC AND G LOBAL N OVELTY B ONUSES

The previous section has shown that global and episodic bonuses succeed in different types of
CMDPs, and that combining them via multiplication can yield a bonus which is more robustly
effective. However, in order to facilitate interpretability we used count-based bonuses, which do
not scale to complex, high-dimensional environments unless task-specific prior knowledge is used
(e.g. knowing to extract (x, y) positions or messages). In this section, we investigate whether our
insights still hold when using more general bonuses which do not assume such prior knowledge. We


                                                  7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


do this through a study of global and episodic bonuses based on function approximation across a
wide range of tasks from the MiniHack suite (Samvelyan et al., 2021).

4.1     E XPERIMENTAL S ETUP

As our experimental testbed, we use 18 procedurally-generated tasks from the MiniHack suite
(Samvelyan et al., 2021) used in prior work (Henaff et al., 2022). The MiniHack tasks are de-
signed to precisely evaluate different capabilities of a given agent, such as navigation, planning or
the ability to use objects. Furthermore, many of the MiniHack tasks involve sparse rewards (which
are only given on completion of the task) and complex observations which include irrelevant infor-
mation. For evaluation, we follow the protocol suggested by Agarwal et al. (2021) and report the
mean, median and interquartile mean (IQM) together with 95% confidence intervals using stratified
bootstrapping. We use 5 random seeds for each of the 18 tasks. Our full experimental details can be
found in Appendix D.

4.2     R ESULTS

We now investigate combining different global novelty bonuses from AGAC, RND and NovelD
with the elliptical episodic bonus. We use E3B’s elliptical bonus as our episodic bonus instead
of a count-based one, since prior work has shown that count-based bonuses either fail in complex
environments, or are highly dependent on task-specific feature extractors (Henaff et al., 2022). In
contrast, the elliptical bonus has been shown to work well across a wide range of environments
without requiring task-specific prior knowledge.
Two questions we aim to answer are: i) which global bonus (if any) gives the most improvements
when combined with E3B’s elliptical bonus, and ii) which strategy is best for combining the two
bonuses. To answer these, we consider the following algorithms:

                          h              i
      bE3B⇥AGAC (st ) =(st )> Ct 11 (st ) · DKL (⇡(·|st )k⇡adv (·|st ))
                     h                   i
    bE3B⇥RND (st ) = (st )> Ct 11 (st ) · kf (st ) f¯(st )k22
                     h                   i h                                            i
  bE3B⇥NovelD (st ) = (st )> Ct 11 (st ) · kf (st+1 ) f¯(st+1 )k22 ckf (st ) f¯(st )k22
                                                                                          +
                     h                   i
                            >    1
   bE3B+AGAC (st ) = (st ) Ct 1 (st ) + DKL (⇡(·|st )k⇡adv (·|st ))
                     h                   i
    bE3B+RND (st ) = (st )> Ct 11 (st ) + kf (st ) f¯(st )k22
                     h                   i   h                                              i
  bE3B+NovelD (st ) = (st )> Ct 11 (st ) + kf (st+1 ) f¯(st+1 )k22 ckf (st ) f¯(st )k22
                                                                                                  +


Here is learned online using an inverse dynamics model. The algorithms above include all possible
combinations of global bonuses (second term) with the elliptical bonus (first term), and combining
the two by multiplication or by taking a weighted sum. For the algorithms which take a weighted
sum, we tuned the term on a subset of tasks, and report the best value on all 18 tasks. We compare
to E3B as a baseline since it was previously shown to outperform other methods such as IMPALA,
RND, ICM, RIDE and NovelD (Henaff et al., 2022).
Results are shown in Figure 8. First, we see that additively combining any of the global bonuses
with the elliptical episodic bonus does not provide a meaningful improvement over E3B for any
metric. However, multiplicatively combining E3B with either RND or NovelD bonuses produces a
large and statistically significant improvement in both median and IQM performance over E3B (the
more robust metrics according to Agarwal et al. (2021)), as well as a modest improvement in mean
performance. This establishes a new state-of-the-art on MiniHack.
One explanation for the superior performance of the multiplicative combination over the additive
one is that the scale of the global bonus decreases significantly throughout training whereas the scale
of the episodic bonus does not, since it is reset each episode. Because of this, if we combine the
two bonuses via addition, the combined bonus will become increasingly dominated by the episodic


                                                  8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Figure 8: Aggregate performance on 18 MiniHack tasks. Bars indicate 95% confidence intervals
computed using stratified bootstrapping.

bonus. However, if we are combining the two multiplicatively, the global bonus will still have an
effect regardless of its scale. See Appendix E for additional results and discussion.


5   R ELATED W ORK

Exploration in singleton MDPs is a well-studied problem in RL, we give a more detailed overview
of existing methods in Appendix C. However, these methods are designed for the singleton MDP
setting and use some form of global bonus which, as we show in Section 3, is not always appropriate
to the more general CMDP setting we consider here. More recently, RIDE (Raileanu & Rocktäschel,
2020), AGAC (Flet-Berliac et al., 2021) and NovelD (Zhang et al., 2021b) have begun to tackle ex-
ploration in procedurally-generated MDPs, a type of CMDP commonly used in empirical research.
These methods use combinations of global bonuses designed for singleton MDPs and count-based
episodic bonuses. The recent work of Henaff et al. (2022) highlighted the practical importance of
these episodic bonuses, as well as the weaknesses of count-based episodic bonuses, and proposed
the elliptical episodic bonus as a solution, but did not include a global bonus. Compared to these
prior works, our work makes two contributions. First, whereas previous works justified using global
bonuses by appealing to intuitions from singleton MDPs, and provided little justification for using
episodic bonuses aside from their empirical performance, we provide deeper justifications for the
use of each bonus in CMDPs. In particular, we examine in detail the behavior of global and episodic
count-based bonuses across different representative settings, and shed light on how each bonus can
drive exploration depending on the amount of shared structure across episodes. Second, whereas
previous works have investigated different combinations of bonuses in isolation, there has not been
a systematic comparison of bonuses and combination strategies, which we do in Section 4. This
investigation results in a new algorithm which outperforms the previously proposed ones. Further-
more, our algorithm’s multiplicative combination of global and episodic bonuses is well justified
based on our previous investigations in Section 3.


6   C ONCLUSION

In this work, we have taken steps towards better understanding the roles of global and episodic
exploration bonuses in CMDPs. First, we study illustrative examples in which count-based versions
of each bonus succeed and fail, showing that the two bonuses have complementary strengths and
weaknesses. In particular, our experiments suggest that the effectiveness of each bonus depends on
the amount of structure which is shared across episodes in the CMDP, and that episodic bonuses
are more effective when there is little shared structure, while global bonuses benefit from more
shared structure. We also show that combining global and episodic bonuses multiplicatively leads
to increased robustness across different settings. Motivated by these observations, we perform an
in-depth empirical study of approaches which combine global and episodic bonuses in the function
approximation setting. This results in a new algorithm that sets a new state-of-the-art across 18
tasks from the MiniHack suite. Future research directions include more precisely understanding and
characterizing the settings where each bonus will succeed, which may lead to improved algorithms
which can adapt automatically to the setting at hand.


                                                9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


R EFERENCES
Joshua Achiam and Shankar Sastry. Surprise-based intrinsic motivation for deep reinforcement
  learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:1703.01732, 2017.

Alekh Agarwal, Mikael Henaff, Sham Kakade, and Wen Sun. Pc-pg: Policy cover directed explo-
  ration for provable policy gradient learning. Advances in neural information processing systems,
  (33), 2020.

Rishabh Agarwal, Max Schwarzer, Pablo Samuel Castro, Aaron Courville, and Marc G Bellemare.
  Deep reinforcement learning at the edge of the statistical precipice. Advances in Neural Informa-
  tion Processing Systems, 2021.

Charles Beattie, Joel Z Leibo, Denis Teplyashin, Tom Ward, Marcus Wainwright, Heinrich Küttler,
  Andrew Lefrancq, Simon Green, Vı́ctor Valdés, Amir Sadik, et al. Deepmind lab. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:1612.03801, 2016.

Marc Bellemare, Yavar Naddaf, Joel Veness, and Michael Bowling. The arcade learning environ-
 ment: An evaluation platform for general agents. Journal of Artificial Intelligence Research, 47,
 07 2012. doi: 10.1613/jair.3912.

Marc Bellemare, Sriram Srinivasan, Georg Ostrovski, Tom Schaul, David Saxton, and Remi Munos.
 Unifying count-based exploration and intrinsic motivation. Advances in neural information pro-
 cessing systems, 29, 2016a.

Marc G. Bellemare, Sriram Srinivasan, Georg Ostrovski, Tom Schaul, David Saxton, and Rémi
 Munos. Unifying count-based exploration and intrinsic motivation. In Proceedings of the 30th
 International Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems, NIPS’16, pp. 1479–1487,
 Red Hook, NY, USA, 2016b. Curran Associates Inc. ISBN 9781510838819.

Carolin Benjamins, Theresa Eimer, Frederik Schubert, André Biedenkapp, Bodo Rosenhahn, Frank
  Hutter, and Marius Lindauer. Carl: A benchmark for contextual and adaptive reinforcement
  learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2110.02102, 2021.

Ronen I. Brafman and Moshe Tennenholtz. R-MAX - A general polynomial time algorithm for
  near-optimal reinforcement learning. J. Mach. Learn. Res., 3:213–231, 2002. URL http://
  jmlr.org/papers/v3/brafman02a.html.

Yuri Burda, Harrison Edwards, Amos Storkey, and Oleg Klimov. Exploration by random network
  distillation. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2019. URL https:
  //openreview.net/forum?id=H1lJJnR5Ym.

Qi Cai, Zhuoran Yang, Chi Jin, and Zhaoran Wang. Provably efficient exploration in policy opti-
  mization. In Hal Daumé III and Aarti Singh (eds.), Proceedings of the 37th International Con-
  ference on Machine Learning, volume 119 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pp.
  1283–1294. PMLR, 13–18 Jul 2020. URL https://proceedings.mlr.press/v119/
  cai20d.html.

Maxime Chevalier-Boisvert, Lucas Willems, and Suman Pal. Minimalistic gridworld environment
 for openai gym. https://github.com/maximecb/gym-minigrid, 2018.

Djork-Arné Clevert, Thomas Unterthiner, and Sepp Hochreiter. Fast and accurate deep network
  learning by exponential linear units (elus). In Yoshua Bengio and Yann LeCun (eds.), 4th Inter-
  national Conference on Learning Representations, ICLR 2016, San Juan, Puerto Rico, May 2-4,
  2016, Conference Track Proceedings, 2016. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/1511.07289.

Karl Cobbe, Oleg Klimov, Chris Hesse, Taehoon Kim, and John Schulman. Quantifying gener-
  alization in reinforcement learning. In Kamalika Chaudhuri and Ruslan Salakhutdinov (eds.),
  Proceedings of the 36th International Conference on Machine Learning, volume 97 of Proceed-
  ings of Machine Learning Research, pp. 1282–1289. PMLR, 09–15 Jun 2019.


                                                10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Karl Cobbe, Chris Hesse, Jacob Hilton, and John Schulman. Leveraging procedural generation
  to benchmark reinforcement learning. In Hal Daumé III and Aarti Singh (eds.), Proceedings of
  the 37th International Conference on Machine Learning, volume 119 of Proceedings of Machine
  Learning Research, pp. 2048–2056. PMLR, 13–18 Jul 2020. URL https://proceedings.
  mlr.press/v119/cobbe20a.html.
Lasse Espeholt, Hubert Soyer, Rémi Munos, Karen Simonyan, Volodymyr Mnih, Tom Ward, Yotam
  Doron, Vlad Firoiu, Tim Harley, Iain Dunning, Shane Legg, and Koray Kavukcuoglu. IM-
  PALA: scalable distributed deep-rl with importance weighted actor-learner architectures. In Jen-
  nifer G. Dy and Andreas Krause (eds.), Proceedings of the 35th International Conference on
  Machine Learning, ICML 2018, Stockholmsmässan, Stockholm, Sweden, July 10-15, 2018, vol-
  ume 80 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pp. 1406–1415. PMLR, 2018. URL
  http://proceedings.mlr.press/v80/espeholt18a.html.
Yannis Flet-Berliac, Johan Ferret, Olivier Pietquin, Philippe Preux, and Matthieu Geist. Adversar-
  ially guided actor-critic. CoRR, abs/2102.04376, 2021. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/
  2102.04376.
Ronan Fruit and Alessandro Lazaric. Exploration-exploitation in mdps with options. In Artificial
  intelligence and statistics, pp. 576–584. PMLR, 2017.
Ronan Fruit, Matteo Pirotta, and Alessandro Lazaric. Near optimal exploration-exploitation in non-
  communicating markov decision processes. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems,
  31, 2018a.
Ronan Fruit, Matteo Pirotta, Alessandro Lazaric, and Ronald Ortner. Efficient bias-span-constrained
  exploration-exploitation in reinforcement learning. In International Conference on Machine
  Learning, pp. 1578–1586. PMLR, 2018b.
Chuang Gan, Jeremy Schwartz, Seth Alter, Martin Schrimpf, James Traer, Julian De Freitas, Jonas
  Kubilius, Abhishek Bhandwaldar, Nick Haber, Megumi Sano, et al. Threedworld: A platform for
  interactive multi-modal physical simulation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2007.04954, 2020.
Danijar Hafner. Benchmarking the spectrum of agent capabilities. arXiv preprint arXiv:2109.06780,
  2021.
Assaf Hallak, Dotan Di Castro, and Shie Mannor. Contextual markov decision processes. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:1502.02259, 2015.
Kaiming He, Xiangyu Zhang, Shaoqing Ren, and Jian Sun. Deep residual learning for image recog-
  nition. arXiv preprint arXiv:1512.03385, 2015.
Mikael Henaff.      Explicit explore-exploit algorithms in continuous state spaces. In
 H. Wallach, H. Larochelle, A. Beygelzimer, F. d'Alché-Buc, E. Fox, and R. Garnett
 (eds.), Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 32. Curran Asso-
 ciates, Inc., 2019. URL https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper/2019/file/
 03b264c595403666634ac75d828439bc-Paper.pdf.
Mikael Henaff, Roberta Raileanu, Minqi Jiang, and Tim Rocktäschel. Exploration via elliptical
 episodic bonuses. In NeurIPS, 2022.
Sepp Hochreiter and Jürgen Schmidhuber. Long short-term memory. Neural computation, 9(8):
  1735–1780, 1997.
Chi Jin, Zhuoran Yang, Zhaoran Wang, and Michael I Jordan. Provably efficient reinforce-
  ment learning with linear function approximation. In Jacob Abernethy and Shivani Agarwal
  (eds.), Proceedings of Thirty Third Conference on Learning Theory, volume 125 of Proceed-
  ings of Machine Learning Research, pp. 2137–2143. PMLR, 09–12 Jul 2020. URL https:
  //proceedings.mlr.press/v125/jin20a.html.
Arthur Juliani, Ahmed Khalifa, Vincent-Pierre Berges, Jonathan Harper, Hunter Henry, Adam
  Crespi, Julian Togelius, and Danny Lange. Obstacle tower: A generalization challenge in vi-
  sion, control, and planning. CoRR, abs/1902.01378, 2019. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/
  1902.01378.


                                                11
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Niels Justesen, Ruben Rodriguez Torrado, Philip Bontrager, Ahmed Khalifa, Julian Togelius, and
  Sebastian Risi. Procedural level generation improves generality of deep reinforcement learning.
  CoRR, abs/1806.10729, 2018. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/1806.10729.

Michael Kearns and Satinder Singh. Near-optimal reinforcement learning in polynomial time. In
 Machine Learning, pp. 209–232. Morgan Kaufmann, 2002.

Robert Kirk, Amy Zhang, Edward Grefenstette, and Tim Rocktäschel. A survey of generalisation
  in deep reinforcement learning. CoRR, abs/2111.09794, 2021a. URL https://arxiv.org/
  abs/2111.09794.

Robert Kirk, Amy Zhang, Edward Grefenstette, and Tim Rocktäschel. A survey of generalisation
  in deep reinforcement learning. CoRR, abs/2111.09794, 2021b. URL https://arxiv.org/
  abs/2111.09794.

J Zico Kolter and Andrew Y Ng. Near-bayesian exploration in polynomial time. In Proceedings of
   the 26th annual international conference on machine learning, pp. 513–520, 2009.

Heinrich Küttler, Nantas Nardelli, Alexander H. Miller, Roberta Raileanu, Marco Selvatici, Edward
  Grefenstette, and Tim Rocktäschel. The nethack learning environment. CoRR, abs/2006.13760,
  2020. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2006.13760.

Marlos C Machado, Marc G Bellemare, and Michael Bowling. Count-based exploration with the
 successor representation. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, vol-
 ume 34, pp. 5125–5133, 2020.

Gaurav Manek and J Zico Kolter. Model-based reinforcement learning with ensembled model-value
  expansion. 2021.

Jarryd Martin, Suraj Narayanan Sasikumar, Tom Everitt, and Marcus Hutter. Count-based explo-
   ration in feature space for reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:1706.08090, 2017.

Georg Ostrovski, Marc G Bellemare, Aäron Oord, and Rémi Munos. Count-based exploration with
  neural density models. In International conference on machine learning, pp. 2721–2730. PMLR,
  2017.

Pierre-Yves Oudeyer and Frederic Kaplan. What is intrinsic motivation? a typology of computa-
  tional approaches. Frontiers in neurorobotics, 1:6, 2009.

Pierre-Yves Oudeyer, Frdric Kaplan, and Verena V Hafner. Intrinsic motivation systems for au-
  tonomous mental development. IEEE transactions on evolutionary computation, 11(2):265–286,
  2007.

Deepak Pathak, Pulkit Agrawal, Alexei A. Efros, and Trevor Darrell. Curiosity-driven exploration by
  self-supervised prediction. CoRR, abs/1705.05363, 2017. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/
  1705.05363.

Aleksei Petrenko, Erik Wijmans, Brennan Shacklett, and Vladlen Koltun. Megaverse: Simulating
  embodied agents at one million experiences per second. In International Conference on Machine
  Learning, pp. 8556–8566. PMLR, 2021.

Roberta Raileanu and Tim Rocktäschel.        Ride: Rewarding impact-driven exploration for
  procedurally-generated environments. In International Conference on Learning Representations,
  2020. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=rkg-TJBFPB.

Santhosh Kumar Ramakrishnan, Aaron Gokaslan, Erik Wijmans, Oleksandr Maksymets, Alexan-
  der Clegg, John M Turner, Eric Undersander, Wojciech Galuba, Andrew Westbury, Angel X
  Chang, Manolis Savva, Yili Zhao, and Dhruv Batra. Habitat-matterport 3d dataset (HM3d):
  1000 large-scale 3d environments for embodied AI. In Thirty-fifth Conference on Neural In-
  formation Processing Systems Datasets and Benchmarks Track (Round 2), 2021. URL https:
  //openreview.net/forum?id=-v4OuqNs5P.


                                                12
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Mikayel Samvelyan, Robert Kirk, Vitaly Kurin, Jack Parker-Holder, Minqi Jiang, Eric Hambro,
 Fabio Petroni, Heinrich Küttler, Edward Grefenstette, and Tim Rocktäschel. Minihack the planet:
 A sandbox for open-ended reinforcement learning research. CoRR, abs/2109.13202, 2021. URL
 https://arxiv.org/abs/2109.13202.

Manolis Savva, Abhishek Kadian, Oleksandr Maksymets, Yili Zhao, Erik Wijmans, Bhavana Jain,
 Julian Straub, Jia Liu, Vladlen Koltun, Jitendra Malik, Devi Parikh, and Dhruv Batra. Habitat: A
 Platform for Embodied AI Research. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference
 on Computer Vision (ICCV), 2019.

Jürgen Schmidhuber. A possibility for implementing curiosity and boredom in model-building neu-
   ral controllers. In Proc. of the international conference on simulation of adaptive behavior: From
   animals to animats, pp. 222–227, 1991.

Ramanan Sekar, Oleh Rybkin, Kostas Daniilidis, Pieter Abbeel, Danijar Hafner, and Deepak Pathak.
  Planning to explore via self-supervised world models. In ICML, 2020.

Bokui Shen, Fei Xia, Chengshu Li, Roberto Martı́n-Martı́n, Linxi Fan, Guanzhi Wang, Claudia
  Pérez-D’Arpino, Shyamal Buch, Sanjana Srivastava, Lyne Tchapmi, et al. igibson 1.0: A simu-
  lation environment for interactive tasks in large realistic scenes. In 2021 IEEE/RSJ International
  Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems (IROS), pp. 7520–7527. IEEE, 2020.

Pranav Shyam, Wojciech Jaśkowski, and Faustino Gomez. Model-based active exploration. In Ka-
  malika Chaudhuri and Ruslan Salakhutdinov (eds.), Proceedings of the 36th International Con-
  ference on Machine Learning, volume 97 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pp.
  5779–5788. PMLR, 09–15 Jun 2019. URL https://proceedings.mlr.press/v97/
  shyam19a.html.

Bradly C Stadie, Sergey Levine, and Pieter Abbeel. Incentivizing exploration in reinforcement
  learning with deep predictive models. arXiv preprint arXiv:1507.00814, 2015.

Christopher Stanton and Jeff Clune. Deep curiosity search: Intra-life exploration improves perfor-
  mance on challenging deep reinforcement learning problems. CoRR, abs/1806.00553, 2018. URL
  http://arxiv.org/abs/1806.00553.

Alexander L Strehl and Michael L Littman. An analysis of model-based interval estimation for
  markov decision processes. Journal of Computer and System Sciences, 74(8):1309–1331, 2008.

Er L. Strehl and Michael L. Littman. An analysis of model-based interval estimation for markov
  decision processes. Journal of Computer and System Sciences, 2006.

Richard S Sutton and Andrew G Barto. Reinforcement learning: An introduction. MIT press, 2018.

Andrew Szot, Alex Clegg, Eric Undersander, Erik Wijmans, Yili Zhao, John Turner, Noah Maestre,
  Mustafa Mukadam, Devendra Chaplot, Oleksandr Maksymets, Aaron Gokaslan, Vladimir Von-
  drus, Sameer Dharur, Franziska Meier, Wojciech Galuba, Angel Chang, Zsolt Kira, Vladlen
  Koltun, Jitendra Malik, Manolis Savva, and Dhruv Batra. Habitat 2.0: Training home assistants to
  rearrange their habitat. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS), 2021.

Haoran Tang, Rein Houthooft, Davis Foote, Adam Stooke, OpenAI Xi Chen, Yan Duan, John Schul-
  man, Filip DeTurck, and Pieter Abbeel. # exploration: A study of count-based exploration for
  deep reinforcement learning. Advances in neural information processing systems, 30, 2017.

Jean Tarbouriech, Evrard Garcelon, Michal Valko, Matteo Pirotta, and Alessandro Lazaric. No-
  regret exploration in goal-oriented reinforcement learning. In International Conference on Ma-
  chine Learning, pp. 9428–9437. PMLR, 2020.

Erik Wijmans, Abhishek Kadian, Ari S. Morcos, Stefan Lee, Irfan Essa, Devi Parikh, Manolis Savva,
  and Dhruv Batra. Dd-ppo: Learning near-perfect pointgoal navigators from 2.5 billion frames. In
  ICLR, 2020.


                                                 13
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Fanbo Xiang, Yuzhe Qin, Kaichun Mo, Yikuan Xia, Hao Zhu, Fangchen Liu, Minghua Liu, Hanx-
  iao Jiang, Yifu Yuan, He Wang, et al. Sapien: A simulated part-based interactive environment.
  In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp.
  11097–11107, 2020.
Amy Zhang, Nicolas Ballas, and Joelle Pineau. A dissection of overfitting and generalization in
 continuous reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:1806.07937, 2018a.
Chiyuan Zhang, Oriol Vinyals, Rémi Munos, and Samy Bengio. A study on overfitting in deep
  reinforcement learning. CoRR, abs/1804.06893, 2018b. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/
  1804.06893.
Tianjun Zhang, Paria Rashidinejad, Jiantao Jiao, Yuandong Tian, Joseph E Gonzalez, and Stuart
  Russell. Made: Exploration via maximizing deviation from explored regions. Advances in Neural
  Information Processing Systems, 34:9663–9680, 2021a.
Tianjun Zhang, Huazhe Xu, Xiaolong Wang, Yi Wu, Kurt Keutzer, Joseph E. Gonzalez, and Yuan-
  dong Tian. Noveld: A simple yet effective exploration criterion. In A. Beygelzimer, Y. Dauphin,
  P. Liang, and J. Wortman Vaughan (eds.), Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems,
  2021b. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=CYUzpnOkFJp.


                                               14
