Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


BO-M USE :
         A HUMAN EXPERT AND AI TEAMING
FRAMEWORK FOR ACCELERATED EXPERIMENTAL DE -
SIGN

 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                                 A BSTRACT
          In this paper we introduce BO-Muse, a new approach to human-AI teaming for
          the optimisation of expensive blackbox functions. Inspired by the intrinsic dif-
          ficulty of extracting expert knowledge and distilling it back into AI models and
          by observations of human behaviour in real-world experimental design, our algo-
          rithm lets the human expert take the lead in the experimental process. The human
          expert can use their domain expertise to its full potential, while the AI plays the
          role of a muse, injecting novelty and searching for areas of weakness to break the
          human out of over-exploitation induced by cognitive entrenchment. With mild as-
          sumptions, we show that our algorithm converges sub-linearly, at a rate faster than
          the AI or human alone. We validate our algorithm using synthetic data and with
          human experts performing real-world experiments.


1    I NTRODUCTION
Bayesian Optimisation (BO) (Shahriari et al., 2015) is a popular sample-efficient optimisation tech-
nique to solve problems where the objective is expensive. It has been applied successfully in diverse
areas (Greenhill et al., 2020) including material discovery (Li et al., 2017), alloy design (Barnett
et al., 2020) and molecular design (Gómez-Bombarelli et al., 2018). However, standard BO typi-
cally operates tabula rasa, building its model of the objective from minimal priors that do not include
domain-specific detail. While there has been some progress made incorporating domain-specific
knowledge to accelerate BO (Li et al., 2018; Hvarfner et al., 2022) or transfer learnings from pre-
vious experiments (Shilton et al., 2017), it remains the case that there is a significant corpus of
knowledge and expertise that could potentially accelerate BO even further but which remain largely
untapped due to the inherent complexities involved in knowledge extraction and exploitation. In
particular, this often arises from the fact that experts tend to organise their knowledge in complex
schema containing concepts, attributes and relationships (Rousseau, 2001), making the elicitation of
relevant expert knowledge, both quantitative and qualitative, a difficult task.
Experimental design underpins the discovery of
new materials, processes and products. How- Expert
ever, experiments are costly, the target func-                           Observations Pool

tion is unknown and the search space unclear.                                     Update Observation Pool
To be sample-efficient, the least number of ex-
                                                                                  Measure Result
periments must be performed. Traditionally                Expert                                          BO-Muse
                                                        Suggestion      Run experiments                   Suggestion
experimental design is guided by (human) ex-                          for both suggestions
perts who uses their domain expertise and intu-
ition to formulate an experimental design, test                  Figure 1: Bo-Muse Workflow.
it, and iterate based on observations. Living be-
ings from fungi (Watkinson et al., 2005) to ants
(Pratt & Sumpter, 2006) and humans (Daw et al., 2006; Cohen et al., 2007) face a dilemma when
they make these decisions: exploit the information they have, or explore to gather new informa-
tion. How humans balance this dilemma has been studied in Daw et al. (2006)– examining human
choices in a n-arm bandit problem, they showed that humans were highly skewed towards exploita-
tion. Moreover, when the task requires specialised experts, cognitive entrenchment is heightened and
the balance between expertise and flexibility swings further towards remaining in known paradigms.


                                                         1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


To break out of this, dynamic environments of engagement are needed to force experts to incorpo-
rate new points of view (Dane, 2010). For such lateral thinking to catalyse creativity, Beaney (2005)
has further confirmed that random stimuli are crucial. For example, using random stimuli to boost
creativity has been attempted in the context of games (Yannakakis et al., 2014). In Sentient Sketch-
book, a machine creates sketches that the human can refine, and sketches are readily created through
machine learning models trained on ample data. Other approaches use machine representations to
learn models of human knowledge, narrowing down options for the human to consider. Recently,
Vasylenko et al. (2021) constructs a variational auto-encoder from underlying patterns of chemistry
based on structure/composition and then a human generated hypothesis guides possible solutions.
An entirely different approach refines a target function by allowing machine learning to discover
relations between mathematical objects, and guides humans to make new conjectures (Davies et al.,
2021). Note, however, that there is still a requirement for large datasets to formulate representations
of mathematical objects, which is antithetical to sample-efficiency as typically in experimental de-
sign we have a budget on the number of experiments, data from past designs is lean, and formulation
of hypothesis is difficult in this lean data space.
The use of BO for experimental design overcomes the problems of over-exploitation and cognitive
entrenchment and provides mathematically rigorous guarantees of convergence to the optimal de-
sign. However, as noted previously, this often means that domain-specific knowledge and expertise
is lost. In this paper, motivated by our observations, rather than attempting to enrich AI models
using expert knowledge to accelerate BO, we propose the BO-Muse algorithm that lets the human
expert take the lead in experimental design with the aid of an AI “muse” whose job is to augment
the expert’s intuition through AI suggestions. Thus the AI’s role is to provide dynamism to break
an expert’s cognitive entrenchment and go beyond the state-of-the-art in new problems, while the
expert’s role is to harness their vast knowledge and extensive experience to produce state-of-the-art
designs. Combining these roles in a formal framework is the main contribution of this paper.
BO-Muse is a formal framework that inserts BO into the expert’s workflow (see Figure 1), allowing
adjustment of the AI exploit/explore strategy in response to the human expert suggestions. This
process results in a batch of suggestions from the human expert and the AI at each iteration. This
batch of designs is experimentally evaluated and shared with the human and the AI. The AI model is
updated and the process iterated until the target is reached. We analyse the sample-efficiency of BO-
Muse and provide a sub-linear regret bound. We validate BO-Muse using optimisation benchmarks
and teaming with experts to perform complex real-world tasks. Our contributions are:

       • Design of a framework (BO-Muse) for a human expert and an AI to work in concert to
         accelerate experimental design, taking advantage of the human’s deeper insight into the
         problem and the AI’s advantage in using rigorous models to complement the expert to
         achieve sample-efficiency;
       • Design of an algorithm that compensates for the human tendency to be overly exploitative
         by appropriately boosting the AI exploration;
       • Provide a sub-linear regret bound for BO-Muse to demonstrate the accelerated convergence
         due to the human-AI teaming in the optimisation process; and
       • Provide experimental validation both using optimisation benchmark functions and with
         human experts to perform complex real-world tasks.


2     BACKGROUND

2.1   H UMAN MACHINE PARTNERSHIPS

Mixed initiative creative interfaces propose a tight coupling of human and machine to foster creativ-
ity. Thus far, however, research has been largely restricted to game design (Deterding et al., 2017),
where the authors identified open challenges including “what kinds of human-AI co-creativity can
we envision across and beyond creative practice?”. Our work is the first example of the use such a
paradigm to accelerate experimental design. Also of importance, though beyond the scope of this
study, is the design of interfaces for such systems (Rezwana & Maher, 2022) and how the differing
ways human and machine express confidence affects performance (Steyvers et al., 2022).


                                                  2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


2.2   BAYESIAN O PTIMISATION

Bayesian Optimisation (BO, (Brochu et al., 2010)) is an optimisation method for solving the prob-
lems of the form: x⋆ = argmaxx∈X f ⋆ (x) in the least possible number of iterations when f ⋆ is an
expensive blackbox function. Bayesian optimisation models f ⋆ as a draw from a Gaussian Process
GP(0, K) with prior covariance (kernel) K (Rasmussen, 2006) and, at each iteration t, recommends
the next function evaluation point xt by optimising a (cheap) acquisition function at : X → R based
on the posterior mean and variance given a dataset of observations Dt−1 = {(xi , yi ) : i ∈ Nt−1 }:
                                 T
                                                   −1
                  µt−1 (x) = yt−1     Kt−1 + σ 2 I     kt−1 (x)
                    2
                                                                       −1
                   σt−1 (x) = Kt−1 (x, x) − kT  t−1 (x)  Kt−1 + σ 2 I     kt−1 (x)
where yt−1 = [yi ]i∈Nt−1 is the set of observed outputs, Kt−1 = [K(xi , xj )]i,j∈Nt−1 and kt−1 (x) =
[K(xi , x)]i∈Nt−1 . Experiments evaluate yt = f ⋆ (xt ) + νt , where νt is noise, the GP model is
updated to include the new observation, and the process repeats either until a convergence criteria is
met or a fixed budget of evaluations is exhausted. Common acquisition functions include Expected
Improvement (EI, (Jones et al., 1998)) and GP-UCB (Srinivas et al., 2012). GP-UCB uses:
                                                            1/2
                                  at (x) = µt−1 (x) + βt          σt−1 (x)                            (1)
Here βt is a variable controlling the trade-off between exploitation of known minima (if βt is small)
and exploration (if βt is large). The optimisation performance depends on βt . To achieve sub-linear
convergence Chowdhury & Gopalan (2017) recommend βt = χt , where:
                                     q                                   2
                             χt = √Σ 2 ln 1δ + 1 + γt + ∥f ⋆ ∥HK

                                                                                                 (2)
                                       σ

and γt is the maximum information gain (maximum mutual information between f ⋆ and any t
observations (Srinivas et al., 2012)). Typically it is assumed that f ⋆ ∼ GP(0, K) or f ⋆ ∈ HK ,
where HK is the reproducing kernel Hilbert space of the kernel K (Srinivas et al., 2012). Otherwise
the problem is mis-specified. One approach to mis-specified BO is enlarged confidence GP-UCB
(EC-GP-UCB, (Bogunovic & Krause, 2021)). In EC-GP-UCB, the function closest to the objective
f ⋆ is denoted f # = argminf ∈HK ∥f ⋆ − f ∥∞ , and the acquisition function takes the form:
                                                            √
                                                     1/2
                           at (x) = µt−1 (x) + βt + ϵ σ t σt−1 (x)                              (3)

where ϵ = ∥f # − f ⋆ ∥∞ is the mis-specification gap. The additional term in the acquisition function
is required to ensure sub-linear convergence in this case.

3     F RAMEWORK
We consider the following optimisation problem x⋆ = argmaxx∈X f ⋆ (x), where f ⋆ : X → R is
expensive and evaluation is noisy, with results y = f ⋆ (x) + ν, where ν is Σ-sub-Gaussian noise. We
optimise f ⋆ as a series of experimental batches, indexed by s = 1, 2, . . .. For each batch a human
expert suggests x̂s for evaluation and an AI suggests x̆s (hatted variables relate to the human expert,
breved variables to the AI). Both experiments are carried out, the human expert and the AI update
their models based on the results, and the process is repeated for a total of S batches.
We do not know precisely how the human expert will model f ⋆ , but the AI maintains a GP model
with kernel (prior covariance) K̆s and we assume the human expert does the same with some un-
known kernel K̂s (we discuss this in detail in section 3.1), where K̆s and K̂s may be updated after
each batch. The posterior means and variances given dataset Ds = {(x̂i , ŷi ), (x̆i , y̆i ) : i ≤ s} are:
      µ̂s (x) = ysT (K̂s + σ 2 I)−1 k̂s (x) , σ̂s2 (x) = K̂s (x, x) − k̂T             2 −1
                                                                        s (x) (K̂s + σ I)  k̂s (x)
      µ̆s (x) = ys (K̆s + σ I) k̆s (x) , σ̆s (x) = K̆s (x, x) − k̆s (x) (K̆s + σ 2 I)−1 k̆s (x)
                  T          2 −1                2                      T


for the human and AI, respectively. We assume f ⋆ ∈ H̆s = HK̆s lies in the RKHS of the AI’s kernel
K̆s . We do not make this assumption for the human expert, making the problem mis-specified from
their perspective. Hence borrowing from (Bogunovic & Krause, 2021), we assume that for batch s
the human by default attempts to maximise the closest function to f ⋆ in Ĥs :
                   fˆ# = argmin
                    s                          ∥f − f ⋆ ∥
                                  f ∈Ĥs :∥f ∥Ĥs ≤B̂         (here Ĥs = H )
                                                              ∞                   K̂s



                                                        3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                                                         #
We further assume that the gap between f ⋆ and fˆs# is bounded as ∥fˆi,s    − f ⋆ ∥∞ ≤ ϵ̂s , and that the
human is able to learn (in effect, update their kernel) to “close the gap”, so lim ϵ̂s → 0.
                                                                                 s→∞

The AI generates recommendations using GP-UCB. Motivated by (Borji & Itti, 2013), we assume
the human in effect generates recommendations using EC-GP-UCB (Bogunovic & Krause, 2021):
                                                          1/2     √
                 x̂s = argminx∈X âs (x) = µ̂s−1 (x) + (β̂s + ϵ̂σs 2s)σ̂s−1 (x)
                                                         1/2                             (4)
                 x̆s = argminx∈X ăs (x) = µ̆s−1 (x) + β̆s σ̆s−1 (x)
The form of âs captures the broad behaviour of human recommendation selection, balancing ex-
ploitation of known good regions, which corresponds to β̂s → 0 (e.g. “based on my model, this
experiment should yield good results”), and exploration of areas of uncertainty, which corresponds
to β̂s → ∞ (e.g. “explore here, I’m curious”). We do not presume to know the precise trade-off
β̂s used by the human but, based on (Borji & Itti, 2013; Dane, 2010), it appears probable that the
human will pursue a conservative policy, so β̂s may be small. We therefore use the AI trade-off β̆s ,
which we control, to compensate for the potential conservative tendencies of the expert.
It is convenient to specify the exploration/exploitation trade-off parameters β̂s and β̆s relative to (2)
(Chowdhury & Gopalan, 2017; Bogunovic & Krause, 2021). Without loss of generality we require
that β̂s ∈ (ζ̂s↓ χ̂s , ζ̂s↑ χ̂s ) and β̆s = ζ̆s χ̆s , where 0 ≤ ζ̂s↓ ≤ 1 ≤ ζ̂s↑ ≤ ∞, ζ̆s ≥ 1 and (2):
                                                           2                                           2
  χ̂s = √Σσ 2 ln (1/δ) + 1 + γ̂s + ∥fˆs# ∥Ĥs , χ̆s = √Σσ 2 ln (1/δ) + 1 + γ̆s + ∥f ⋆ ∥H̆s
              p                                                        p
                                                                                                         (5)
where γ̂s and γ̆s are, respectively, the max information-gain for human expert and the AI. We show
in section 3.3 that the this suffices to ensure sublinear convergence for any human expert selections,
and moreover that the convergence rate can be improved beyond what can be achieved by standard
GP-UCB if the human operates as described here.

3.1   T HE H UMAN M ODEL

We posit that the human expert will maintain, explicitly or implicitly, an evolving weight-space
model (we do not presume to know the details of this, only that it exists, explicitly or otherwise):
                                          fˆs (x) = ĝs (p̂s (x))
of f ⋆ , where ĝs is in some sense “simple” and p̂s : Rn → Rm̂s represents the human’s understand-
ing of important features. This fits into the above scheme if we let the form of ĝs dictate the kernel
K̂s . For example if we know that ĝs is linear (so fˆs (x) = ŵsT p̂s (x) in weight-space) then we can
say that the human is, in effect, using a GP model with a linear-derived model:
                                      K̂s (x, x′ ) = p̂T           ′
                                                       s (x) p̂s (x )

Similarly if the human is using a model ĝi,s captured by a dth -order approximation model fˆs (x) =
ŵsT [p̂⊗q
        s (x)]q=0,1,...,d then we can assume a GP with a polynomial-derived kernel:

                                                                   ′ d
                                  K̂s (x, x′ ) = 1 + p̂T

                                                       s (x) p̂s (x )

As discussed previously we do not assume that the human expert’s evolving model suffices to com-
pletely replicate f ⋆ , particularly in the earlier stages of the algorithm, but we do assume that the
human expert is capable of learning from observations of f ⋆ to refine their model, closing the gap
ϵ̂2s between their model and f ⋆ so that lims→∞ ϵ̂2s = 0.
With regard to max information gain, we can reasonably assume that the human expert (the expertise
is important) starts with a better understanding of f ⋆ than the AI - the underlying physics of the
system, the behaviour one might expect in similar experiments, etc. So the human expert may begin
with an incomplete but informative set of features that relate to their knowledge of the system or
similar systems similar, or an understanding of the covariance structure of design space, so:

       • The prior variance of the human expert’s GP will vary between a zero-knowledge base level
         in regions that are a mystery to the expert, and much lower in regions where the expert has
         a good understanding from past experience, understanding of underlying physics etc.


                                                     4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


        • The prior covariance of the expert’s GP (the expert’s kernel) will have a structure informed
          by the expert’s understanding and knowledge, for example, of the “region A will behave
          like region B because they have feature/attribute C in common” type, so an experiment in
          region A will reduce the human expert’s posterior variance both in regions.
By comparison, the AI will typically start with a generic kernel prior like an SE kernel, Matern
kernel or similar. Such priors are “flat” over the design space, with no areas of lower prior variance
and no “region A will behave like B” behaviour, so an experiment will only reduce the AI’s local
variance.1 Thus as the algorithm progresses the human expert’s variance will both start from a lower
prior and decrease more quickly than the AI’s. We know that max information gain is bounded as the
sum of the logs of the pre-experiment posterior variance (Srinivas et al., 2012, Lemma 5.3), so we
may reasonably assume that the expert’s max information gain will be lower than the AI’s. Finally,
we argue that, as the human expert’s kernel is built on relatively few, highly informative features,
the expert’s RKHS norm ∥fs# ∥K̂s = ∥ŵ∥2 will be less than the AI’s norm ∥f ⋆ ∥K̆s = ∥w̆∥2 .

3.2    T HE BO-M USE A LGORITHM

The BO-Muse algorithm is shown in algorithm 1, where f ⋆ is optimised using a sequence of batches
s = 1, 2, . . . , S, each containing one human and one AI recommendation, respectively x̂s and x̆s .
The AI recommendation minimises the GP-UCB acquisition function on the AI’s GP posterior, with
the exploration/exploitation trade-off β̆s given (see section 3.4). The human recommendation is
assumed to be implicitly selected to minimise the EC-GP-UCB acquisition function (3), where the
exploitation/exploration trade-off β̂s is unknown but assumed to lie in the range β̂s ∈ (ζ̂s↓ χ̂s , ζ̂s↑ χ̂s ),
and the gap ϵ̂s is unknown but assume to converge to 0 at the rate to be specified in theorem 1).
We use two approximations in ourPdefinition of β̆s . Following the standard practice, we approximate
the max information gain γ̆s as (x,...)∈Ds−1 ln(1 + σ −2 σ̆i2 (x)); and we approximate the RKHS
norm bound B̆ = ∥f ⋆ ∥Hs as ∥µ̆s ∥Hs , which is updates using max to ensure it is non-decreasing
with s (this will tend to over-estimate the norm, but this should not affect the algorithm’s rate of
convergence). For simplicity we assume that σ = Σ (the model parameter matches the noise).

Algorithm 1 BO-Muse
      Input: Initial observations D0 = {(x1 , y1 ) , (x2 , y2 ) , . . .}, AI prior GP(0, K). Let B̆ = 1.
      for s ∈ 1, 2, . . . , Sqdo
                       √                                                                  2
        Set β̆s = 7 σ 2 ln(1/δ) + 1 + (x,...)∈Ds−1 ln (1 + σ −2 σ̆i2 (x)) + B̆ as per (5), (8).
                                          P

                                                                                    1/2
        AI recommends x̆s as x̆s = argmaxx∈X ăs (x) = µ̆s−1 (x) + β̆s σ̆s−1 (x).
        Human recommends x̂s .
        Run experiments to obtain ŷs = f ⋆ (x̂s ) + ν̂s and y̆s = f ⋆ (x̆s ) + ν̆s .
        Set Ds = Ds−1 ∪ {(x̂s , ŷs ) , (x̆s , y̆s )} and update the AI GP posterior.
                                               −1
        Set B̆ = max{B̆, ysT Ks + σ 2 I             ys }.
      end for


3.3    C ONVERGENCE AND R EGRET B OUNDS

We now discuss the convergence properties of BO-Muse. Our goal here is twofold: first we show
that BO-Muse converges even in the worst-case where the human operates arbitrarily; and second,
assuming the human behaves according to our assumptions, we analyse how convergence is acceler-
ated. Our approach is based on regret analysis (Srinivas et al., 2012; Chowdhury & Gopalan, 2017;
Bogunovic & Krause, 2021). As experiments arebatched we are concerned with instantaneous regret
per batch, not per experiment. The instantaneous regret for batch s is:
                         rs = min {f ⋆ (x⋆ ) − f ⋆ (x̂s ) , f ⋆ (x⋆ ) − f ⋆ (x̆s )}
                                                                      PS
and the cumulative regret up to and including batch S is RS = s=1 rs . If RS grows sub-linearly
then the minimum instantaneous regret will converge to 0 as S → ∞.
    1
      We do not consider the possibility of transfer learning of this structure, as this requires the expert to distill
their knowledge in an amenable form which, as noted previously, is highly non-trivial.


                                                          5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Consider first the worst-case scenario, i.e. an arbitrary, non-expert human. In this case the BO-
Muse algorithm 1 effectively involves the AI using a GP-UCB acquisition function (the constant
scaling factor on β̆s does not change the convergence properties of GP-UCB) to design a sequence
of experiments x̆s , where each experiment costs twice as much as usual to evaluate and yields
two observations, (x̆s , y̆s = f ⋆ (x̆s ) + η̆s ) and (x̂s , ŷs = f ⋆ (x̂s ) + η̂s ), where x̂s is arbitrary.
Additional observations can only improve the accuracy of the posterior, so using standard methods
(e.g. Chowdhury  √ & Gopalan p (2017); Bogunovic & Krause (2021); Srinivas et al. (2012)), we see
that RS = O(B γ̆2S 2S + (ln(1/δ) + γ̆2S )γ̆2S 2S), which is sub-linear for well-behaved kernels.
Thus we see that the worst-case convergence of BO-Muse is the same, in the big-O sense, as that of
GP-UCB. However this is pessimistic: in reality we assume a human is generating experiments x̂s
using an EC-GP-UCB style trade-off between exploitation and exploration, and moreover that the
human is an expert with an implicit or explicit evolving model of the system that is superior to the
AI’s generic prior. For this case we have the following result:
Theorem 1. Fix δ > 0, θ↓ > 0, θs ∈ [θ↓ , ∞], S ∈ N+ . Assume ζ̂s↓ ∈ (0, 1], ζ̆s = ζ̆ ≥ 1 so:
                            1/2       1/2                 1/2
              Mθs exp(χ̂s (1 − ζ̂s↓ )+ σs−1↑ ), exp(χ̆s (1 − ζ̆ 1/2 )− σs−1↓ ) ≤ 1               (6)
for all s ≤ S, where σs−1↑ = max(σ̂s−1 (x⋆ ), σ̆s−1 (x⋆ )), σs−1↓ = min(σ̂s−1 (x⋆ ), σ̆s−1 (x⋆ )),
                                                                                                  1
Mθ (a, b) = ( 12 (aθ + bθ ))1/θ is the generalised mean, and χ̂s , χ̆s as per (5). If ϵ̂2s = O(s− 2 ) then:
                                    q                           q                     2
          1
          S RS ≤ ln M−θ↓ exp           Ĉ χ̂SSγ̂S +O S1 , exp     C̆ 21 (1 + ζ̆ 1/2 ) χ̆SSγ̆S           (7)
with probability ≥ 1 − δ, where Ĉ, C̆ > 0 are constants.
We present the proof of this theorem in the appendix. As discussed previously γ̂S and γ̆S are the
max information gains for the human and AI, respectively; ζ̂s↓ ∈ (0, 1] defines the degree to which
the human is allowed to over-exploit; and ζ̆ defines the degree to which the AI must over-explore to
compensate. The parameters θs constrain the range of ζ̆ for which the theorem is applicable through
the condition (6), and the “mix” between human and AI in the regret bound (7). Assuming the max
information gain for the human model has better convergence properties than the AI model, which
we consider reasonable based on previous discussion, and noting that the power mean Mθ (a, b) will
be dominated by max(a, b) as θ → ∞ and by min(a, b) as θ → −∞, we see that:

          • When θs is large the AI trade-off parameter ζ̆ must be large to satisfy (6), corresponding
            to a very explorative AI, and the regret bound (7) will be asymptotically superior, being
            dominated by the human’s max information gain γ̆S for large S which, as discussed in
            section 3.1, may be reasonably expected to be smaller than the AI’s max information gain
            due to the human expert’s superior understanding of f ⋆ .
          • When θs is small the AI is less constrained, so the theorem is applicable for more ex-
            poitative AIs, but the regret bound (7) will be more strongly influenced by the AI max
            information gain and hence asymptotically inferior.
Note that, while larger θs will lead to tighter regret bounds in the asymptotic regime, this bound
will only apply for very explorative AIs, and moreover the factor ( 12 (1 + ζ̆ 1/2 ))2 will also be large,
so the regret bound may only be superior for very large S. The “ideal” trade-off is unclear, but
the important observation from this theorem is that the human’s expertise, and subsequent superior
maximum information gain, will improve the regret bound and thus convergence.

3.4      T UNING PARAMETER S ELECTION

We now consider the selection of the tuning parameter β̆s to ensure faster convergence than standard
BO alone. The conditions that β̆s must meet are specified by (6). Equivalently, taking the maxi-
                                                                                               √
mally pessimistic view of human under-exploration (i.e. ζ̂s↓ = 0), we require that exp(θs χ̆s (1 −
  1/2                      √                                                     σ                      2
ζ̆s )σs−1↓ ) ≤ 2 − exp(θs χ̂s σs−1↑ ) or, equivalently, ζ̆s ≥ 1 + ( χ̂χ̆ss )1/2 σs−1↑   1
                                                                                   s−1↓ ϕs
                                                                                           ln 2−e1 ϕs     ,
      2
                √
where ϕs = θs χ̂s σs−1↑ ∈ (0, ln 2), and, noting that the right of the inequality is strictly increas-
                                                   σ
ing, ϕs = 0 corresponds to ζ̆s = 1 + ( χ̆χ̂ss )1/2 σs−1↑
                                                    s−1↓
                                                         and ϕs = ln 2 to ζ̆s = ∞.
   2
       We need ϕs > 0 to ensure θs > 0, and note that h(ϕ) = ϕ1 ln( 2−e
                                                                      1
                                                                        ϕ ) is increasing and h(ln 2) = ∞.


                                                       6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Table 1: Synthetic benchmark functions. Analytical forms are provided in the second column and
the last column depicts the high level features used by a simulated human expert.

    Functions                             f ⋆ (x)                                       High Level Features
                                                                                        x′1 = x21 , x′2 = x22
    Matyas-2D          0.26 ∗ (x21 + x22 ) − 0.48 ∗ (x1 ∗ x2 )
                                                                                           x′3 = x1 ∗ x2
                           √1                 √1 P                                 x′1 = cos(x1 ), x′2 = cos(x2 )
                                ||x||2
    Ackley-4D      −ae−b    d        2   −e    d    i cos(cxi )   + a + e1   x′3 = cos(x3 ),x′4 = cos(x4 ),x′5 = ||x||2
                  sin2 (πw1 ) + s + (wd − 1)2 [1 + sin2 (2πwd )]                           x′1 = (sin x1 )2 ,
                where s = d−1    (w1 − 1)2 [1 + 10 sin2 (πwi + 1)]                       ′
                                                                                        xj+1 = x2j (sin xj )2
                          P
    Levy-6D                   i
                          and wi = 1 + xi4−1 ∀i ∈ N6                                          ∀j ∈ N6



                                                          √the max√information gains satisfy γ̆s ≥ γ̂s ,
As discussed in section 3.1, it is reasonable to assume that
and that ∥fs# ∥K̂s ≤ ∥f ⋆ ∥K̆s . With these assumptions χ̂s ≤ χ̆s . Furthermore we prove in the
                        σs−1↑
Appendix that lims→∞ σs−1↓       = 1, so we approximate the bound on ζ̆s as ζ̆s ≥ (1+ ϕ1s ln( 2−e1 ϕs ))2 .
Recalling ϕs ∈ (ln 1, ln 2) we finally, somewhat arbitrarily select ϕs = ln 3/2 (the middle of the
range in the log domain), which leads to the following heuristic used in the BO-Muse algorithm:
                                                                      2
                                                   ζ̆s ≥ 1 + lnln3/2
                                                                  2
                                                                        ≈7                                           (8)


4      E XPERIMENTS

We validate the performance of our proposed BO-Muse algorithm in the optimisation of synthetic
benchmark functions, and the real-world tasks involving human experts. In all our experiments,
we have used Squared Exponential (SE) kernel at all levels with associated hyper-parameters tuned
using maximum-likelihood estimation. We measure the sample-efficiency of BO-Muse framework
and other standard baselines in terms of the simple regret (rt ): rt = f ⋆ (x⋆ ) − maxxt ∈Dt f ⋆ (xt ),
where f ⋆ (x⋆ ) is the true global optima and f ⋆ (xt ) is the best solution observed in t iterations.
Experiments were run on an Intel Xeon CPU@ 3.60GHz workstation with 16 GB RAM capacity.

4.1     E XPERIMENTS WITH O PTIMISATION B ENCHMARK F UNCTIONS

We have evaluated BO-Muse on synthetic test functions covering a range of dimensions, as detailed
in Table 1. We compare the sample-efficiency of BO-Muse with (i) Generic BO: A standard GP-
UCB based BO algorithm with the exploration-exploitation trade-off factor (β) set as per Srinivas
et al. (2012); (ii) Simulated Human: A simulated human with access to higher level properties
(refer to Section 3.1 and high level features in Table 1) that may help to model the optimisation
function more accurately; and (iii) Simulated Human + PE: A simulated human teamed with an
AI agent using a pure exploration strategy (that is, an AI policy with ζ̆s = ∞). To simulate a
human expert (with high exploitation), we use a standard BO algorithm with small exploration
factor maximising âs (x) = µ̂s (x) + 0.001σ̂s (x). Furthermore, we have ensured to allocate the
same function evaluation budget for all the competing methods.
Figure 2a and 2b shows the simple regret computed for the Ackley-4D and Levy-6D functions
averaged over 10 randomly initialised runs – BO-Muse consistently outperforms all the baselines
for both functions. We believe that the poor performance of Simulated Human + PE is due to
the pure exploration strategy used. Additionally, we have conducted an ablation study by varying
the degrees of exploitation-exploration strategy (βˆs ) to simulate covering over-exploitative to over-
explorative experts. Figure 2c shows the result of the ablation study for Matyas-2D function and
we refer to the appendix for the additional results. To further understand the behaviour of BO-Muse
framework with other human acquisition functions, we have also considered an additional function
optimisation experiment to include Expected Improvement acquisition function for human experts.
The experimental details and results of the ablation study are provided in the Appendix.


                                                                   7
 Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                Ackley-4D Function                                                          Levy6D Function                                               Ablation Study - Matyas Function
                24                                                                           30
                                                 BO-Muse + Human                                                         BO-Muse + Human                                                                    s=1
                                                 Generic BO                                                              Generic BO                             3.0
                22                               Simulated Human                                                         Simulated Human                                                                    s = 10
                                                                                             25
                                                 Simulated Human + PE                                                    Simulated Human + PE                   2.5                                         s = 100
                20                                                                                                                                                                                          s = 1000
Simple Regret


                                                                             Simple Regret


                                                                                                                                                Simple Regret
                                                                                             20                                                                 2.0
                18
                                                                                                                                                                1.5
                                                                                             15
                16
                                                                                                                                                                1.0
                14                                                                           10
                                                                                                                                                                0.5
                12                                                                           5                                                                  0.0
                       5   10   15   20     25      30   35    40       45                        8   16    24    32    40    48    56     64                         3     6     9     12     15      18      21
                                Function Evaluations                                                       Function Evaluations                                                 Function Evaluations

                                      (a)                                                                        (b)                                                                  (c)

 Figure 2: Simple regret versus iterations for (a) Ackley-4D (b) Levy-6D functions. Ablation study
 with varying degrees of exploitation-exploration parameter (β̂s ) is shown in (c).


 4.2                   R EAL - WORLD E XPERIMENTS

 We now evaluate the performance of our proposed framework in complex real-world tasks.

 4.2.1                     C LASSIFICATION TASKS – S UPPORT V ECTOR M ACHINES AND R ANDOM F ORESTS
 Experimental Set-up. The expert task is to choose hyper-parameters for Support Vector Machine
 (SVM) and Random Forest (RF) classifiers operating on real-world Biodeg dataset from UCI repos-
 itory (Dua & Graff, 2017). We divide the dataset into random 80/20 train/test splits. We set up two
 human expert teams. Each member of Team 1 works in partnership with BO-Muse, whilst mem-
 bers of Team 2 work individually without BO-Muse. We recruited 8 participants3 consisting of 4
 postdocs and 4 postgraduate students. 2 postdocs and 2 students are allocated to each team ran-
 domly so that each team has 4 participants, with roughly similar expertise. Each participant is given
 the same budget, 3 random initial designs + 30 further iterations. At the end of each iteration, the
 test classification error for the suggested hyper-parameter set is computed. We measure the overall
 performance using simple regret, which will be the minimum test classification error observed so
 far. The individual results from each team are averaged to compare (Team 1) BO-Muse + Human
 vs (Team 2) Human alone (baseline). Additionally, we also report the performance of Generic BO
 (AI alone) method to demonstrate the efficacy of our approach. Further, we have set the same seed
 initialisation and allocated the same evaluation budget for all the algorithms. As we provide each
 participant the same set of random initial observations, we do not compute the descriptive statistics
 for the Generic BO baseline. We note that BO-Muse is designed to work with experts at various
 levels as we assume an imperfect expert model via a mis-specified GP.

 Interfacing with Experts. The human experts perform two hyper-parameter tuning experiments
 to minimise the test classification error of SVM and RF. The expert is provided with a simple graphi-
 cal interface (Figure 3a) which shows accumulated observations of classifier performance as a func-
 tion of hyper-parameters, with the best result so far shown in dark blue. Interfaces for both teams
 are similar excepting that teams working with BO-Muse also see the previous AI-generated obser-
 vations indicated by ▼. Experts suggest the next hyper-parameter set by clicking at a point of their
 choice inside the plot. We refer to Appendix A.9 for more details.

 Experiment 1 – SVM Classification. In this experiment we have considered C-SVM classifiers
 with Radial Basis Function (RBF) kernel. We have used LibSVM (Chang & Lin, 2011) imple-
 mentation of SVM with hyper-parameters kernel scale γ and the cost parameter C. The SVM
 hyper-parameters i.e., γ and C are tuned in the exponent space of [−3, 3].

 Experiment 2 – Random Forest Classification. In the classification tasks with random forests
 we let the experts and BO-Muse tune the hyper-parameters maximum depth of the decision tree and
 the number of samples per split in the range (0, 100], and (1, 50], respectively.
                 3
                     Necessary ethics approval obtained.


                                                                                                                 8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                     Enter Expert Suggestion #5                                                      SVM Hyperparameter Tuning                                          Random Forests Hyperparameter Tuning
                                                                                          0.16                                                                   0.40
                               85.3                                                                                Expert alone                                                              Expert alone
    4                                                                                     0.15                     BO-Muse + Human                               0.38                        BO-Muse + Human


                                                              Test Classification Error


                                                                                                                                     Test Classification Error
                                                                                                                   Generic BO                                    0.36                        Generic BO
    2                                                                                     0.14
        64.5                                                                                                                                                     0.34
    0                                                                                     0.13                                                                   0.32
C



                                                                                                                                                                 0.30
                                                                                          0.12
    2                                                                                                                                                            0.28
                                                  64.5
                                                         #4                               0.11
                                                                                                                                                                 0.26
    4
                                                                                          0.10                                                                   0.24
               4       2       0            2            4                                       5     10       15   20   25   30                                        5     10    15     20    25    30
                             Gamma                                                                    Function Evaluations                                                    Function Evaluations
                            (a)                                                                             (b)                                                                     (c)

Figure 3: (a) Interface used by participants showing performance vs hyper-parameters: best per-
formances indicated in blue (darker is higher). If working with BO-Muse, machine point from the
previous iteration (#) are shown with ▼; Simple regret vs iterations for the hyper-parameter tuning
of classifiers comparing Team 1 (BO-Muse + Human) (red) vs Team 2 (Human only) (black) vs AI
alone (blue). We report the simple regret mean (along with its standard deviation) for (b) Support
Vector Machines (SVM) and (c) Random Forests (RF) classifiers.


The results of our classification experiments are depicted in Figure 3b and Figure 3c. In both exper-
iments, the BO-Muse + Human team outperforms the experts working on their own.


4.2.2              S UPPLEMENTARY SPACE SHIELD DESIGN EXPERIMENT

Our third experiment evaluates BO-Muse in a real applied engineering experiment. We consider the
design of a shield for protecting spacecraft against the impact of a space debris particle by partnering
with a world leading impact expert. For this problem, i.e., impact of a cubic steel debris particle,
there exists no state-of-the-art solution. We include this experiment in Appendix A.10 because of
the lack of familiarity of CS with this problem and the detail required to give sufficient background.
In the experiment (see Table 6 in Appendix A.10) we observe the human expert initially exploring
solutions based on the state-of-the-art for more typical debris impact problems (which are normally
simplified to spherical aluminium projectiles). The expert is observed to rapidly exploit their initial
3 designs to identify two feasible shielding solutions within the first four batch iterations (ID 4–11,
marked in blue). The expert performs further exploitation of these successful designs (Result=0)
over the next four batch iterations (ID 12-19, marked in brown) in an attempt to reduce the weight,
but is unsuccessful. To this point the expert does not appear to have been influenced at all by the BO
suggestions. However, in the next four batch iterations (ID 20-27, marked in green) we can observe
the expert taking inspiration from the previous BO-Muse suggestions. One such exploitation results
in a successful solution (ID 27), further exploitation of which provides the best solution identified
by the experiment ID 29. This solution is highly irregular for spacecraft debris shields, utilising a
polymer outer layer in contact with a metallic backing to disrupt the debris particle. Such a design is
not reminiscent of any established flight hardware, see e.g., Christiansen et al. (2009). Thus, the BO-
Muse is demonstrated to have performed its role as hypothesised, inspiring the human expert with
novel designs that are subsequently subject to exploitation by the human expert. The experimental
set-up and results are discussed in detail in Appendix A.10.


5       C ONCLUSION

We have presented a new approach to human expert/AI teaming for experimental optimisation. Our
algorithm lets the human expert take the lead in the experimental process thus allowing them to fully
use their domain expertise, while the AI plays the role of a muse, injecting novelty and searching
for regions the human may have overlooked to break the human out of over-exploitation induced by
cognitive entrenchment. We show that our algorithm converges sub-linearly and faster than either
the AI or human expert alone.


                                                                                                            9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


R EFERENCES
CE Anderson Jr, IS Chocron, and AE Nicholls. Damage modeling for taylor impact simulations.
  Journal of Applied Physics IV, 134:331–337, 2006.
Anon. Metallic materials and elements for aerospace vehicle structures. Technical Report MIL-
  HDBK-5J, US Department of Defense, 2003.
Anon. Aisi 4340 steel, normalized, 100 mm (4 in.) round. Technical report, Aerospace Specification
  Metals (ASM) Inc., 2022.
Biswajit Banerjee. The mechanical threshold stress model for various tempers of aisi 4340 steel.
  International Journal of Solids and Structures, 44:834–859, 2007.
MR Barnett, M Senadeera, D Fabijanic, KF Shamlaye, J Joseph, SR Kada, S Rana, S Gupta, and
 S Venkatesh. A scrap-tolerant alloying concept based on high entropy alloys. Acta Materialia,
 200:735–744, 2020.
Michael Beaney. Imagination and creativity, volume 4. Open University Worldwide Ltd, 2005.
Ilija Bogunovic and Andreas Krause. Misspecified gaussian process bandit optimization. volume 34,
   2021.
Ali Borji and Laurent Itti. Bayesian optimization explains human active search. In Advances in
  neural information processing systems, volume 26, 2013.
Eric Brochu, Vlad M. Cora, and Nando de Freitas. A tutorial on bayesian optimization of expensive
  cost functions, with applications to active user modeling and heirarchical reinforcement learning.
  eprint arXiv:1012.2599, arXiv.org, December 2010.
Chih-Chung Chang and Chih-Jen Lin. Libsvm: a library for support vector machines. ACM trans-
  actions on intelligent systems and technology (TIST), 2(3):1–27, 2011.
Sayak Ray Chowdhury and Aditya Gopalan. On kernelized multi-armed bandits. In Doina Pre-
  cup and Yee Whye Teh (eds.), Proceedings of the 34th International Conference on Machine
  Learning, volume 70 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pp. 844–853, International
  Convention Centre, Sydney, Australia, Aug 2017. PMLR.
Eric Christiansen, Jeanne Crews, J.E. Williamsen, J.H. Robinson, and A.M. Nolen. Enhanced me-
  teoroid and orbital debris shielding. International Journal of Impact Engineering, 17:217–228,
  1995.
Eric Christiansen, Jim Arnold, Alan Davis, James Hyde, Dana Lear, J.-C. Liou, Frankel Lyons,
  Thomas Prior, Martin Ratliff, Shannon Ryan, Frank Giovane, Bob Corsaro, and George Studor.
  Handbook for designing mmod protection. Technical Report NASA/TM-2009-214785, NASA
  Johnson Space Center, 2009.
Jonathan D Cohen, Samuel M McClure, and Angela J Yu. Should i stay or should i go? how the
  human brain manages the trade-off between exploitation and exploration. Philosophical Trans-
  actions of the Royal Society B: Biological Sciences, 362(1481):933–942, 2007.
Brooke Corbett. Numerical simulations of target hole diameters for hypervelocity impacts into
  elevated and room temperature bumpers. International Journal of Impact Engineering, 33:431–
  440, 2006.
Burton Cour-Palais and Jeanne Crews. A multi-shock concept for spacecraft shielding. International
  Journal of Impact Engineering, 10:135–146, 1990.
Erik Dane. Reconsidering the trade-off between expertise and flexibility: A cognitive entrenchment
  perspective. Academy of Management Review, 35(4):579–603, 2010.
Alex Davies, Petar Veličković, Lars Buesing, Sam Blackwell, Daniel Zheng, Nenad Tomašev,
  Richard Tanburn, Peter Battaglia, Charles Blundell, András Juhász, et al. Advancing mathematics
  by guiding human intuition with ai. Nature, 600(7887):70–74, 2021.


                                                10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Nathaniel D Daw, John P O’doherty, Peter Dayan, Ben Seymour, and Raymond J Dolan. Cortical
  substrates for exploratory decisions in humans. Nature, 441(7095):876–879, 2006.
Roberto Destefanis, Moreno Faraud, and Marco Trucchi. Columbus debris shielding experiments
  and ballistic limit curve. International Journal of Impact Engineering, 23:181–192, 1999.
Sebastian Deterding, Jonathan Hook, Rebecca Fiebrink, Marco Gillies, Jeremy Gow, Memo Ak-
  ten, Gillian Smith, Antonios Liapis, and Kate Compton. Mixed-initiative creative interfaces. In
  Proceedings of the 2017 CHI Conference Extended Abstracts on Human Factors in Computing
  Systems, pp. 628–635, 2017.
Dheeru Dua and Casey Graff. UCI machine learning repository, 2017. URL http://archive.
  ics.uci.edu/ml.
Christian Fiedler, Carsten W Scherer, and Sebastian Trimpe. Practical and rigorous uncertainty
  bounds for gaussian process regression. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial
  Intelligence, volume 35, pp. 7439–7447, 2021.
Rafael Gómez-Bombarelli, Jennifer N Wei, David Duvenaud, José Miguel Hernández-Lobato,
  Benjamı́n Sánchez-Lengeling, Dennis Sheberla, Jorge Aguilera-Iparraguirre, Timothy D Hirzel,
  Ryan P Adams, and Alán Aspuru-Guzik. Automatic chemical design using a data-driven contin-
  uous representation of molecules. ACS central science, 4(2):268–276, 2018.
S. Greenhill, S. Rana, S. Gupta, P. Vellanki, and S. Venkatesh. Bayesian optimization for adaptive
   experimental design: A review. IEEE Access, 8:13937–13948, 2020. doi: 10.1109/ACCESS.
   2020.2966228.
Eduard Gruneisen. The state of solid body. Technical Report R19542, National Aeronautics and
  Space Administration (NASA), 1959.
John Hallquist. Ls-dyna theory manual. Technical report, Livermore Software Technology Corpo-
  ration (LSTC), Livermore, 2006.
Teri Hamlin, Michael Canga, Roger Boyer, and Eric Thigpen. 2009 space shuttle probabilistic risk
  assessment overview. In 10th International Probabilistic Safety Assessment and Management
  Conference, 2013.
TJ Holmquist, DW Templeton, and KD Bishnoi. Constitutive modeling of aluminum nitride for
  large strain, high strain-rate, and high-pressure applications. International Journal of Impact
  Engineering, 25:211–231, 2001.
Carl Hvarfner, Danny Stoll, Artur Souza, Marius Lindauer, Frank Hutter, and Luigi Nardi. π-bo:
  Augmenting acquisition functions with user beliefs for bayesian optimization. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2204.11051, 2022.
Gordon Johnson and William Cook. A constitutive model and data for metals subject to large strains,
  high strain rates and high temperatures. In 7th International Symposium on Ballistics, 1983.
Gordon Johnson and William Cook. Fracture characteristics of three metals subjected to various
  strain, strain rates, temperatures and pressures. Engineering Fracture Mechanics, 21:31–48, 1985.
Donald R. Jones, Matthias Schonlau, and William J. Welch. Efficient global optimization of expen-
  sive black-box functions. Journal of Global optimization, 13(4):455–492, 1998.
Paula Krisko. The new nasa orbital debris engineering model ordem 3.0. In AIAA/AAS Astrodynam-
  ics Specialist Conference, 2014.
Cheng Li, David Rubı́n de Celis Leal, Santu Rana, Sunil Gupta, Alessandra Sutti, Stewart Greenhill,
  Teo Slezak, Murray Height, and Svetha Venkatesh. Rapid bayesian optimisation for synthesis of
  short polymer fiber materials. Scientific reports, 7(1):5683, 2017.
Cheng Li, Santu Rana, Sunil Gupta, Vu Nguyen, Svetha Venkatesh, Alessandra Sutti, David Rubin,
  Teo Slezak, Murray Height, Mazher Mohammed, and Ian Gibson. Accelerating experimental
  design by incorporating experimenter hunches. In Data Mining (ICDM), 2018 IEEE International
  Conference on, pp. 257–266. IEEE, 2018.


                                                11
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Long Nguyen, Torsten Lassig, Shannon Ryan, Werner Riedel, Adrian Mouritz, and Adrian Orifici.
  A methodology for hydrocode analysis of ultra-high molecular weight polyethylene composite
  under ballistic impact. Composites: Part A, 84:224–235, 2016.
Josip E. Pečarić. Generalization of the power means and their inequalities. Journal of Mathematical
  Analysis and Applications, 161(2):395–404, 1991.
Stephen C Pratt and David JT Sumpter. A tunable algorithm for collective decision-making. Pro-
  ceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 103(43):15906–15910, 2006.
C.W. Pyun. Generalized means: Properties and applications. American Journal of Physics, 42(10):
  896–901, 1974.
Carl Edward Rasmussen. Gaussian processes for machine learning. MIT Press, 2006.
Jeba Rezwana and Mary Lou Maher. Designing creative ai partners with cofi: A framework for
  modeling interaction in human-ai co-creative systems. ACM Transactions on Computer-Human
  Interaction, 2022.
M Rivero, B Shiotani, M Carrasquilla, N Fitz-Coy, J-C Liou, M Sorge, T Huynh, J Opiela, P Krisko,
  and H Cowardin. Debrisat fragment characterization system and processing status. In 67th Inter-
  national Astronautical Congress, 2016.
Denise M Rousseau. Schema, promise and mutuality: The building blocks of the psychological
  contract. Journal of occupational and organizational psychology, 74(4):511–541, 2001.
Meyer Scetbon and Zaid Harchaoui. A spectral analysis of dot-product kernels. In International
 Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Statistics, pp. 3394–3402. PMLR, 2021.
Bobak Shahriari, Kevin Swersky, Ziyu Wang, Ryan P Adams, and Nando De Freitas. Taking the
  human out of the loop: A review of bayesian optimization. Proceedings of the IEEE, 104(1):
  148–175, 2015.
Alistair Shilton, Sunil Gupta, Santu Rana, and Svetha Venkatesh. Regret bounds for transfer learning
  in bayesian optimisation. In Artificial Intelligence and Statistics, pp. 307–315, Florida, USA,
  2017.
M Silcock, W Hall, B Fox, and N Warrior. Finite element modelling of metallic tubular crash
 structures with an explicit code. International Journal of Vehicle Safety, 1(4):292–303, 2006.
Niranjan Srinivas, Andreas Krause, Sham M. Kakade, and Matthias W. Seeger. Information-
  theoretic regret bounds for gaussian process optimization in the bandit setting. IEEE Transactions
  on Information Theory, 58(5):3250–3265, May 2012.
Mark Steyvers, Heliodoro Tejeda, Gavin Kerrigan, and Padhraic Smyth. Bayesian modeling
 of human–ai complementarity. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 119(11):
 e2111547119, 2022.
J van Hoof, M Worswick, P Straznicky, and M Bolduc. Effects of post-failure modelling on the
   response of ballistically impacted composites. In Proceedings of the International Conference on
   Composite Materials, 1999.
Andrij Vasylenko, Jacinthe Gamon, Benjamin B Duff, Vladimir V Gusev, Luke M Daniels, Marco
  Zanella, J Felix Shin, Paul M Sharp, Alexandra Morscher, Ruiyong Chen, et al. Element selection
  for crystalline inorganic solid discovery guided by unsupervised machine learning of experimen-
  tally explored chemistry. Nature communications, 12(1):1–12, 2021.
Sarah C Watkinson, Lynne Boddy, K Burton, PR Darrah, D Eastwood, Mark D Fricker, and Monika
  Tlalka. New approaches to investigating the function of mycelial networks. Mycologist, 19(1):
  11–17, 2005.
James Wilson, Frank Hutter, and Marc Deisenroth. Maximising acquisition functions for Bayesian
  optimisation. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2018), pp. 9884–
  9895, 2018.
Georgios N Yannakakis, Antonios Liapis, and Constantine Alexopoulos.            Mixed-initiative co-
  creativity. 2014.


                                                 12
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


A     A PPENDIX
A.1   P ROOFS OF R EGRET B OUNDS

In this appendix we consider a generalised version of the framework. For clarity (we favour brevity
in the paper body, but clarity is essential here) we also require some additional notations. As in the
main paper, our goal is to solve:
                                         x⋆ = argmax f ⋆ (x)
                                                   x∈X
where f ⋆ is only measurable via an expensive and noisy process:
                                            y = f ⋆ (x) + ν
where ν is Σ-sub-Gaussian noise.
Let’s assume that we have a series of experimental batches 1, 2, . . ., where batch s contains p̂ human
generated experiments and p̆ AI generated experiments, giving a total of p = p̂ + p̆ experiments. We
use a hat with an index i ∈ M̂ to indicate a property relating to human i, and a breve with an index
j ∈ M̆ to indicate a property relating to AI j, where:
                                     M̂ = Np̂       (set of humans)
                                     M̆ = Np̆       (set of AIs)

We assume the batches are run sequentially, and wlog that the experiments within each batch are
nominally ordered, so the set of all experiments may be indexed with t. We use a bar to differentiate
between a property indexed by experiment number t, which is unbarred (e.g. ct ), and a property
indexed by batch number s, which is barred (e.g. d¯s ). For simplicity we define:
                   l m
            st = pt                       (batch s in which experiment t occurs)
            ts = p (s − 1) + 1            (first experiment in batch s)
              t = p (st − 1) + 1          (first experiment in batch st )
            t̂s = p (s − 1) + 1           (first human experiment in the batch s)
              t̂ = p (st − 1) + 1         (first human experiment in the batch st )
            t̆s = p (s − 1) + 1 + p̂      (first AI experiment in the batch s)
              t̆ = p (st − 1) + 1 + p̂ (first AI experiment in the batch st )
            Ts = Np + p (s − 1) + 1 (set of experiments in batch s)
          T≤s = Nsp + 1                   (set of experiments up to and including batch s)

We assume that humans and AIs maintain a GP model that is updated after each batch. So, after
batch s, the posterior means and variances are, respectively:
                                                                                         −1
                                                                 ˆ T (x) K̄

      ˆi,s (x) = ᾱ
      µ̄           ˆT    ˆ                         ˆ (x, x) − k̄
                                     ˆ 2i,s (x) = K̄                        ˆ + σ̄ ˆ2I      ˆ (x)
                     i,s k̄i,s (x) , σ̄              i,s           i,s        i,s           k̄i,s
                                                                   T                     −1
                     T ˘                2          ˘             ˘          ˘         2      ˘
      ˘j,s (x) = ᾱ
      µ̄           ˘ j,s k̄j,s (x) , σ̄
                                     ˘ j,s (x) = K̄ j,s (x, x) − k̄j,s (x) K̄j,s + σ̄
                                                                                   ˘ I      k̄j,s (x)
where:
                                      −1                                         −1
               ˆ i,s = K̄
               ᾱ         ˆ + σ̄ ˆ2I     ȳs ,            ˘ j,s = K̄
                                                          ᾱ         ˘ + σ̄ ˘2I     ȳs
                            i,s                                        j,s
                        h                i                         h                i
               ˆ
              K̄           ˆ (x , x ′ )                   ˘           ˘ (x , x ′ )
                  i,s =   K̄ i,s  t  t             ,     K̄  j,s =   K̄ j,s  t  t
                        h              i t,t′ ∈T≤s                 h              i t,t′ ∈T≤s
          ˆ                ˆ
          k̄i,s (x) = K̄ i,s (xt , x)          ,     ˘                ˘
                                                     k̄j,s (x) = K̄ j,s (xt , x)
                                        t∈T≤s                                            t∈T≤s
                ȳs = [ f ⋆ (xt ) + νt ]t∈T≤s ,               f̄s = [ f ⋆ (xt ) ]t∈T≤s
We also occasionally use:
                       yt = [ f ⋆ (xt′ ) + νt′ ]t′ ≤t , ft = [ f ⋆ (xt′ ) ]t′ ≤t

As this is a batch algorithm we are concerned with the instantaneous regret for the batches, not the
individual experiments therein. The instantaneous regret for batch s is:
                               r̄s = min rt ,     rt = f ⋆ (x⋆ ) − f ⋆ (xt )
                                     t∈Ts


                                                     13
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


where rt is the instantaneous regret for experiment t. The cumulative regret up to and including
batch S is:                                      P
                                         R̄S =         r̄s
                                                        s∈NS +1

                     ⋆
We do not assume f is drawn from any of the GP models for humans or AIs, so the problem mis-
specified. So, borrowing from Bogunovic & Krause (2021), we assume humans and AIs attempt to
maximise the “closest” (best-in-class) function to f ⋆ in the respective hypothesis spaces, using the
shorthand H̄ˆ =H           ˘
             i,s     ˆ , H̄j,s = HK̄
                    K̄                ˘     :
                       i,s              j,s
                                           n                               o
                               ˆ
                               H̄      =      f ∈  ˆ
                                                  H̄     ∥f ∥       ≤ B̂
                                  i,s                i,s      ˆ
                                                             H̄          i
                                           n                    i,s        o
                               ˘
                               H̄ = f ∈ H̄         ˘     ∥f ∥       ≤ B̆
                                     j,s                j,s            ˘
                                                                      H̄              j
                                                                         j,s

where the closest to optimal approximations of f ⋆ in the hypothesis spaces are:
                       #                         #
                     fˆ
                      ¯ = argmin ∥f − f ⋆ ∥ , f¯˘ = argmin ∥f − f ⋆ ∥
                       i,s                 ∞     j,s                  ∞
                                 ˆ
                              f ∈H̄                                               ˘
                                                                               f ∈H̄
                                   i,s                                              j,s

As is usual in practice, kernels may be updated when the GP models are updated, typically using
max-log-likelihood for AIs or something more radical for the humans, which modifies the corre-
sponding RKHSs. The difference between the best-in-class approximations and f ⋆ for batch s are
assumed bounded as:
                                 #                                #
                              fˆ
                               ¯ − f⋆
                                i,s            ≤ ϵ̄ˆi,s ,        f˘¯j,s − f ⋆             ≤ ϵ̄˘j,s
                                           ∞                                       ∞
                                                                                                     #
After each batch s, we have the (nominal) GP models built on (nominal) observations of fˆ¯i,s and
 ˘# , which have the same variance as the (real) models (the posterior variance is independent of y)
f¯
 j,s
but different posterior means:
                         ˆ#
                         µ̄          ˆ #T ˆ            ˘#          ˘ #T ˘
                           i,s (x) = ᾱi,s k̄i,s (x) , µ̄j,s (x) = ᾱj,s k̄j,s (x)

We assume that test points are generated, either nominally (for humans) or directly (for AIs), EC-
GP-UCB style (Bogunovic & Krause, 2021), from a sequence of interleaved βt sequences by the
relevant human i = t − t̂ if i ∈ M̂ or AI j = t − t̆ if j ∈ M̆ in batch st , so:

                                           β̂i,t if i = t − t̂ ∈ M̂
                                 βt =
                                         β̆j,t if j = t − t̆ ∈ M̆
                                           ϵ̂i,t if i = t − t̂ ∈ M̂
                                  ϵt =
                                       ( j,t if j = t − t̆ ∈ M̆
                                           ϵ̆
                                            ˆi,st −1 (x) if i = t − t̂ ∈ M̂
                                           µ̄
                          µt−1 (x) =
                                            ˘
                                           µ̄        (x) if j = t − t̆ ∈ M̆
                                         j,st −1
                                           ˆ i,st −1 (x) if i = t − t̂ ∈ M̂
                                           σ̄
                          σt−1 (x) =
                                           ˘ j,st −1 (x) if j = t − t̆ ∈ M̆
                                           σ̄
using the acquisition function:
                                                            √              √
                            αt (x) = µt−1 (x) +                 βt + ϵσt    t σt−1 (x)
Generally we cannot control the human’s exploitation/exploration trade-off sequence β̂i,t , but we
assume humans are conservative, so the sequence may be assumed small. We use the AI trade-off
sequence β̆j,t , which we do control, to compensate for the conservative tendencies of the humans
involved. We do however assume that the humans include at least some exploration in their decisions
on the understanding that their knowledge is not, in fact, perfect, so β̂i,t ≥ 0 (note that a human who
over-estimates their abilities may fail to meet this requirement, so care is required to avoid this). For
reasons which will become apparent, we assume that:

                                    β̂i,ts ∈ ζ̄ˆi,s↓ χ̄
                                                     ˆi,s , ζ̄ˆi,s↑ χ̄
                                                                     ˆi,s

                                    β̆j,ts ∈ ζ̄˘j,s↓ χ̄
                                                      ˘j,s , ζ̄˘j,s↑ χ̄
                                                                     ˘j,s


                                                        14
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


where ζ̄ˆi,s↓ ≤ 1, which we will see makes the humans over-exploitative, and ζ̄˘j,s↓ ≥ 1, which we
will see makes the AIs over-explorative, and:
                                                                      !2
                                     q                        #
                        ˆ = √Σ 2 ln 1 + 1 + γ̄ˆ + fˆ¯

                        χ̄  i,s           σ           δ              i,s       i,s
                                                                                      ˆ
                                                                                     H̄ i,s
                                                                                              !2
                                             q                                 #
                                         Σ            1
                                                            + 1 + γ̄˘ j,s + f˘¯j,s

                          ˘j,s =
                          χ̄             √    2 ln    δ
                                           σ                                          ˘
                                                                                     H̄ j,s


where γ̄ˆ i,s and γ̄˘ j,s are, respectively, the max-information-gain terms for humans i ∈ M̂ and AIs
j ∈ M̆, as will be described shortly.

A.2    N OTES ON M AXIMUM I NFORMATION G AIN

We are assuming p GPs, each of which will have a different information gain that is a function of its
kernel. All have the same dataset and get updated at the batch boundary. Thus, after S batches, if
we consider human i ∈ M̂:
                                                 ˆ 2 ISp
         Iˆi (ySp : fSp ) = H (ySp ) − 12 ln 2πeσ̄
           = H (ySp−1 ) + H ySp | y(S−1)p − 21 ln 2πeσ̄  ˆ 2 ISp


           = H (ySp−2 ) + H ySp | y(S−1)p + H ySp−1 | y(S−1)p − 12 ln 2πeσ̄    ˆ 2 ISp


           = ...
                                   H yt | yt−1 − 12 ln 2πeσ̄ˆ 2 ISp
                               P
           = H y(S−1)p +
                              t∈TS
                                                         H yt | yt−1 − 12 ln 2πeσ̄ˆ 2 ISp
                               P                       P
           = H y(S−2)p +           H yt | yt−1 +
                                  t∈TS                         t∈TS−1
           = ...
                    H yt | yt−1 − 12 ln 2πeσ̄      ˆ 2 ISp
                P
           =
             t∈T≤S

           = 21                 ˆ 2 + σ̄ˆ −2 σ̄
                                             ˆ 2i,t−1 (xt ) − 21 ln 2πeσ̄
                                                                       ˆ 2 IT
                  P
                      ln 2πe σ̄
                t∈T≤S

             1                ˆ −2 σ̄
                                   ˆ 2i,t−1 (xt )
                  P
           =2         ln 1 + σ̄
                t∈T≤S

where we have used that x1 , . . . , xsp are deterministic conditioned on y(s−1)p , and that the variances
do not depend on y. The derivation for AI j is essentially identical. In summary, therefore, the
information gain is:

                     Iˆi (ySp : fSp ) = 12                 ˆ −2 σ̄
                                                                ˆ 2i,t−1 (xt ) ≤ γ̄ˆ i,S
                                              P
                                                  ln 1 + σ̄
                                            t∈T≤S

                      ˘                   1                 ˘ −2 σ̄
                                                                 ˘ 2j,t−1 (xt ) ≤ γ̄˘ j,S
                                              P
                     Ij (ySp : fSp ) = 2          ln 1 + σ̄
                                                t∈T≤S

where γ̄ˆ i,S and γ̄˘ j,S are, respectively, the maximum information gains for human i and AI j over S
batches.

A.3    N OTES ON THE H UMAN M ODEL

We posit that every human i ∈ M̂ has an evolving model of the system:

                                    fˆ¯i,s (x) = ḡˆi,s p̄

                                                        ˆ i,s (x)

                                               ˆ i,s : Rn → Rm̄ ˆ i,s
where ḡˆi,s is in some sense “simple” and p̄                         . This fits into the above scheme if
                                              ˆ
we let the form of ḡˆi,s dictate the kernel K̄ i,s . For example if we know that ḡˆi,s is linear - i.e., the
human is known to be using some heuristic model of the form:

                                              fˆ¯i,s (x) = w̄
                                                           ˆT     ˆ
                                                              i,s p̄i,s (x)


                                                            15
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


then we can use a GP with a linear-derived kernel:
                                 K̄             ˆ T (x) p̄
                                  ˆ (x, x′ ) = p̄       ˆ             ′
                                       i,s             i,s      i,s (x )

Similarly if the human is using a model ḡˆi,s that can be captured by a dth -order polynomial model:
                                                 r
                              ˆ
                              ¯           ˆ  T        d ˆ ⊗q
                              f i,s (x) = w̄i,s       q p̄i,s (x)
                                                                     q∈Nd+1

then we can use a GP with a polynomial-derived kernel:
                                                                       d
                             ˆ (x, x′ ) = 1 + p̄
                            K̄                  ˆT    (x) ˆ
                                                          p̄    (x ′
                                                                     )
                               i,s                i,s       i,s

                                                                                     ˆ i,s are important but
Alternatively, if ḡˆi,s is more vague (i.e., the researcher knows that the factors p̄
not the exact form of the relationship) then we might use a GP assuming a distance-based model:

                              ˆ (x, x′ ) = exp − 1 p̄
                             K̄ i,s                   2l
                                                                     ˆ i,s (x′ ) 2
                                                         ˆ i,s (x) − p̄
                                                                                 2

or some similarly generic model that captures the worst-case behaviour of the human, along, hope-
fully, with some insight into the thought processes used by them.
With regard to maximum information gain, because the human models are evolving, m̄        ˆ i,s will
                                                            ˆ                ˆ
change with s, so it is convenient to define define m̄i,s↑ = maxt∈Ts m̄i,s to capture the worst-
case feature-space dimensionality over S batches. We can then bound the maximum information
gain for the human as the worst-case of these models over all S batches. So for example, depending
on the specifics of ḡˆi,s , we have (Srinivas et al., 2012; Scetbon & Harchaoui, 2021):
                                    Linear: γ̄ˆi,s = O (ln (Sp))
                                Polynomial: γ̄ˆi,s = O (ln
                                                         (Sp))
                                                            ˆ
                        Squared-Exponential: γ̄ˆi,s = O lnm̄i,s↑ +1 (Sp)

In general we assume that the asymptotic behaviour of the human maximum information gain con-
verges more quickly than that of the machine models. This makes intuitive sense of the human is
applying a linear or polynomial heuristic model ḡˆi,s , which is captured by a linear or polynomial
kernel, while the machines use more general GP models with SE or Matern type kernels (as is com-
mon practice). Thus in this case the human has a better behaved maximum information gain at the
cost of a potentially non-zero gap ϵ̄ˆi,s (presumably trending to 0 as the human gains improved in-
sight into the problem and evolves their model to better match the problem), while the machine has
a worse behaved maximum information gain but zero gap (assuming a universal kernel like an SE
kernel).

A.4    M ATHEMATICAL P RELIMINARIES

We use p-norms extensively, where:
                                       p 1
                                                             where x ∈ Rn
                                 P
                       ∥x∥p = ( i |xi | ) p
                                          p  1
                                                             where f : Rn → R
                                 R
                       ∥f ∥p = x |f (x)| dx p
with the extensions:
                                              ∥x∥∞ = maxi |xi |
                                             ∥x∥−∞ = mini |xi |
                      ∥f ∥∞ = inf {C ≥ 0 : |f (x)| ≤ C for almost all x ∈ Rn }
                     ∥f ∥−∞ = sup {C ≥ 0 : |f (x)| ≥ C for almost all x ∈ Rn }
This is only a norm for p ∈ [1, ∞] (though we may occasionally refer to it as such in a loose sense),
but is well defined for p ∈ [−∞, 0) ∪ (0, ∞]. It is not difficult to see that:
                             ∥x∥p ≥ ∥x∥p′ , ∀p, p′ ∈ (0, ∞], p ≤ p′
                             ∥x∥p ≥ ∥x∥p′ , ∀p, p′ ∈ [−∞, 0), p ≤ p′
                             ∥x∥p ≥ ∥x∥p′ , ∀p ∈ (0, ∞], p′ ∈ [−∞, 0)

                                                     16
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


(the final inequality follows from the first two, noting that mini |xi | < maxi |xi |, and similarly for
functions); and furthermore:
                                               1
                                                   − p1′
                                  ∥x∥p ≤ n p               ∥x∥p′               ∀1 ≤ p ≤ p′ ≤ ∞
when x ∈ Rn . We also use the following inequalities (⊙ is the Hadamaard product):
       ∥x ⊙ x′ ⊙ . . . ⊙ x′′′′ ∥r ≤ ∥x∥p ∥x′ ∥p′ . . . ∥x′′′′ ∥p′′′′

                                                                            General. Hölder inequality
       ∥f ⊙ f ′ ⊙ . . . ⊙ f ′′′′ ∥r ≤ ∥f ∥p ∥f ′ ∥p′ . . . ∥f ′′′′ ∥p′′′′ )
                                    ∥x ⊙ x′ ∥1 ≥ ∥x∥ 1 ∥x′ ∥ −1
                                                          q         q−1
                                                                            Reverse Hölder inequality
                                    ∥f ⊙ f ′ ∥1 ≥ ∥f ∥ 1 ∥f ′ ∥ −1
                                                                           q        q−1

                                                   ′            ′′′′
where p1 + p1′ + . . . + p′′′′
                          1
                                  =   1
                                      r and r, p, p , . . . , p
                                                                                                   1
                                                                     ∈ (0, ∞], with the convention ∞                             = 0; and
q ∈ (0, ∞).
We also use generalised (power) mean (Pečarić, 1991; Pyun, 1974), defined as:
                                                
                                                 mini ai     if θ = −∞
                                                
                                                  1
                                                     P θ   θ1
                                                 n i ai
                                                
                                                             if θ ∈ (−∞, 0)
                                                           1
                   Mθ ({a1 , a2 , . . . an }) =
                                                   Q
                                                  ( i ai ) n  if θ = 0
                                                
                                                   1
                                                     P θ   θ1
                                                              if θ ∈ (0, ∞)
                                                
                                                 n i ai
                                                
                                                
                                                  maxi ai     if θ = ∞
                                                

where θ ∈ [−∞, ∞]. For example θ = −1, 0, 1 correspond, respectively, to the harmonic, geometric
and arithmetric means. Note that, for all θ, θ′ ∈ [−∞, ∞], θ ≤ θ′ :
                                Mθ ({a1 , a2 , . . . an }) ≤ Mθ′ ({a1 , a2 , . . . an })
With a minor abuse of notation, we define:
                                        Mθ (a) = Mθ ({a1 , a2 , . . . an })
             n
for a ∈ R        , so that, for a ∈ Rn+ , we have the connection to the p-norms:
                                         (          1
                                             n− θ ∥a∥θ                 if θ ∈ [−∞, 0) ∪ (0, ∞]
                             Mθ (a) =         Q       1
                                             ( i ai ) n                if θ = 0
The following result is central to our proof:4
Lemma 2. Let a, b ∈ Rn+ , z ∈ [−∞, ∞], q, q ′ ∈ [1, ∞], 1q + q1′ = 1, ∞
                                                                      1
                                                                        = 0. Then we have the
following bounds on M−∞ (a ⊙ b):
                                   M−∞ (a ⊙ b) ≤ M−z (a) Mz (b)
                                   M−∞ (a ⊙ b) ≤ M|zq| (a) M|zq′ | (b)
                                   M−∞ (a ⊙ b) ≤ M−|z| (a) M q−1
                                                              q
                                                                   |z| (b)



Proof. Let us suppose that, unlike in the theorem, z ∈ (−∞, 0)∪(0, ∞). Then, using the generalised
mean inequality:
                                                                       1                               1                     1
                   M−∞ (a ⊙ b) ≤ Mz (a ⊙ b) = n− z ∥a ⊙ b∥z = n− z ∥a⊙z ⊙ b⊙z ∥1z
If z > 0 then, using Hölder’s inequality:
                                               1                                    1
                      M−∞ (a ⊙ b) = n− |z| a⊙|z| ⊙ b⊙|z| 1|z|
                                               1                       1                  1
                                      ≤ n− |z| a⊙|z| q|z| b⊙|z| q|z|
                                                                  ′
                                                                                                  1
                                                                           1              ′
                                      = n− |z| a⊙|zq| 1|zq| b⊙|zq |
                                               1
                                                                                              |zq′ |
                                                                                              1                         1
                                                                   1                          1
                                                                                                       1 ⊙|zq ′ |
                                              1           1
                                           − |z|                               1 ⊙|zq| |zq|                         |zq′ |
                                      =n           n    |zq|   n |zq′ |        na      1               nb
                                               1                                1
                                                                                                                    1
                                           −                               −
                                      = n |zq′ | ∥a∥|zq| n |zq′ | ∥b∥|zq′ |
                                      = M|zq| (a) M|zq′ | (b)
   4
       This result may be well known, but we have been unable to find it in the literature.


                                                                   17
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


If z < 0 then, using the reverse Hölder inequality (noting the negative exponent):
                                           1                                          − 1
                 M−∞ (a ⊙ b) = n |z| a⊙−|z| ⊙ b⊙−|z| 1 |z|
                                                                          1
                                           1                           − |z|                     − 1
                                   ≤ n |z| a⊙−|z|                      1          b⊙−|z| − |z|1
                                                                       q                           q−1
                                                                           q                     q−1
                                            1                    |z|    − |z|          |z|        |z|
                                                       ⊙− q                         ⊙ q−1
                                   =n      |z|       a                            b
                                                                        1                     1q                       q−1
                                            1           q         q−1                 |z|    − |z|               |z|    |z|
                                                     − |z|                   1 ⊙− q                      1 ⊙ q−1
                                   =n      |z|   n           n     |z|
                                                                             na                          nb
                                           q                                q−1
                                                                                             1                         1
                                   = n |z| ∥a∥− |z| n− |z| ∥b∥ |z|
                                                 q            q−1
                                   = M− |z| (a) M |z| (b)
                                                 q                     q−1



It is instructive to let r = |z|/q. Then the most recent bound becomes:

                                  M−∞ (a ⊙ b) ≤ M−r (a) M q−1
                                                           q
                                                              r (b)


which in the limit q → ∞ simplifies to:

                                   M−∞ (a ⊙ b) ≤ M−r (a) Mr (b)

Finally, using the definitions:

                          M−∞ (a ⊙ b) ≤ M0 (a ⊙ b) = M0 (a) M0 (b)

completing the proof.


A.5    B OGUNOVIC ’ S L EMMA

We have the following from Bogunovic & Krause (2021):
                                                                                      √
                                  µ#                    ϵt
                                   t−1 (x) − µt−1 (x) ≤ σ                                 tσt−1 (x)                            (9)

This follows from (Bogunovic & Krause, 2021, Lemma 2) using that all models satisfy this result,
and that the model is posterior on the observations up to and including the previous batch. It follows
from this and the definitions that, for all x ∈ X:

                                             ˆ¯           ϵ̂i,ts √     #
        µ̄                     ˆ#
        ˆi,s−1 (x) − f ⋆ (x) ≤ µ̄i,s−1 (x) − f i,s−1 (x) + σ
                                                                      ˆ i,s−1 (x) + ϵ̂i,t
                                                                   ts σ̄                 s
                                                                                                                              (10)
                                             ˘¯           ϵ̆j,ts √     #
        µ̄                     ˘#
        ˘j,s−1 (x) − f ⋆ (x) ≤ µ̄j,s−1 (x) − f j,s−1 (x) + σ
                                                                      ˘ j,s−1 (x) + ϵ̆j,t
                                                                   ts σ̄                  s


A.6    T HE R EGRET B OUND

We begin with the following uncertainty bound, which is largely based on the bound (Chowdhury &
Gopalan, 2017, Theorem 2) and analogous to (Srinivas et al., 2012, Lemma 5.1) and (Bogunovic &
Krause, 2021, Lemma 1):
Lemma 3. Let δ ∈ (0, 1). Assume noise variables are Σ-sub-Gaussian. Let:
                                                                                                                !2
                                           q                                            #
                                    Σ                        1
                                                                     + 1 + γ̄ˆ i,s + fˆ¯i,s

                         ˆi,s =
                         χ̄         √       2 ln             δ
                                      ˆ
                                      σ̄                                                                ˆ
                                                                                                       H̄ i,s
                                                                                                                !2            (11)
                                        q                                               #
                                    Σ                        1
                                                                     + 1 + γ̄˘ j,s + f˘¯j,s

                         ˘j,s =
                         χ̄         √    2 ln                δ
                                      ˘
                                      σ̄                                                                ˘
                                                                                                       H̄ j,s


                                                                       18
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Then, for all i ∈ M̂ and j ∈ M̆:
               (
                          ˆi,s−1 (x) − f ⋆ (x) ≤ . . .
           Pr ∀s, ∀x ∈ X, µ̄
                                                                                                   )
                                            q                  √
                                                ˆi,s + ϵ̂i,t
                                                χ̄        ˆ
                                                             s
                                                                 ts       ˆ i,s−1 (x) + ϵ̂i,t
                                                                          σ̄                           ≥1−δ
                                                          σ̄                                 s
               (
                          ˘j,s−1 (x) − f ⋆ (x) ≤ . . .
           Pr ∀s, ∀x ∈ X, µ̄
                                                                                                   )
                                            q                  √
                                                ˘j,s + ϵ̆j,t
                                                χ̄        ˘
                                                             s
                                                                 ts       ˘ j,s−1 (x) + ϵ̆j,t
                                                                          σ̄                           ≥1−δ
                                                          σ̄                                  s


Proof. We start with (Chowdhury & Gopalan, 2017, Theorem 2). This states that, in our setting,
with probability ≥ 1 − δ, simultaneously for all s ≥ 1 and x ∈ D:
                                         ˆ¯#
                                                                    q
                            ˆ#
                           µ̄                          ˆ −1
                             i,s−1 (x) − f i,s−1 (x) ≤ σ̄ i,s−1 (x)
                                                                      ˆi,s
                                                                      χ̄
                                          ˘¯#
                                                                    q
                            ˘#
                           µ̄                           ˘ −1
                             j,s−1 (x) − f j,s−1 (x) ≤ σ̄ j,s−1 (x)
                                                                       ˘j,s
                                                                      χ̄

    ˆi,s , χ̄
for χ̄     ˘j,s as specified by (11). Next, recall (10):

                                                  ˆ¯         # ϵ̂i,s √
             µ̄                     ˆ#
             ˆi,s−1 (x) − f ⋆ (x) ≤ µ̄i,s−1 (x) − f i,s−1 (x) + σ̄
                                                                 ˆ
                                                                          ˆ i,s−1 (x) + ϵ̂i,s
                                                                       ts σ̄
                                                  ˘¯         # ϵ̆j,s √
             µ̄                     ˘#
             ˘j,s−1 (x) − f ⋆ (x) ≤ µ̄j,s−1 (x) − f j,s−1 (x) + σ̄
                                                                 ˘
                                                                          ˘ j,s−1 (x) + ϵ̆j,s
                                                                       ts σ̄

and the result follows.

Remark: Alternatively, following (Fiedler et al., 2021, Theorem 1) we can use:
                            r                                                     !2
                                                                        #
            ˆ
            χ̄i,s ≥    √Σ          1
                                                   ˆ         ˆ 2
                              2 ln δ + ln det K̄i,s−1 + σ̄ I + f i,s   ˆ
                                                                       ¯
                         ˆ
                         σ̄                                                 ˆ
                                                                           H̄ i,s
                            r                                                     !2
                                                                        #
            ˘ ≥ √Σ 2 ln 1 + ln det K̄              ˘         ˘ I + f˘¯
                                                                2

            χ̄     j,s      ˘          δ             j,s−1 + σ̄                              j,s
                            σ̄                                                                      ˘
                                                                                                   H̄ j,s


Using the uncertainty bound above, we obtain our first bound on instantaneous experiment-wise
regret based on (Srinivas et al., 2012, Lemma 5.2) with some techniques borrowed from Bogunovic
& Krause (2021):
Lemma 4. Let δ ∈ (0, 1). Assume noise variables are Σ-sub-Gaussian. Assume that:

                                     β̂i,ts ∈ ζ̄ˆi,s↓ χ̄
                                                      ˆi,s , ζ̄ˆi,s↑ χ̄
                                                                     ˆi,s

                                    β̆j,ts = ζ̄˘j,s↓ χ̄˘j,s , ζ̄˘j,s↑ χ̄
                                                                      ˘j,s

where:                                                                                      !2
                                        q                                      #
                                    Σ             1
                                                        + 1 + γ̄ˆ i,s + fˆ¯i,s

                          ˆi,s =
                          χ̄        √    2 ln     δ
                                      ˆ
                                      σ̄                                            ˆ
                                                                                   H̄ i,s
                                                                                            !2
                                        q                                      #
                                    Σ             1
                                                        + 1 + γ̄˘ j,s + f˘¯j,s

                          ˘j,s =
                          χ̄        √    2 ln     δ
                                      ˘
                                      σ̄                                            ˘
                                                                                   H̄ j,s

Then, simultaneously for all s ≥ 1, the instantaneous regret is bounded as:
                                                q        q
                                                  ˆ
                        rt̂s +i ≤ r̄ˆi,s↑ + 1 − ζ̄ i,s↓          ˆ i,s−1 (x⋆ )
                                                            ˆi,s σ̄
                                                           χ̄
                                                q         q
                       rt̆s +j ≤ r̄˘j,s↑ + 1 − ζ̄˘j,s↓            ˘ j,s−1 (x⋆ )
                                                            ˘j,s σ̄
                                                            χ̄


                                                        19
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


with probability ≥ 1 − δ, where:
                                   q                           !
                                 1+ ζ̄ˆi,s↑         ϵ̂i,ts √
                                            q
                   r̄ˆi,s↑ = 2      2
                                              ˆi,s + ˆ
                                             χ̄        σ̄
                                                                 ˆ i,s−1 xt̂ +i + 2ϵ̂i,t
                                                             ts σ̄          s           s

                                   q                              !
                                 1+ ζ̄˘j,s↑           ϵ̆j,ts √
                                            q
                   r̄˘j,s↑ = 2      2
                                              ˘
                                             χ̄ j,s +    ˘
                                                         σ̄
                                                               ts
                                                                    ˘
                                                                    σ̄ j,s−1   x t̆s +j + 2ϵ̆j,ts


Proof. By the pretext and Lemma 3:
                                                  q                    √
                   f ⋆ (x⋆ ) ≤ µ̄
                               ˆi,s−1 (x⋆ ) +         ˆi,s + ϵ̂i,t
                                                      χ̄        ˆ
                                                                   s       ˆ i,s−1 (x⋆ ) + ϵ̂i,t
                                                                        ts σ̄
                                                                σ̄                              s


with probability ≥ 1 − δ. By definition xt maximises the acquisition function, so:
                                               q
                                                                ϵ̂i,ts √

              ˆi,s−1 (x⋆ ) ≤ µ̄
             µ̄              ˆi,s−1 xt̂ +i +         β̂ i,ts +     ˆ     t s
                                                                               ˆ
                                                                               σ̄ i,s−1   x t̂s +i
                                                                   σ̄
                                 q s
                                             ϵ̂ s √
                              −     β̂i,ts + i,t
                                               ˆ    ts σ̄ ˆ i,s−1 (x⋆ )
                                               σ̄


and hence:
                                             q
                                                             ϵ̂i,ts √

  f ⋆ (x⋆ ) − f ⋆ xt̂s +i ≤ µ̄
                            ˆi,}s−1 xt̂ +i +
                                        s
                                                   β̂ i,ts +    ˆ
                                                                σ̄
                                                                      t s
                                                                            ˆ
                                                                            σ̄ i,s−1   xt̂s +i + ϵ̂i,ts . . .
                                q         q
                             +     ˆi,s − β̂i,t σ̄
                                   χ̄              ˆ i,s−1 (x⋆ ) − f ⋆ xt̂ +i
                                               s                                 s



It follows that the instantaneous regret is bounded by:
                                        q
                                                        ϵ̂i,ts √

                       ˆ
            rt̂s +i ≤ µ̄i,s−1 xt̂s +i +        β̂i,ts + σ̄ˆ          ˆ i,s−1 xt̂ +i + ϵ̂i,t . . .
                                                                 ts σ̄          s          s
                           q         q
                       +      ˆi,s − β̂i,t σ̄
                              χ̄                ˆ i,s−1 (x⋆ ) − f ⋆ xt̂ +i
                                            s                             s



So, using our assumptions on β we find that:
                                  q
                                                           ϵ̂i,ts √
                                                q
                  ˆi,s−1 xt̂ +i +
        rt̂s +i ≤ µ̄                    ˆ
                                        ζ̄         ˆ
                                                   χ̄    +          t   ˆ
                            s              i,s↑      i,s      ˆ
                                                              σ̄     s σ̄ i,s−1 xt̂s +i + ϵ̂i,ts . . .
                          q       q
                   + 1 − ζ̄ˆi,s↓     ˆi,s σ̄
                                     χ̄      ˆ i,s−1 (x⋆ ) − f ⋆ xt̂ +i
                                                                      s



Once again using our pretext and Lemma 3 we see that:
                                          q                  √
         f ⋆ xt̂s +i ≥ µ̄ ˆi,s−1 xt̂ +i −     ˆi,s + ϵ̂i,t
                                             χ̄         ˆ
                                                           s
                                                              ts
                                                                 ˆ
                                                                 σ̄ i,s−1   x t̂s +i − ϵ̂i,ts
                                    s                   σ̄

Hence:                                 q                           !
                                     1+ ζ̄ˆi,s↑         ϵ̂i,ts √
                                                q
                      rt̂s +i ≤ 2       2
                                                  ˆi,s + ˆ
                                                  χ̄                 ˆ i,s−1 xt̂ +i . . .
                                                                 ts σ̄
                                                           σ̄                   s
                                      q         q
                                 + 1 − ζ̄ˆi,s↓         ˆ i,s−1 (x⋆ ) + 2ϵ̂i,t
                                                  ˆi,s σ̄
                                                  χ̄                          s


and the desired result follows from the definitions. The proof for AI regret follows by an analogous
argument.

To extend this to usable batchwise instantaneous regret bound we need to deal with the variance
      ˆ i,s−1 (x⋆ ), σ̄
terms σ̄             ˘ i,s−1 (x⋆ ) in the above theorem. To do this, in the following theorem we use
the generalised (power) mean, and in particular lemma 2, to split the batchwise risk bound into
a constraint term containing the free variances and a risk bound that depends only on the various
parameters of the problem:


                                                        20
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Lemma 5. Fix δ > 0 and θ̄s ∈ [0, ∞].5 Assume noise variables are Σ-sub-Gaussian, and that:


                                             β̂i,ts ∈ ζ̄ˆi,s↓ χ̄
                                                              ˆi,s , ζ̄ˆi,s↑ χ̄
                                                                             ˆi,s

                                             β̆j,ts = ζ̄˘ χ̄   ˘ , ζ̄˘ χ̄
                                                               j,s↓ j,s
                                                                              ˘j,s↑ j,s


where ζ̄ˆi,s↓ ≤ 1, ζ̄˘j,s↓ ≥ 1, and:

                                                                                                     !2
                                                   q                                  #
                                            Σ              1
                                                                   + 1 + γ̄ˆ i,s + fˆ¯i,s

                                ˆi,s =
                                χ̄          √       2 ln   δ
                                              ˆ
                                              σ̄                                             ˆ
                                                                                            H̄ i,s
                                                                                                      !2
                                                q                                     #
                                            Σ              1
                                                                   + 1 + γ̄˘ j,s + f˘¯j,s

                                ˘j,s =
                                χ̄          √    2 ln      δ
                                              ˘
                                              σ̄                                              ˘
                                                                                             H̄ j,s


If:

                           (                      q                               !              )        
                                      q
                                        ˆi,s 1 − ζ̄ˆi,s↓
                                                                                                      S
                               exp    χ̄                    σ̄s−1↑                    : i ∈ M̂     ... 
                                                           +
                                                                                                       
                    Mθ̄s        (                   q                                 !           )    ≤1
                                       q                                                               
                         
                                   exp     ˘
                                           χ̄    1 − ζ̄˘        σ̄                         : j ∈ M̆
                                                                                                        
                                                   j,s              j,s↓         s−1↓
                                                                           −



Then, simultaneously for all s ≥ 1, the batchwise instantaneous regret is bounded as:


                                               r̄s ≤ ln M−θ̄s (exp (r̄s↑ ))


with probability ≥ 1 − δ, where:

                         "          q                                !                                    #          
                                   1+ ζ̄ˆi,s↑            ϵ̂i,ts √
                                              q
                           2          2
                                                ˆ
                                                χ̄ i,s +    ˆ     t s
                                                                        ˆ
                                                                        σ̄ i,s−1  x t̂s +i + 2ϵ̂i,ts
                                                           σ̄                                                   
                                                                                                                
                r̄s↑ = 
                        "           q                                     !                               #i∈M̂ 
                                   1+ ζ̄˘j,s↑
                                              q                √                                                 
                       
                           2          2
                                                ˘j,s + ϵ̆j,t
                                                χ̄        ˘
                                                             s
                                                                 ts            ˘ j,s−1 xt̆ +j + 2ϵ̆j,t
                                                                               σ̄
                                                                                                                 
                                                          σ̄                              s            s
                                                                                                               i∈M̂



and:


                                                           ⋆
                                                                                 ⋆
                                                 ˆ                     ˘
                            σ̄s−1↑ = max max σ̄ i,s−1 (x ) , max σ̄ j,s−1 (x )
                                          i∈M̂                  j∈M̆
                                                          ⋆
                                                                               ⋆
                            σ̄s−1↓ = min min σ̄ ˆ i,s−1 (x ) , min σ̄˘ j,s−1 (x )
                                                   i∈M̂                         j∈M̆



and exp is applied elementwise.


      5
          The proof is true for θ̄s ∈ [−∞, ∞], but the negative θ̄s case is not of interest here.


                                                                   21
     Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


    Proof. It is convenient to re-frame the batch-wise instantaneous regret in log-space, and extract the
    max variance upper bound. Recalling that ζ̄ˆi,s↓ ≤ 1, ζ̄˘j,s↓ ≥ 1:
                             q                                   !                                    
                          1+ ζ̄ˆj,s↑
                                      q
                                                  ϵ̂       √                                           
           (
                      2
                     
                     
                                2
                                         ˆi,s + ˆ s ts σ̄
                                         χ̄          i,t
                                                                       ˆ i,s−1 xt̂ +i + . . .         
                                                      σ̄                             s
                                                                                                       
 r̄s ≤ min min                               q             q                                             ,
                i∈M̂                          ˆ                                      ⋆
                                                                                                       
                     
                     
                                       1 −    ζ̄ i,s↓
                                                                  ˆ
                                                                  χ̄     ˆ
                                                                         σ̄
                                                                     i,s i,s−1     (x   ) +  2ϵ̂ i,ts 
                                                                                                       
                                                                                                       
                             q                                   !                                    
                          1+ ζ̄˘j,s↑
                                      q
                                                  ϵ̆       √                                           )
                      2
                     
                                2
                                         ˘j,s + ˘
                                         χ̄          j,t s
                                                             ts σ̄     ˘ j,s−1 xt̆ +j + . . .         
                                                     σ̄                              s
                                                                                                       
                min                          q              q
                j∈M̆ 
                                        1 − ζ̄˘j,s↓
                                                                                                      
                     
                                                                  ˘j,s σ̄
                                                                  χ̄      ˘ j,s−1 (x⋆ ) + 2ϵ̆j,t      
                                                                                                       
                                                                                                     s
                                     q                                      !                                 !    
                                 1+ ζ̄ˆi,s↑
                                             q
                                                            ϵ̂        √                                             
           (
                      exp 2
                     
                     
                                       2
                                                ˆi,s + ˆ s ts σ̄
                                               χ̄              i,t
                                                                                ˆ i,s−1 xt̂ +i + 2ϵ̂i,t . . .      
                                                               σ̄                            s              s
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
≤ ln min min                                                                q                q                    !   ,
                i∈M̂                                                                             ˆ                 
                     
                     
                     
                                                                exp           ˆi,s 1 − ζ̄ i,s↓
                                                                               χ̄                          σ̄s−1↑ 
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                            !                           +      !   
                                      q
                                 1+ ζ̄˘j,s↑
                                             q
                                                             ϵ̆       √                                             
                      exp 2
                     
                     
                                       2
                                                ˘j,s + ˘ s ts σ̄
                                               χ̄               j,t
                                                                                ˘ j,s−1 xt̆ +j + 2ϵ̆j,t . . .        )!
                                                                σ̄                           s               s
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                min                                                         q                 q                   !
                j∈M̆                                                                              ˘                
                     
                     
                     
                                                                 exp           ˘j,s 1 − ζ̄ j,s↓
                                                                                χ̄                          σ̄s−1↓ 
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                   −

     which may be re-written:
                                                        r̄s ≤ ln (M−∞ (a ⊙ b))
     where:
                                                    â                        b̂
                                              a=           ∈ Rp+ , b =             ∈ Rp+
                                                    ă                        b̆
                         "                q                              !                         ! #
                                        1+ ζ̄ˆi,s↑            ϵ̂i,ts √
                                                   q
                  â =       exp 2         2
                                                       ˆi,s + ˆ
                                                      χ̄                   ˆ i,s−1 xt̂ +i + 2ϵ̂i,t
                                                                       ts σ̄
                                                                        σ̄                     s      s

                         "                                                        ! #                     i∈M̂
                                   q                 q
                  b̂ =       exp       ˆi,s
                                       χ̄         1 − ζ̄ˆi,s↓           σ̄s−1↑
                                                                    +
                         "                q                           ! i∈M̂                     !        #
                                        1+ ζ̄˘j,s↑         ϵ̆j,ts √
                                                   q
                  ă =       exp 2         2
                                                     ˘j,s + ˘
                                                     χ̄                ˘ j,s−1 xt̆ +j + 2ϵ̆j,t
                                                                    ts σ̄
                                                              σ̄                  s            s

                         "                                             ! #                                    j∈M̆
                                   q                 q
                  b̆ =       exp       ˘j,s
                                       χ̄         1 − ζ̄˘j,s↓   σ̄s−1↓
                                                                    −                   j∈M̆
     So, by lemma 2, we have that:

                             r̄s ≤ ln M−θ̄s (a) Mθ̄s (b) = ln M−θ̄s (a) + ln Mθ̄s (b)
     and by assumption Mθ̄s (b) ≤ 1, so:

                                                            r̄s ≤ ln M−θ̄s (a)
     and the result follows by the definition.

     The next step is to convert this bound into a bound on the total regret. To obtain such a bound
     we need some additional assumptions regarding “gap” parameters ϵ and the explorative/exploitative
     nature of the humans and AIs. We do this with the following theorem:
     Theorem 6. Fix δ > 0 and θ̄s ∈ [0, ∞].6 Assume noise variables are Σ-sub-Gaussian, and that:

                                       β̂i,ts ∈ ζ̄ˆi,s↓ χ̄
                                                        ˆi,s , ζ̄ˆi,s↑ χ̄
                                                                       ˆi,s

                                       β̆j,t = ζ̄˘j,s↓ χ̄
                                                        s
                                                         ˘j,s , ζ̄˘j,s↑ χ̄
                                                                        ˘j,s

        6
            The proof is true for θ̄s ∈ [−∞, ∞], but the negative θ̄s case is not of interest here.


                                                                             22
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


where ζ̄ˆi,s↓ ≤ 1, ζ̄˘j,s↓ ≥ 1, and:
                                                                                                       !2
                                                  q                                    #
                                           Σ                1
                                                                    + 1 + γ̄ˆ i,s + f¯ˆi,s

                              ˆi,s =
                              χ̄           √       2 ln     δ
                                             ˆ
                                             σ̄                                                ˆ
                                                                                              H̄ i,s
                                                                                                           !2
                                               q                                       #
                                           Σ                1
                                                                    + 1 + γ̄˘ j,s + f¯˘j,s

                              ˘j,s =
                              χ̄           √    2 ln        δ
                                             ˘
                                             σ̄                                                    ˘
                                                                                                  H̄ j,s

and:                   (                                                            !               )            
                                    q            q
                             exp     ˆ            ˆ
                                     χ̄i,s 1 − ζ̄ i,s↓     σ̄s−1↑                        : i ∈ M̂    ... 
                                                                                                           S
                                                         +
                                                                                                        
                Mθ̄s          (                   q                                     !          )    ≤1
                                     q                                                                  
                                 exp     ˘
                                         χ̄    1 − ζ̄˘        σ̄                            : j ∈ M̆
                                                                                                        
                                                  j,s                j,s↓         s−1↓
                                                                            −
for all s, where:


                           σ̄s−1↑ = max max σ̄  ˆ i,s−1 (x⋆ ) , max σ̄ ˘ j,s−1 (x⋆ )
                                         i∈M̂                   j∈M̆
                                                         ⋆

                           σ̄s−1↓ = min min σ̄ ˆ i,s−1 (x ) , min σ̄ ˘ j,s−1 (x⋆ )
                                                  i∈M̂                           j∈M̆
                       −q
If ϵ̂i,ts , ϵ̆j,ts = O(s    ) for some q ∈ ( 12 , ∞) then, with probability ≥ 1 − δ:
                                    ( (r                                                        )
                                                   q              2
1                                                   2                   1
                                               ˆ     ˆi,S + O (1) Ĉi,2 S γ̄ˆ i,S + O (1) i ∈ M̂
                                                                                                  S
S R̄S ≤ ln      M−θ̄↓ exp                     8σ̄   χ̄                                              ...
                  v                                        !2                                                            )!!!
                  u u 2
                                       q
                                     1+ ζ̄˘j∼
                                              q                                                                          
                        ˘
                     t8σ̄
                                       2
                                                ˘j,S + O (1) C̆j,2 S1 γ̄˘ j,S + O (1)
                                                χ̄                                                              j ∈ M̆
                                                                                                                        


                               σ̄    ˆ
                               ˆ −2 K̄                               ˘ −2 K̄
                                                                     σ̄     ˘
                                       i,s↑                                   j,s↑
where Ĉi,2 = maxs
                                        ˆ
                                                 and C̆j,2 = maxs
                                                                           −2 ˘
                                                                                         ; and:
                           ln 1+σ̄ˆ −2 K̄ i,s↑                   ln 1+  ˘
                                                                        σ̄    K̄ j,}s↑

                                                         θ̄↓ = min θ̄s
                                                                    s∈NS +1
                                                        ζ̄˘j∼ = max ζ̄˘j,s
                                                                    s∈NS +1



Proof. Using the assumptions and Lemma 5, we have that, with probability ≥ 1 − δ, simultaneously
for all s ≥ 1:
                        r̄s ≤ ln (M−θs (exp (r̄s↑ ))) ≤ ln M−θ̄s (exp (r̄s↑ ))
where r̄s↑ ≥ 0. Using the definition of M−θ̄s :
         P              P
               r̄s ≤         ln M−θ̄↓ (exp (r̄s↑ ))
       s∈NS +1       s∈NS +1                          !
                             Q
                   = ln           M−θ̄↓ (exp (r̄s↑ ))
                          s∈NS +1
                                                               !
                             Q  1                        − 1
                                                           θ̄↓
                   = ln             p ∥exp (r̄s↑ )∥−θ̄↓
                          s∈NS +1
                                                                      !!
                                       S                       − θ̄1
                              Q                         ⊙−θ̄ ↓      ↓
                   = ln             p θ̄↓ (exp (r̄s↑ ))
                            s∈NS +1                            1
                                                                                S 
                                                                          1 − θ̄
                                         
                                                                       ⊙S S      ↓
                                        S                        θ̄
                         Q                                 ⊙− S↓
                   = ln            p θ̄↓  (exp (r̄s↑ ))                        
                                                                                   
                                 s∈NS +1
                                                                                              1
                                                                                 − θ̄S
                                                                                         !!
                                              S                             θ̄
                                    Q                                  ⊙− S↓         ↓
                     = ln                  p θ̄↓ (exp (r̄s↑ ))
                                 s∈NS +1                                         S


                                                                    23
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Using the generalised Hölder inequality and the definition of M−θ̄↓ :

                                                                                          − θ̄S
                                                                                                    !!
                                                         S                        θ̄
                  P                           Q                                 ⊙− S↓           ↓
                           r̄s ≤ ln           p         θ̄↓
                                                      (exp (r̄s↑ ))
              s∈NS +1
                                    s∈NS +1                             S
                                                                          − θ̄S
                                                                                
                                                   S                  θ̄↓     ↓
                                         J                          ⊙− S
                               ≤ ln           p θ̄↓ (exp (r̄s↑ ))             
                                             s∈NS +1
                                                                                          1
                                       
                                                                                      θ̄
                                                                                                    − θ̄S 
                                                                                !   ⊙− S↓                ↓
                                     1                J                                                 
                               = ln                                 exp (r̄s↑ )
                                                                                                         
                                     p                                                                 
                                                      s∈NS +1
                                                                                !!              1
                                                        J
                               = ln M         θ̄               exp (r̄s↑ )
                                           − S↓      s∈NS +1


and so, again recalling that r̄s↑ ≥ 0:
                                                                                                     !!
                                   P                                        J
                                           r̄s ≤ ln M           θ̄                   exp (r̄s↑ )
                                s∈NS +1                       − S↓        s∈NS +1
                                                                                                     !!!
                                                                                     P
                                                   = ln M       θ̄        exp                 r̄s↑
                                                              − S↓                 s∈NS +1


Next, using that χ is increasing with s, and noting our restricted range in ζ, note that:
                              q                √                                         2
                   2
                r̄ˆi,s↑ ≤ 4     ˆi,S + ϵ̂i,t
                                χ̄         ˆ
                                             s
                                                  t s
                                                         ˆ i,s−1 xt̂ +i + ϵ̂i,t
                                                         σ̄
                                  q σ̄                         2        s             s

                                                ϵ̂i,ts √

                                                                     2                   2
                        ≤ 8 max       ˆi,S + ˆ
                                      χ̄                    ts σ̄  ˆ i,s−1 xt̂ +i , ϵ̂i,t
                                                   σ̄                           s           s
                                  q                                  !                                  !2
                               1+ ζ̄˘j∼                ϵ̆j,ts √
                                        q
                   2
                r̄˘j,s↑ ≤ 4        2
                                            ˘j,S + ˘
                                           χ̄             σ̄
                                                                 ts σ̄  ˘ j,s−1 xt̆ +j + ϵ̆j,t
                                                                                     s               s
                                                                           !2                                  
                                        q
                                                               ϵ̆j,ts √
                                 1+ ζ̄˘ q                                                                      
                                                                                  2                        2
                        ≤ 8 max          2
                                            j∼
                                                    ˘
                                                   χ̄ j,S    +    ˘      ts
                                                                               ˘
                                                                               σ̄ j,s−1    x t̆s +j   , ϵ̆ j,ts
                                                                 σ̄                                            

and so:
                                                   q                             2
                  2                                                   √
               r̄ˆi,s↑                                 ˆi,S + ϵ̂i,t                  ˆ 2i,s−1       xt̂s +i , ϵ̂2i,ts
       P                        P
                         ≤8     max                    χ̄        ˆ
                                                                 σ̄
                                                                    s
                                                                        ts           σ̄
    s∈NS +1                   s∈NS +1
                                 q                √  2 2
                                   ˆi,S + ϵ̂i,t               ˆ                                            ϵ̂2i,ts
                          P                                                                        P
                    ≤8             χ̄        ˆ
                                             σ̄
                                                s
                                                    t s       σ̄ i,s−1      x t̂s +i + 8
                        s∈NS +1                                                               s∈N   S +1                   
                                                                                     !2
                                     1+qζ̄˘ q                                √                                             
               2                                                      ϵ̆j,ts               2                           2
            r̄˘j,s↑ ≤ 8                          j∼
                                                        ˘                               ˘
      P                   P
                                max          2          χ̄ j,S    +      ˘
                                                                         σ̄
                                                                                 t s    σ̄ j,s−1       x t̆s +j    , ϵ̆j,ts
    s∈NS +1             s∈NS +1                                                                                            
                                    q                                   !   2
                                 1+ ζ̄˘j∼                ϵ̆j,ts √
                                          q
                                                                                 2
                                             ˘                                ˘                                             ϵ̆2j,ts
                          P                                                                                        P
                    ≤8                2      χ̄ j,S +       ˘
                                                            σ̄
                                                                    t s       σ̄ j,s−1    x  t̆ s +j    +8
                              s∈NS +1                                                                                       s∈NS +1


Recalling our assumption ϵ̂i,ts , ϵ̆j,ts = O(s−q ) for some q > 12 we find that, as                                                  1
                                                                                                                              P
                                                                                                                                s∈N s2q̂i   =
ζ(2q̂i ) < ∞ (ζ here is the Reimann zeta function):
                                        q                2
                            2
                         r̄ˆi,s↑ ≤ 8      ˆi,S + O (1) σ̄  ˆ 2i,s−1 xt̂ +i + O (1)
               P                         P
                                         χ̄                             s
           s∈NS +1             s∈NS +1
                                          q                        !2
                                        1+ ζ̄˘j∼
                                                 q
                      2                                                  2
                   r̄˘j,s↑ ≤ 8                     ˘                  ˘
             P                   P
                                            2      χ̄j,S + O    (1)   σ̄ j,s−1   x t̆s +j + O (1)
           s∈NS +1                     s∈NS +1



                                                                     24
  Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


  Now, by the standard procedure:

                              ˆ −2 σ̄
                                   ˆ 2i,s−1 xt +i                               ˆ −2 σ̄
                                                                                     ˆ 2i,s−1 xt +i
                      P                                               P
                              σ̄              s
                                                        ≤ Ĉi,2         ln 1 + σ̄                 s
                    s∈NS +1                                     s∈NS +1
                                                                                −2 2
                                                                              ˆ σ̄ ˆ i,st −1 (xt )
                                                                  P
                                                        ≤ Ĉi,2       ln 1 + σ̄
                                                                  t∈T≤S
                                                ≤ Ĉi,2 γ̄ˆ i,S
                              −2 2
                                                                          ˘ −2 σ̄
                                                                               ˘ 2j,s−1 xt +j

                            ˘   ˘
                      P                                       P
                            σ̄ σ̄ j,s−1 xts +j ≤ C̆j,2            ln 1 + σ̄                 s
                    s∈NS +1                               s∈NS +1
                                                                          −2 2
                                                                        ˘ σ̄ ˘ j,st −1 (xt )
                                                             P
                                                ≤ C̆j,2         ln 1 + σ̄
                                                                  t∈T≤S
                                                        ≤ C̆j,2 γ̄˘ j,S

  where:
                                                                       ˆ
                                                                 ˆ −2 K̄
                                                                σ̄       i,s↑
                                              Ĉi,2 = max
                                                                          ˆ

                                                     s∈NS +1 ln 1+σ̄ˆ −2 K̄ i,s↑
                                                                       ˘
                                                                 ˘ −2 K̄
                                                                 σ̄      j,s↑
                                              C̆j,2 = max             −2  ˘

                                                     s∈NS +1 ln 1+σ̄˘ K̄    j,s↑



  and so:
                                               q               2
                                   2
                                           ˆ2
                                r̄ˆi,s↑ ≤ 8σ̄    ˆi,S + O (1) Ĉi,2 γ̄ˆ i,S + O (1)
                         P
                                                χ̄
                      s∈NS +1
                                                 q                      !2
                                               1+ ζ̄˘j∼
                                                        q
                                 2          2
                              r̄˘j,s↑ ≤ 8σ̄
                                         ˘                ˘j,S + O (1) C̆j,2 γ̄˘ j,S + O (1)
                        P
                                                   2     χ̄
                      s∈NS +1

                                √
  Recalling that ∥ · ∥1 ≤           S∥ · ∥2 (in S dimensions):
                                              r
                                      √       q               2
                          r̄ˆi,s↑ ≤     ˆ2      ˆi,S + O (1) Ĉi,2 γ̄ˆ i,S + O (1)
                     P
                                       8σ̄S     χ̄
                   s∈NS +1            v
                                      u                                  !2
                                    √ u
                                                   q
                                               1+ ζ̄˘j∼
                                                        q
                                             2
                           r̄˘j,s↑ ≤ S 18σ̄˘              ˘j,S + O (1) C̆j,2 γ̄˘ j,S + O (1)
                     P                t
                                                   2      χ̄
               s∈NS +1


  and so:

       r̄ˆi,s↑ +r̄˘j,s↑ . . .
  P                  P
s∈NS +1            s∈NS +1
                   ((                                                              )
                               r
                         √          2
                                                q      2
                                 ˆ O (1) + χ̄     ˆi,S Ĉi,2 γ̄ˆ i,S + O (1) i ∈ M̂
                                                                                     S
 ≤ ln M θ̄↓ exp               S 8σ̄                                                    ...
       −S
             v                                   !2                              )!!!
         √ u u 2
                                       q
                                   1+ ζ̄˘j∼
                                            q                                   
            S 8σ̄
              t    ˘ O (1) +            2
                                              ˘j,S C̆j,2 γ̄˘ j,S + O (1) j ∈ M̆
                                              χ̄
                                                                               

  Finally, noting that, for a > 0:

                                                           1
                       1
                       S ln   M   θ̄↓ (exp (a))   = ln  M  S
                                                             θ̄  (exp (a))
                                −S                        − ↓
                                                           S                 1!
                                                          1
                                                             P ai − θ̄S↓ − θ̄↓
                                                  = ln    p     i (e )

                                                                           1  −θ̄↓  − θ̄1↓
                                                                                           !
                                                                    1       S ai
                                                                      P
                                                             = ln   p   i e

                                                             = ln M−θ̄↓ exp S1 a


                                                                 25
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


we obtain:
                                               !
1
               r̄ˆi,s↑ +         r̄˘j,s↑ . . .
       P                     P
S
     s∈NS +1               s∈NS +1
                               ((       r                                                                             )
                                                                           q            2
                                                         2
                                     √1             ˆ                           ˆi,S
                                                                 Ĉi,2 γ̄ˆ i,S + O (1) i ∈ M̂
                                                                                              S
    ≤ ln M−θ̄↓ exp                     S
                                                   8σ̄           O (1) +        χ̄              ...
                 v                                         !2                              )!!!
                  u                            q
                                             1+ ζ̄˘j∼
                 u 2                                 q                                   
               1    ˘                                   ˘j,S C̆j,2 γ̄˘ j,S + O (1) j ∈ M̆
              √ t8σ̄
                S
                                     O (1) +   2       χ̄
                                                                                         

as required.

Finally, we consider the bounds on the posterior variance at x⋆ . We have the following result:
Lemma 7. Fix j ′ ∈ M̆. We have the bounds for all i ∈ M̂, j ∈ M̆:
                                                     ˆ ⋆i,s↓ ≤ σ̄
                                                     σ̄                      ˆ ⋆i,s↑
                                                               ˆ i,s (x⋆ ) ≤ σ̄
                                                     ˘ ⋆j,s↓ ≤ σ̄
                                                     σ̄                      ˘ ⋆j,s↑
                                                               ˘ j,s (x⋆ ) ≤ σ̄

where:
                                                        ˆ
                                               ˆ 2 +2psD̄             1   ˆ2
                                               σ̄         i,s,↓ −ps ˆ ⋆⋆ D̄ i,s,↓
                               ˆ ⋆2
                               σ̄         =
                                                                           K̄ i,s            ˆ ⋆⋆
                                                                                            K̄
                                  i,s↓                           ˆ ⋆⋆
                                                         ˆ 2 +psK̄
                                                         σ̄                                    i,s
                                                                   i,s
                                                        ˘
                                               ˘ 2 +2psD̄
                                               σ̄              −ps 1       ˘2
                                                                    ˘ ⋆⋆ D̄ j,s,↓
                                                                  j,s,↓              ⋆⋆
                               ˘ ⋆2
                               σ̄         =
                                                                   K̄ j,s                    ˘
                                                                                            K̄
                                  j,s↓                         ˘ ⋆⋆
                                                       ˘ 2 +psK̄
                                                       σ̄                            j,s
                                                                  j,s
                                               ˆ 2 +2 t∈T
                                                     P        ˆ             1
                                                                                 P        ˆ2
                                               σ̄            D̄ i,s,t − ˆ ⋆⋆       t∈T≤s D̄ i,s,t
                               ˆ ⋆2
                               σ̄
                                                          ≤s              K̄ i,s                              ˆ ⋆⋆
                                  i,s↑ =                       ˆ 2 +psK̄
                                                              σ̄          ˆ ⋆⋆                               K̄ i,s
                                                                            i,s
                                                  2
                                               ˘ +2 t∈T
                                               σ̄
                                                     P        ˘
                                                             D̄ j,s,t − ˘ 1⋆⋆
                                                                                 P        ˘2
                                                                                   t∈T≤s D̄ j,s,t
                               ˘ ⋆2
                               σ̄
                                                          ≤s              K̄ j,s                              ˘ ⋆⋆
                                  j,s↑ =                       ˘ 2 +psK̄
                                                              σ̄          ˘ ⋆⋆                               K̄ j,s
                                                                            j,s

and:
                                   ˆ ⋆⋆ = K̄
                                  K̄        ˆ (x⋆ , x⋆ ) ,         ˘ ⋆⋆ = K̄
                                                                  K̄         ˘ (x⋆ , x⋆ )
                                     i,s      i,s                     j,s      j,s
                               ˆ            ˆ       ⋆          ˘
                              K̄ i,s,t,⋆ = K̄ i,s (x , xt ) , K̄ j,s,t,⋆ = K̄˘ (x⋆ , x )
                                                                               j,s        t
                               ˆ
                              K̄            ˆ                   ˘            ˘
                                 i,s,t,t = K̄ i,s (xt , xt ) , K̄ j,s,t,t = K̄ j,s (xt , xt )

and:
                             ˆ            ˆ ⋆⋆     ˆ                               ˘            ˘ ⋆⋆     ˘
                            K̄ i,s,t,t = K̄ i,s − D̄ i,s,t ,                      K̄ j,s,t,t = K̄ j,s − D̄ i,s,t
                                                n          o                                          n          o
                                ˆ
                               D̄                  ˆ                                  ˘                  ˘
                                  i,s,↓ = min     D̄ i,s,t ,                         D̄ i,s,↓ = min     D̄ i,s,t
                                               t∈T≤s                                                 t∈T≤s


Proof. Using the definition of GP posterior variance and K bounds we can minimise the posterior
variance within the constraints given as:
                                                                                                −1
                              ˆ ⋆⋆ − K̄  ˆ2

              ˆ 2i,s (x⋆ ) ≥ K̄
              σ̄                                   1  T      ˆ
                                                            K̄        1     1  T
                                                                                   +  ˆ
                                                                                      σ̄
                                                                                         2
                                                                                           I         1ps
                                i,s                             i,s↑ ps ps                  ps
                                      i,s,↑,⋆   2
                                                      ps

                                ⋆⋆            ˆ
                                             K̄ i,s,↑,⋆
                              ˆ                                 ps
                           = K̄ i,s 1 − K̄      ˆ ⋆⋆ σ̄  ˆ 2 +psK̄  ˆ
                                                  i,s                 i,s↑
                                                          2

                                ⋆⋆                      ˆ
                                                    psK̄ i,s,↑,⋆
                              ˆ
                           = K̄ i,s 1 − ˆ 2 ˆ ⋆⋆
                                             σ̄ K̄ i,s +psK̄ ˆ        ˆ ⋆⋆
                                                               i,s↑ K̄ i,s
                                      2 ⋆⋆                      ⋆⋆          ˆ2

                                ⋆⋆         ˆ          ˆ       ˆ
                                      ˆ K̄ i,s +psK̄ i,s↑ K̄ i,s −psK̄
                                      σ̄
                              ˆ
                           = K̄                      ⋆⋆
                                                                              i,s,↑,⋆
                                i,s            ˆ2 ˆ           ˆ         ˆ ⋆⋆
                                      2 ⋆⋆σ̄ K̄ i,s +psK̄⋆⋆      i,s↑ K̄ i,s
                                                                            ˆ ⋆⋆2 +2psK̄  ˆ ⋆⋆ D

                                ⋆⋆         ˆ          ˆ       ˆ
                                      ˆ K̄ i,s +psK̄ i,s↑ K̄ i,s −psK̄                                    2
                              ˆ       σ̄                                      i,s           i,s i,s,↓ −psDi,s,↓
                           = K̄ i,s                                 ˆ ⋆⋆ +psK̄
                                                               ˆ 2 K̄            ˆ      ˆ ⋆⋆
                                                              σ̄
                                         2                        1
                                                                      i,s
                                                                          2
                                                                                 !i,s↑ K̄ i,s
                                      ˆ
                                      σ̄ +2psDi,s,↓ −ps ˆ ⋆⋆ Di,s,↓
                              ˆ ⋆⋆
                           ≥ K̄
                                                               K̄ i,s
                                         i,s                             ˆ
                                                                 ˆ 2 +psK̄
                                                                 σ̄        i,s↑


                                                                           26
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


and likewise for the AI posterior variances. For the upper bound, we may pessimise the bound by
first using the maximum eigenvalue:
                                                                 ⋆⋆
                                                                            P        ˆ2
                                                          ˆ −                 t∈T≤s K̄ i,s,t,⋆
                                          ˆ 2i,s (x⋆ ) ≤ K̄
                                          σ̄                i,s

                                                                                  ˆ

                                                                            λmax K̄ i,s +σ̄ˆ2

                                         ˆ )≤
and by Gershgorin’s circle theorem λmax (K̄
                                                                        P                ˆ
                                           i,s                               t∈T≤s K̄ i,s,ts ,ts , so:

                                             ⋆⋆
                                                           P           ˆ2
                                                                      K̄
                       σ̄              ˆ −
                       ˆ 2i,s (x⋆ ) ≤ K̄         t∈T≤s                   i,s,t,⋆
                                         i,s ˆ2
                                                P
                                                     σ̄ + t∈T           ˆ
                                                                       K̄ i,s,ts ,ts
                                                                  ≤s
                                               ˆ ⋆⋆ +P
                                          ˆ 2 K̄                  ˆ             ˆ ⋆⋆ P          ˆ2
                                                                    i,s,ts ,ts K̄ i,s −
                                    =
                                          σ̄     i,s     t∈T≤s   K̄                     t∈T≤s K̄ i,s,t,⋆    ˆ ⋆⋆
                                                                                                           K̄
                                                           ˆ ⋆⋆ +P
                                                      ˆ 2 K̄
                                                     σ̄                        ˆ          ˆ ⋆⋆                i,s
                                                             i,s     t∈T≤s K̄ i,s,ts ,ts K̄ i,s


                   ˆ            ˆ ⋆⋆     ˆ                ˆ              ˆ ⋆⋆
Now, we have that K̄ i,s,t,⋆ = K̄ i,s − D̄ i,s,t , where D̄ i,s,t ∈ [0, K̄ i,s ], so:

                            ˆ ⋆⋆ +P
                       ˆ 2 K̄            ˆ             ˆ ⋆⋆      ˆ ⋆⋆2      ˆ ⋆⋆ P          ˆ        P         ˆ2
                       σ̄               K̄ i,s,ts ,ts K̄ i,s −psK̄ i,s +2K̄ i,s     t∈T≤s D̄ i,s,t −   t∈T≤s D̄ i,s,t ˆ ⋆⋆
      ˆ 2i,s (x⋆ ) ≤
      σ̄
                              i,s   t∈T ≤s
                                                        ⋆⋆
                                                      ˆ +                ˆ           ˆ ⋆⋆                            K̄ i,s
                                                 ˆ 2 K̄
                                                              P
                                                 σ̄     i,s     t∈T≤s K̄ i,s,ts ,ts K̄ i,s
                         ˆ ⋆⋆ +P
                    ˆ 2 K̄               ˆ             ˆ ⋆⋆      ˆ ⋆⋆2      ˆ ⋆⋆ P          ˆ        P         ˆ2
                    σ̄     i,s    t∈T≤s K̄ i,s,ts ,ts K̄ i,s −psK̄ i,s +2K̄ i,s     t∈T≤s D̄ i,s,t −   t∈T≤s D̄ i,s,t ˆ ⋆⋆
                  ≤                                     ⋆⋆
                                                      ˆ +
                                                 ˆ 2 K̄
                                                              P          ˆ           ˆ ⋆⋆                            K̄ i,s
                                                 σ̄     i,s     t∈T≤s K̄ i,s,ts ,ts K̄ i,s
                         ˆ ⋆⋆ +P
                    ˆ 2 K̄               ˆ ⋆⋆2        ˆ ⋆⋆2     ˆ ⋆⋆ P           ˆ         P         ˆ2
                    σ̄     i,s    t∈T≤s K̄ i,s −psK̄ i,s +2K̄ i,s         t∈T≤s D̄ i,s,t −   t∈T≤s D̄ i,s,t ˆ ⋆⋆
                  ≤                                     ⋆⋆
                                                      ˆ +                ˆ ⋆⋆2                             K̄ i,s
                                                 ˆ 2 K̄
                                                              P
                                                 σ̄     i,s     t∈T≤s K̄ i,s

                    ˆ 2 K̄       ˆ ⋆⋆ P
                         ˆ ⋆⋆ +2K̄               ˆ          P          ˆ2
                    σ̄                          D̄  i,s,t −           D̄         ⋆⋆
                  ≤
                           i,s     i,s  t∈T         ≤s        t∈T        i,s,t
                                                                        ≤s           ˆ
                                                                                    K̄
                                               ˆ ⋆⋆ +psK̄
                                          ˆ 2 K̄        ˆ ⋆⋆2                          i,s
                                          σ̄     i,s      i,s
                       ˆ 2 +2
                       σ̄
                                P          ˆ
                                          D̄      − 1
                                                         P            ˆ2
                                                               t∈T≤s D̄ i,s,t
                                                                                 ˆ ⋆⋆
                                t∈T≤s       i,s,t  ˆ ⋆⋆
                                                  K̄ i,s
                  =                        ˆ 2    ˆ ⋆⋆                          K̄ i,s
                                           σ̄ +psK̄ i,s

and likewise for AI variances.
                              ˆ           ˆ      ⋆    ⋆     ˆ       ⋆
In this theorem the sequence D̄ i,s,t = K̄ i,s (x , x )−|K̄ i,s (x , xt )| ≥ 0 is a proxy for convergence,
being minimised for xt = x⋆ and increasing as xt becomes (a-posterior) less correlated with x⋆ . If
we consider the case considered in the paper - namely 1 human and 1 AI with zero gap and a trade-off
sequence meeting the conditions of GP-UCB - then we know that the AI, operating alone, suffices
to ensure convergence; and moreover adding additional observations (the human recommendations)
will not prevent this. From here, it is not difficult to see that the upper and lower bounds in the above
theorem converge not just to 0 but to one another, and if we further assume that K̄              ˘ ⋆⋆ then
                                                                                         ˆ ⋆⋆ = K̄
                                                                                           i,s     j,s
the ratio of any upper bound on the posterior variance to the lower bound on any posterior variance
will convergen to 1.

A.7     A DDITIONAL S YNTHETIC E XPERIMENTS

In addition to the experimental results mentioned in the main paper, we provide the optimisation
performance of our proposed BO-Muse framework on the following synthetic benchmark functions:
(a) Matyas-2D, and (b) Rastrigin-5D. The details of the additional synthetic optimisation benchmark
functions are mentioned in Table 2.
We maintain the same experimental settings mentioned in the main paper for the additional experi-
ments conducted. For a given d dimensional problem, we use d + 1 initial observations and optimise
for 10 × d iterations i.e., the budget allocated for our synthetic experiments is set to 10 × d function
evaluations. The simple regret plots obtained for Matyas-2D function and Rastrigin-5D function
after 10 runs with random initialisations are shown in Figure 4a and Figure 4b, respectively.

A.8     A BLATION S TUDIES

A.8.1     VARYING DEGREES OF E XPLOITATION -E XPLORATION
We study the sensitivity of the exploitation-exploration parameter (β̂s ) in our proposed BO-Muse
framework and compare the optimisation performance. We vary the exploitation-exploration param-


                                                                   27
 Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                          Functions                                                                   f ⋆ (x)                                                                         High Level Features
                                                                                                                                                                                                          x′1 = x21 , x′2 = x22
                                          Matyas-2D                                  0.26(x21 + x22 ) − 0.48(x1 x2 )
                                                                                                                                                                                                              x′3 = x1 x2
                                                                                           Pd       2                                                                                           x′i = x2i ∀i ∈ N5
                                      Rastrigin-5D                      10d +                   i [xi − 10 cos(2πxi )] ∀i ∈ N5                                                              x′j+5 = cos xj ∀j ∈ N5

 Table 2: Synthetic optimisation benchmark functions. Analytical forms are provided in the second
 column and the last column depicts the features used by a simulated human expert.


                                                                       Matyas Function                                                                                                Rastrigin5D Function
                                      7                                                                                                             80
                                                                                           BO-Muse + Human                                                                                                               BO-Muse + Human
                                      6                                                    Generic BO                                                                                                                    Generic BO
                                                                                           Simulated Human                                          70                                                                   Simulated Human
                                      5                                                    Simulated Human + PE                                                                                                          Simulated Human + PE
                      Simple Regret


                                                                                                                                    Simple Regret
                                                                                                                                                    60
                                      4
                                      3                                                                                                             50

                                      2                                                                                                             40
                                      1
                                                                                                                                                    30
                                      0
                                               3          6            9          12           15                18      21                                       6        12        18                   24       30     36     42        48    54
                                                                  Function Evaluations                                                                                                Function Evaluations
                                                                            (a)                                                                                                                           (b)

                     Figure 4: Simple regret vs iterations for synthetic Functions:(a) Matyas-2D (b) Rastrigin-5D


 eter (β̂s ) in the exponent range of [0, 3] i.e., β̂s ∈ 10[0,3] to cover the whole spectrum from over-
 exploitative experts (β̂s = 1) to over-explorative experts (β̂s = 1000). We have tuned the Squared
 Exponential (SE) kernel hyper-parameters of the inherent GP surrogate models using maximum-
 likelihood estimation. The empirical results obtained for various synthetic functions are depicted in
 Figure 5. It is evident from the empirical results that BO-Muse teamed up with an expert following
 more of an exploitation strategy (β̂s = 1) has better convergence when compared to its counterpart
 teamed with pure explorative expert (β̂s = 1000).

 A.8.2                                BO-M USE WITH E XPECTED I MPROVEMENT ACQUISITION F UNCTION

 We have conducted an additional experiment to study the behaviour of our BO-Muse framework
 with different acquisition function strategies for the human experts. Expected Improvement (EI)



                                      Ablation Study - Ackley Function                                                 Ablation Study - Levy Function                                                              Ablation Study - Rastrigin Function
                                                                                                                                                                                                     70
                22                                            s=1               s = 100                     25                                      s=1               s = 100                                                         s=1             s = 100
                                                              s = 10            s = 1000                                                            s = 10            s = 1000
                                                                                                                                                                                                     65                               s = 10          s = 1000

                20                                                                                          20                                                                                       60
Simple Regret


                                                                                            Simple Regret


                                                                                                                                                                                     Simple Regret


                                                                                                                                                                                                     55
                18                                                                                          15
                                                                                                                                                                                                     50
                16                                                                                          10                                                                                       45
                                                                                                                                                                                                     40
                14                                                                                          5
                                                                                                                                                                                                     35
                         3                6     9     12         15        18      21                             8     16    24     32              40      48       56        64                             6    12    18    24    30    36   42      48      54
                                              Function Evaluations                                                           Function Evaluations                                                                         Function Evaluations

                                                    (a)                                                                            (b)                                                                                          (c)

 Figure 5: Ablation study with varying degrees of exploration-exploitation parameter (β̂s ) obtained
 for (a) Ackley-4D (b) Levy-6D functions (c) Rastrigin-5D functions.


                                                                                                                                   28
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                                    Ablation Study - Ackley Function
                                    26                                 BO-MUSE+Human(GP-UCB)
                                                                       BO-MUSE+Human(EI)
                                    24                                 Generic BO
                                    22                                 Simulated Human
                                                                       Simulated Human + PE



                    Simple Regret
                                    20
                                    18
                                    16
                                    14
                                    12
                                    10
                                                5    10    15    20    25     30   35   40     45
                                                          Function Evaluations
        Figure 6: Ablation study with EI acquisition function obtained for Ackley function.


acquisition function (Wilson et al., 2018) guides the search for optima by taking into account the
expected improvement over the current best solution. If f ⋆ (x+ ) is the best value observed, then the
next best query point is obtained by maximising the EI acquisition function âEIs (x), given by:


                                             (µ̂s (x) − f ⋆ (x+ )) Φ(Z) + σ̂s (x) ϕ(Z) if σ̂s (x) > 0

                âEI
                  s (x) =
                                                     0                                 if σ̂s (x) = 0
                                                             µ̂s (x) − f ⋆ (x+ )
                                                       Z=
                                                                   σ̂s (x)

where Φ(Z) and ϕ(Z) represents the Cumulative Distribution Function (CDF) and the Probability
Density Function (PDF) of the standard normal distribution, respectively.
In this experiment, the GP-UCB acquisition function used by the human expert in BO-Muse frame-
work is now replaced with the Expected Improvement acquisition function. We compare this new
baseline (BO-Muse + Human (EI)) with BO-Muse + Human (GP-UCB) and all the other compet-
ing baselines. The empirical results obtained for the experiment with EI acquisition function is
depicted in Figure 6. As expected BO-Muse with the EI acquisition function still outperforms the
standard baselines considered. However, BO-Muse with GP-UCB acquisition function has superior
performance when compared to its counterpart with the EI acquisition function.

A.9   A DDITIONAL D ETAILS OF C LASSIFICATION E XPERIMENTS

We have considered two real-world classification tasks using Support Vector Machines (SVMs)
and Random Forests (RFs). This experiment involves hyperparameter tuning of SVMs and RFs
operating on the Biodeg dataset to classify biodegradable and non-biodegradable materials. We used
publicly available Biodeg dataset from the UCI data repository (Dua & Graff, 2017). Biodeg dataset
consists of 1056 instances with 41 features. We randomly split the dataset into 80/20 train/test splits.
Each time a hyperparameter set (design) is chosen, the model needs to retrained and evaluated on a
held out set. The goal is to reach to the hyperparameter set that leads to a classification model with
the minimum test classification error.
We have created two groups (arms) with 4 members (2 students and 2 postdoctoral researchers)
randomly allocated in each group. Each expert in the first group teams up with AI as per BO-
Muse, while each expert in the second group (baseline) tunes the classifier completely on their own.
For each of the classification tasks, the two groups use the same tuning budget (3 random initial
designs + 30 further iterations. The aforementioned real-world task is suitable for our case: (1)
It is easier to find multiple human experts for this task as AI graduate students and post-doctoral


                                                                  29
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


researchers have a good understanding of classification (SVM and RF) models and understand how
its hyperparameters generally influence the model fitting, (2) This task is familiar to the ICLR and
machine learning community.
The simple graphical interface used by each participant is shown in Figure 7a and 7b. The interface
shows accumulated observations of classifier performance as a function of hyper-parameters, with
the best results shown in darker shades of blue. Interfaces for both teams are the same, excepting that
participants working with BO-Muse see the AI-generated observation in the previous (#) iteration
(indicated by ▼) in addition to the existing set of observed samples. Experts click on the plot to
provide their suggestion on the next hyper-parameter set to evaluate. The co-ordinates of the clicked
point is used as the expert suggestion.

                          Enter Expert Suggestion #5                                    Enter Expert Suggestion #4
                                    85.3                                   100           59.3
           4
                                                                            80                        63.0
           2
               64.5                                                              66.7
                                                                            60



                                                                   Depth
           0
       C


                                                                            40
           2
                                                       64.5
                                                              #4            20
           4
                      4     2       0            2            4                  10        20       30        40     50
                                  Gamma                                               Number of samples per split
                                 (a)                                                            (b)

Figure 7: Simple graphical interface used by (a) Team 1 and (b) Team 2 for both the classification
experiments using SVM and RF classifiers.


A.10     S PACECRAFT S HIELDING D ESIGN E XPERIMENT



Our third experiment is to team with an expert to design spacecraft shields to protect from impact
by orbital debris particles.

A.10.1     E XPERIMENTAL PROBLEM
Here we consider the design of a two- or three-wall shield for protection against a cubic steel pro-
jectile impacting face on, normal to the surface of the target plates, at an impact velocity of 7.0
km/s. There exists no state-of-the-art solution for such an impact threat, however for protecting
against a spherical aluminium projectiles in this velocity domain the state-of-the-art solution would
be a “stuffed Whipple shield” after Christiansen et al. (1995), consisting of an outer aluminium
plate, inner layers of aramid and ceramic fabrics, and a rear wall (pressure hull) of aluminium.
US, Japanese, and European modules on the ISS all utilise stuffed Whipple shield designs (Chris-
tiansen et al., 2009). The design space is schematically shown in Figure 8. Design variables include:
(1) plate material - AA6061-T651 (“AL”), 4340 steel (“ST”), Kevlar/epoxy (“KE”), and ultra-high
molecular weight polyethylene (“PE”); (2) plate thickness - 0.1 cm to 1.0 cm in 0.1 cm increments;
(3) plate spacing, S - 0.0 cm to 10 cm in 1.0 cm increments, an; (4) number of plates, 2 or 3 (i.e., the
’outer bumper’ plate may or may not be used). Only metal plates (i.e., “AL” or “ST”) may be used
for the 3rd plate. The full factorial design space includes 577,365 options.

A.10.2     BACKGROUND
Spacecraft are subject to impact by natural micrometeoroid and man-made orbital debris particles,
collectively referred to as space debris, during their orbital lifetime. The impact of such particles
(typically at velocities above 10 km/s) is a significant risk to the safe operation of spacecraft and
the fulfillment of mission objectives. Indeed, for manned spacecraft such as the International Space


                                                                   30
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Figure 8: Schematic of the spec debris shield design problem. Our objective is a design solution that
will prevent perforation of the spacecraft hull (Plate 3, rear wall) by modifying the plate materials,
plate thicknesses, and plate spacing (S).


Station (ISS) and Space Shuttle Orbiter, space debris impact is the top mission risk (see e.g., Hamlin
et al. (2013)). As such, all manned spacecraft and some robotic spacecraft carry dedicated protective
shields. The most common shield configuration is a simple design known as a Whipple shield with
two thin plates separated by a gap. Meteoroid and debris particles, upon impact with the outer
plate, fragment into a cloud of solid, molten, and vaporised particles. This debris cloud expands
as it propagates through the gap, resulting in a dispersed and substantially less lethal load upon the
spacecraft hull. Multiple variants of the Whipple shield exist, including stuffed Whipple shields
which utilise intermediate layers of high-strength and high-impedence fabric (see e.g., Christiansen
et al. (1995)) and multi-shock shields which induce multiple impact shocks into the projectile to
promote maximum melting and vaporisation (Cour-Palais & Crews, 1990).
Spacecraft debris shields are typically designed using a combination of semi-analytical equations,
numerical simulations, and experimental testing. Simulations are performed in either explicit finite
element solvers, e.g., ANSYS LS-DYNA, or shock physics solvers, e.g., CTH from Sandia National
Laboratory. Modelling hypervelocity impact in those simulation codes requires substantial exper-
tise to accurately projectile and target kinetmatics together with material response. Furthermore,
such simulations can be computationally expensive, requiring hundreds of CPU hours depending
on the geometric discretisation of the model. Experimentation is typically performed on laboratory
accelerators known as two-stage light gas guns. The number of such facilities that can perform
experiments with millimetre and centimetre sized proejctiles up to impact velocities of 7+ km/s is
very limited (estimated to be < 20 globally). Such experiments are also expensive, costing on the
order of thousands of dollars, with a low through-put of approximately 1 experiment per day. In
the design of space debris shielding, in order to minimise the number of experiments and simula-
tions required, space debris is typically simplified to spherical aluminium particles. In reality, of
course, the debris environment consists of a range of materials, both metallic and non-metallic, the
properties of which influence their impact lethality. Similarly, for robotic and manned spacecraft
the majority of impact risk is represented by millimeter-sized objects, the majority of which are
fragmentation debris that have been generated by catestrophic breakup of a satellite or rocket body
and are thus highly irregular in shape, see Rivero et al. (2016). Until recently the engineering envi-
ronment models used to predict mission risk to space debris impact have also simplified the debris
population as spherical aluminium objects, thus there was little incentive to introduce the added
complexity of projectile shape and material effects in shielding design or characterisation studies.
However, recent improvements in orbital debris environment engineering models, e.g., ORDEM 3.0
(Krisko, 2014), and planned improvements to debris population source models, e.g., via DebriSat
(Rivero et al., 2016), aim to address some of these deficiencies. Shield design and characterisation,
therefore, must also begin to account for projectile shape and material effects.

A.10.3    D ETAILS OF EXPERIMENT
The spacecraft shielding design experiment utilises synthetic data generated via numerical simula-
tion. This section provides additional information on the simulation setup and evaluation. Simula-


                                                 31
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


         Parameter                          Value     Units              Source
         EoS: Gruneisen
         Density, ρ                         2700     kg/m3           (Anon., 2003)
         Shear modulus, G                   26.2      GP a           (Anon., 2003)
         Elastic modulus, E                 68.3      GP a           (Anon., 2003)
         Poisson’s ratio, ν                 0.33        -            (Anon., 2003)
         Melting temperature, Tm             930       K            (Corbett, 2006)
         Bulk soundspeed, c0                5240      m/s           (Corbett, 2006)
         Parameter S1                        1.4        -           (Corbett, 2006)
         Parameter S2                        0.0        -           (Corbett, 2006)
         Parameter S3                        0.0        -           (Corbett, 2006)
         Gruneisen gamma, Γ                 1.97        -           (Corbett, 2006)
         Specific heat, cp                   885     J/kgK          (Corbett, 2006)

         Strength: Johnson-Cook
         Yield stress, A                     324     MPa       (Anderson Jr et al., 2006)
         Hardening constant, B               114     MPa       (Anderson Jr et al., 2006)
         Hardening exponent, n               0.42      -       (Anderson Jr et al., 2006)
         Strain rate constant, C            0.002      -       (Anderson Jr et al., 2006)
         Thermal softening exponent, m       1.34      -       (Anderson Jr et al., 2006)
         Reference strain rate, ε˙0          1.0      /s       (Anderson Jr et al., 2006)

         Failure: Johnson-Cook
         Failure constant, d1               0.0         -      (Anderson Jr et al., 2006)
         Triaxiality constant, d2           1.11        -      (Anderson Jr et al., 2006)
         Triaxiality exponent, d3           -1.5        -      (Anderson Jr et al., 2006)
         Strain rate constant, d4           0.0         -      (Anderson Jr et al., 2006)
         Thermal softening constant, d5     0.0         -      (Anderson Jr et al., 2006)

   Table 3: Constitutive model parameters for AA6061-T651 used in the numerical simulations.


tions are performed in the explicit structural mechanics solver LS-DYNA from ANSYS (Hallquist,
2006). Simulations are performed in 3D using a smooth particle hydrodynamics (SPH) discreti-
sation scheme, which enables projectile fragmentation to be modelled without arbitrary numerical
erosion that would otherwise be required for a mesh-based Lagrangian scheme. SPH elements of
0.05 mm diameter are used to disretise all simulated parts. The metallic materials, AA6061-T651
(“AL”) and 4340 steel (“ST”), utilise a Gruneisen equation of state (EoS) (Gruneisen, 1959), a
Johnson-Cook viscoplasticity model (Johnson & Cook, 1983) and a Johnson-Cook fracture model
(Johnson & Cook, 1985), the constants for which are given in Tables 3 and 4. The aramid composite
(“KE”) is modelled as a continuum using the elastic-plastic orthotropic strength with failure model
from LS-DYNA (MAT 059) and a linear EoS, the constants for which are given in Table 5. The
ultra-high molecular weight polyethylene (“PE”), specifically Dyneema HB26, is modelled using
the orthotropic non-linear model and material constants from (Nguyen et al., 2016).
In Figure 9 a series of frames from a representative LS-DYNA simulation are provided, depicting
the impact of the cubic steel projectile against a three-wall shield design.
Simulations are performed on AMD EPYC servers with 64 CPU cores (2.25 GHz) and 1 TB of
RAM. All simulations are performed in parallel on 4 CPU cores and require 20-40 CPU hours
to run, depending on the complexity (in this case thickness) of the target plates. The simulation
models included a 3.0 cm thick aluminium alloy witness plate located 10.0 cm from the rear surface
of the target rear wall (Plate 3 in Figure 8) to measure residual penetration in the event that the
shield was perforated. Results were recorded as a binary pass/fail related to non-perforation or
perforation of the target rear wall, respectively, together with a continuous Depth of Penetration
(DoP) measurement into the witness plate. Our objective is to design a protective shield that can
defeat the projectile threat for minimal weight.


                                                32
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


          Parameter                         Value     Units               Source
          EoS: Gruneisen
          Density, ρ                        7850     kg/m3             (Anon., 2022)
          Shear modulus, G                   80.0     GP a             (Anon., 2022)
          Elastic modulus, E                205.0     GP a             (Anon., 2022)
          Poisson’s ratio, ν                 0.29       -              (Anon., 2022)
          Melting temperature, Tm           1700       K               (Anon., 2022)
          Bulk soundspeed, c0               3935      m/s             (Banerjee, 2007)
          Parameter S1                      1.578       -             (Banerjee, 2007)
          Parameter S2                        0.0       -             (Banerjee, 2007)
          Parameter S3                        0.0       -             (Banerjee, 2007)
          Gruneisen gamma, Γ                 1.69       -             (Banerjee, 2007)
          Specific heat, cp                  475     J/kgK             (Anon., 2022)

          Strength: Johnson-Cook
          Yield stress, A                    910      MPa         (Holmquist et al., 2001)
          Hardening constant, B              586      MPa         (Holmquist et al., 2001)
          Hardening exponent, n              0.26       -         (Holmquist et al., 2001)
          Strain rate constant, C           0.014       -         (Holmquist et al., 2001)
          Thermal softening exponent, m      1.03       -         (Holmquist et al., 2001)
          Reference strain rate, ε˙0          1.0      /s         (Holmquist et al., 2001)

          Failure: Johnson-Cook
          Failure constant, d1              -0.80         -       (Holmquist et al., 2001)
          Triaxiality constant, d2           2.10         -       (Holmquist et al., 2001)
          Triaxiality exponent, d3          -0.50         -       (Holmquist et al., 2001)
          Strain rate constant, d4          0.002         -       (Holmquist et al., 2001)
          Thermal softening constant, d5     0.61         -       (Holmquist et al., 2001)

     Table 4: Constitutive model parameters for 4340 steel used in the numerical simulations.

      Parameter                                   Value       Units           Source
      EoS: Linear
      Density, ρ                                  1230        kg/m3    (van Hoof et al., 1999)
      Shear modulus, G11                          0.77         GP a    (van Hoof et al., 1999)
      Shear modulus, G22                          1.36         GP a    (van Hoof et al., 1999)
      Shear modulus, G33                          1.36         GP a    (van Hoof et al., 1999)
      Elastic modulus, E11                        18.5         GP a    (van Hoof et al., 1999)
      Elastic modulus, E22                        18.5         GP a    (van Hoof et al., 1999)
      Elastic modulus, E33                         6.0         GP a    (van Hoof et al., 1999)
      Poisson’s ratio, ν21                        0.25          -      (van Hoof et al., 1999)
      Poisson’s ratio, ν31                        0.33          -      (van Hoof et al., 1999)
      Poisson’s ratio, ν32                        0.33          -      (van Hoof et al., 1999)

      Strength: Composite Failure
      In-plane shear strength, S21                9.0         MPa      (van Hoof et al., 1999)
      Transverse shear strength, S31             271.5        MPa      (van Hoof et al., 1999)
      Transverse shear strength, S32             271.5        MPa      (van Hoof et al., 1999)
      Longitudinal compressive strength, C11     221.0        MPa       (Silcock et al., 2006)
      Transverse compressive strength, C22       221.0        MPa       (Silcock et al., 2006)
      Normal compressive strength, C33          1200.0        MPa      (van Hoof et al., 1999)
      Longitudinal tensile strength, T11         740.0        MPa      (van Hoof et al., 1999)
      Transverse tensile strength, T22           740.0        MPa      (van Hoof et al., 1999)
      Normal tensile strength, T33                34.5        MPa      (van Hoof et al., 1999)

Table 5: Constitutive model parameters for woven aramid composite used in the numerical simula-
tions.


                                               33
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Figure 9: Series of frames from an LS-DYNA simulation showing the impact of a steel cubic particle
(yellow) at 7 km/s against a shield consisting of three 1.0 cm thick plates of AA6061-T651 (red -
outer bumper, blue - inner bumper, green - rear wall) with a 3.0 mm thick AA6061-T651 witness
plate (brown) positioned 10 cm behind the rearmost surface of the shield. The projectile is shown
to fragment into a dispersed cloud of projectile and shield fragments which radially disperse before
impacting upon the rear wall. The rear wall is perforated and fragments are observed to crater the
witness plate, providing a non-zero depth of penetration measurement.


Three initial designs are evaluated by the human expert, the details of which are provided in Table 6
together with the simulation results. Based on these results we assume that target designs with areal
weights significantly less than 5 kg/m2 are likely infeasible, while designs significantly heavier (>
15kg/m2 ) are not of interest. Within this weight range the design space includes 577,365 potential
options. We perform the optimisation in iterative batches of size 2, with one suggestion from the
BO and one from the human expert.

A.10.4    D IFFERENCE TO A CLASSICAL CS SETTING

We work with one expert and this differs from usual CS settings where multiple experts perform the
same task because:

     1. Level of expertise required is high, and access is difficult: The design of shields for protect-
        ing against space debris impact at hypervelocity is a highly specialised discipline typically
        limited to national space agencies or their primary contractors. For instance, shielding
        onboard the ISS was predominantly developed by NASA and Boeing for US modules,
        ROSCOSMOS and RKK Energia for Russian modules, and JAXA for the Japanese mod-
        ule. Shielding on the European Coloumbus module was designed primarily by Alenia
        Aerospazio under contract to the European Space Agency, but borrowed heavily from the
        NASA designs (see e.g.,Destefanis et al. (1999)). Therefore, recruiting multiple experts is
        a formidable task.
     2. The cost of experiments is high: Due to the cost and access limitations on experimental
        facilities, we utilise numerical simulations for this design study. Such simulations are dif-
        ficult to design and validate, our expert (with 20 years experience on such codes) required
        about 120 hours to build the simulation models. In addition, the simulations can be com-


                                                  34
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


          putationally expensive, requiring on the order of 100-200 CPU hours per simulation for a
          moderate CPU.
       3. The design problem is hard: There exists no state-of-the-art solution for the defined prob-
          lem. The nearest analogue is a shield designed for a spherical aluminium projectile, for
          which the state-of-the-art is a stuffed Whipple shield. This shielding configuration has
          been used to define our optimisation variables. Existing semi-analytical penetration laws,
          such as those in Christiansen et al. (1995), are not valid for application with non-spherical
          or non-aluminium projectiles.
       4. The expert cannot repeat the same design task as they learn during the first experiment.

All these factors mean that for a real experiment we can only show how BO-Muse helps a single
expert for a new problem for which there is no state-of-art solution.

A.10.5     R ESULTS
Results of the experiment are provided in Table 6. We can observe that the human expert initially
explored designs similar to the stuffed Whipple concept (i.e., metallic outer bumper, KE or PE
inner bumper, and metallic rear wall, with the inner bumper being roughly located at the mid-point
between the two metallic plates). By design ID 9 the expert had identified a stuffed Whipple design
that was successful at defeating the projectile, with an areal weight of 14.3 kg/m2 . Between design
IDs 9 and 19 we can observe the expert exploiting this successful design to identify a lower weight
solution, without success. Up to this point the expert does not seem to have been influenced by the
BO suggestions. By design ID 21, however, we can observe the expert beginning to exploit BO
suggestions, with design ID 21 a modification of ID 5 and 14, design ID 23 a modification of 18,
and so on. Design ID 27, an expert suggestion that is an exploitation of the BO suggested ID 22,
was successful at defeating the projectile, albeit at a higher weight than the previously identified
solutions at ID 9 and 11 (16.9 kg/m2 ). The final expert design, ID 29, is a further exploitations of
ID 27 intended to reduce weight and is found to be the best solution identified during the experiment,
with an areal weight of 13.8 kg/m2 .
The BO-Muse design ID 22 and subsequent human exploitations (design IDs 27 and 29) are, ac-
cording to our human expert, highly unusual configurations for spacecraft debris shielding that they
would not have otherwise considered if not for the BO suggestion. The conventional design method-
ology based on typical shields used in flight harware suggest that the outer bumper have a density and
a shock impedance comparable to that of the projectile and be sized such that the shock rarefaction
and tensile release wave superimpose towards the back of the projectile, maximising fragmentation
and radial dispersion. An internal fabric layer, such as that used in stuffed Whipple shields (see e.g.,
Christiansen et al. (1995)) is then intended to catch and decelerate projectile fragments prior to im-
pact upon the shield rear wall. This general design principle has been established through ongoing
investigation since the Apollo program and matured for the International Space Station with signif-
icant, proven success. Design ID 22 and the subsequent designs (IDs 27 and 29) are a substantial
deviation from these established principles and at current it is unclear why they have been successful
- further investigation is needed.


Evaluating this experiment - the role of BO-Muse was to inject novelty in the design process, from
which the human expert could take inspiration and perform exploitation. We consider this to have
been successfully demonstrated in a real applied engineering design experiment

A.11     D ISCUSSION OF L IMITATIONS

In this section we present a brief discussion of the limitations of our work. With regard to the
human expert, we have assumed that “Cognitive entrenchment” behaviour occurs, which is backed
by recent studies (Dane, 2010; Daw et al., 2006). This may not hold strictly in all cases, which may
cause the algorithm’s sample efficiency to be lower than expected as BO may over-compensate for
expected expert over-exploitation that does not eventuate. Similarly, we assume that the expert is
able to improve their model as the number of observations available to them increases. However
a less skilled expert may fail to do this, and subsequently the algorithm’s sample efficiency may
suffer as, after a point, expert suggestions may cease to be useful. Finally, the human expert may


                                                  35
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                          Plate 1       Gap1         Plate 2      Gap2        Plate 3      SC      Weight    Result   DoP
      ID   Source
                    Mat        t(cm)    (cm)   Mat        t(cm)   (cm)   Mat       t(cm)   (cm)   (kg/m2 )   [1/0]    (cm)

      1    expert   ST          0.2     2.0    ST          0.2    5.0    ST         0.5    7.9      7.1        1      2.89
      2    expert   AL          1.0     3.5    AL          1.0    3.0    AL         1.0    9.5      8.1        1      0.31
      3    expert   ST          1.0     6.0    AL          1.0    1.0    AL         1.0    10.0     13.3       1      0.01
      4     BO      ST          0.9     0.0    AL          0.9    7.0    AL         0.6    9.4      11.1       1      0.43
      5    expert   AL          0.5     5.0    KE          1.0    2.0    AL         1.0    9.5      5.3        1      0.22
      6     BO      ST          0.3     8.0    PE          0.6    0.0    AL         0.9    9.8      5.4        1      0.31
      7    expert   ST          0.3     5.0    KE          1.0    2.0    ST         1.0    9.3      11.4       1      0.07
      8     BO      ST          0.5     7.0    ST          0.9    0.0    AL         0.9    9.3      13.4       1      0.68
      9    expert   ST          0.7     4.0    PE          1.0    3.0    ST         1.0    9.7      14.3       0      0.0
      10    BO      AL          0.9     0.0    KE          0.2    8.0    ST         0.5    9.6      6.6        1      1.90
      11   expert   ST          0.7     4.0    KE          1.0    3.0    ST         1.0    9.7      14.6       0      0.0
      12    BO      PE          0.2     8.0    AL          0.9    0.0    ST         0.9    10.0     9.7        1      2.84
      13   expert   ST          0.6     4.0    KE          1.0    3.0    ST         0.9    9.5      13.0       1      0.01
      14    BO       -              -   0.0    KE          0.9    0.0    ST         0.9    1.8      8.2        1      0.84
      15   expert   ST          0.5     4.0    KE          1.0    3.0    ST         1.0    9.5      13.0       1      0.01
      16    BO       -              -   0.0    ST          0.9    9.0    AL         0.1    10.0     7.3        1      0.32
      17   expert   ST          0.7     4.0    KE          1.0    3.0    ST         0.8    9.5      13.0       1      0.01
      18    BO      AL          0.9     8.0    ST          0.1    0.0    AL         0.9    9.9      5.6        1      0.39
      19   expert   ST          0.5     6.0    PE          1.0    1.0    ST         1.0    9.5      12.8       1      0.06
      20    BO      PE          0.0     0.0    ST          0.4    8.0    AL         0.9    9.3      5.6        1      0.31
      21   expert   ST          0.7     0.0    KE          1.0    7.0    ST         1.0    9.7      14.6       1      0.33
      22    BO      KE          0.9     0.0    ST          0.9    8.0    ST         0.1    9.9      9.0        1      0.26
      23   expert   ST          1.0     5.0    KE          1.0    2.0    AL         1.0    10.0     11.8       1      0.11
      24    BO       -              -   0.0    ST          0.9    0.0    ST         0.1    1.0      7.9        1      0.82
      25   expert   ST          0.4     6.0    AL          1.0    1.0    ST         1.0    9.4      13.7       1      0.03
      26    BO       -              -   0.0    PE          0.1    9.0    ST         0.9    10.0     7.2        1      1.53
      27   expert   KE          1.0     0.0    ST          1.0    7.0    ST         1.0    10.0     16.9       0      0.0
      28    BO      AL          0.9     0.0    ST          0.1    8.0    AL         0.9    9.9      5.6        1      1.75
      29   expert   KE          1.0     0.0    ST          0.8    7.0    ST         0.8    9.6      13.8       0      0.0


Table 6: Results of the spacecraft protective design optimisation experiment. The best results are
indicated in bold (SC - space claim).


                                                                  36
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


not behave precisely like a GP-UCB model would suggest, again resulting in lower efficiency. We
note, however, that even when the human is unable to perform as expected, BO-Muse will still have
sublinear convergence. In such a worst-case scenario every second experiment will, in effect, be
wasted. However the data from these “wasted” experiments will still provide additional observations
of f ⋆ for the machine’s GP model, which can only improve the model’s accuracy. The behaviour of
the algorithm in this case can therefore be analysed in the “machine running GP-UCB plus improved
prior due to additional data” regime - that is, a GP-UCB algorithm with AI-generated suggestions,
an exploration parameter β that is increased by a constant multiplicative factor, and a stream of
additional (harmless or even potentially informative) human-guided experimental observations -
which suffices to ensure sublinear convergence (Srinivas et al., 2012). We also note that the aforesaid
worst-case scenario is highly unlikely on the assumption that the human expert is knowledgeable in
the relevant field.


                                                  37
